                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DO EXPIRING BUDGETS LEAD TO WASTEFUL YEAR-END SPENDING? EVIDENCE
                    FROM FEDERAL PROCUREMENT

                                         Jeffrey B. Liebman
                                           Neale Mahoney

                                        Working Paper 19481
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19481


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 2013, Revised January 2018




We are grateful to Steven Kelman and Shelley Metzenbaum for conversations that stimulated our interest
in this topic and to the editor and anonymous referees for their valuable suggestions. We thank seminar
audiences at OMB, Stanford, the Naval Postgraduate School, MIT Sloan, Harvard, Chicago Booth,
the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance, Yale, and UIC-Chicago for helpful comments and
suggestions. Mahoney acknowledges a Kapnick Fellowship, Ric Weiland Fellowship, and the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jeffrey B. Liebman and Neale Mahoney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Do Expiring Budgets Lead to Wasteful Year-End Spending? Evidence from Federal Procurement
Jeffrey B. Liebman and Neale Mahoney
NBER Working Paper No. 19481
September 2013, Revised January 2018
JEL No. H0,H5,H56,H57,H61,L0,L2,L24

                                            ABSTRACT

Many organizations have budgets that expire at the end of the fiscal year and may face incentives to
rush to spend resources on low quality projects at year’s end. We test these predictions using data
on procurement spending by the U.S. federal government. Spending in the last week of the year is
4.9 times higher than the rest-of-the-year weekly average, and year-end information technology projects
have substantially lower quality ratings. We also analyze the gains from allowing agencies to roll over
unused funds into the next fiscal year.


Jeffrey B. Liebman
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_liebman@harvard.edu

Neale Mahoney
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Neale.Mahoney@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction

Many organizations have budgets that expire at the end of the fiscal year. In the United States,

most budget authority provided to federal government agencies for discretionary spending re-

quires the agencies to obligate funds by the end of the fiscal year or return the funds to the Trea-

sury; state and municipal agencies typically face similar constraints (McPherson, 2007; Jones, 2005;

GAO, 2004).1

      This “use it or lose it” feature of time-limited budget authority has the potential to result in low

value spending, since the opportunity cost to organizations of spending about-to-expire funds is

effectively zero.2 Exacerbating this problem is the incentive to build up a rainy day fund over the

front end of the budget cycle. Most organizations are de facto liquidity constrained, facing at the

very least a high cost of acquiring mid-cycle budget authority. When future spending demands

are uncertain, organizations have an incentive to hold back on marginal spending early in the

budget cycle and then burn through this buffer-stock at the end of the year.

      This paper examines the quantitative importance of wasteful year-end spending in the U.S.

federal government and the efficiency gains from policies that could be used to address this issue.

We present a simple model of the annual budget process for a single government agency with ex-

piring budget authority. At the beginning of each year, Congress chooses a budget for the agency.

In each subperiod within the year, the agency draws a parameter that determines the marginal

value of expenditure and chooses a level of spending to maximize an objective with decreasing re-

turns. We show that the combination of uncertainty and decreasing returns can lead the agency to

engage in precautionary savings over the first part of the year. At the end of the year, the prospect

of expiring funds leads the agency to spend all of its remaining resources even if the marginal

value is below the social costs of funds (our definition of wasteful spending). As a result, there is

a spike in the volume of spending and a drop-off in quality at the end of the year.

      Anecdotal evidence supports these predictions. A Department of Defense employee inter-
    1 At the end of the federal fiscal year, unobligated balances cease to be available for the purpose of incurring new
obligations. They sit in an expired account for 5 years in case adjustments are needed to account accurately for the cost
of obligations incurred during the fiscal year for which the funds were originally appropriated. At the end of the 5
years, the funds revert to the Treasury general fund.
   2 In some settings, unspent funding may not only represent a lost opportunity but can also signal a lack of need

to budget-setters, decreasing funding in future budget cycles (Laffont and Tirole, 1986; Lee and Johnson, 1998; Jones,
2005). When current spending is explicitly used as the baseline in setting the following year’s budget, this signaling
effect is magnified.


                                                           1
viewed by McPherson (2007) describes “merchants and contractors camped outside contracting

offices on September 30th [the close of the fiscal year] just in case money came through to fund

their contracts.” At a 2006 congressional hearing, agency representatives admitted to a “use-it-or-

lose-it” mentality and a “rush to obligate” at year’s end (McPherson, 2007). In Canada, where the

fiscal year ends on March 31, the Treasury Board President has used the term “March Madness”

to describe the year-end rush-to-spend.3

    Yet despite these accounts, there is no hard evidence on whether U.S. federal spending surges

at the end of the fiscal year or whether year-end spending is lower-value than spending during the

rest of the year. Reports from the Government Accountability Office in 1980 and 1985 documented

that fourth quarter spending among federal agencies was somewhat higher than spending during

the rest of the year. Yet a follow-up report, GAO (1998), was unable to examine quarterly agency

spending patterns for 1997 because agency compliance with quarterly reporting requirements was

incomplete. The report nevertheless concluded that because “substantial reforms in procurement

planning and competition requirements have changed the environment . . . year-end spending is

unlikely to present the same magnitude of problems and issues as before.”

    We address this evidentiary shortfall by examining data on procurement spending by the U.S.

federal government. Federal procurement is important, accounting for about 15 percent of gov-

ernment expenditure, and is the category where agencies have the most discretion over the timing

of spending. Our data is a near-universe of federal procurement spending from 2004 to 2009,

which was recently made available to the public. These data contain contract-level information on

the timing of 14.6 million purchases, totaling $2.6 trillion in government expenditure.

    The data show a large spike in spending at the end of the year. If procurement spending were

uniformly distributed over the year, 1.9 percent of spending would occur in each week on average.

We find that 8.7 percent of spending occurs in the last week of the year, or nearly 5 times the rest-

of-year weekly average. The surge in spending is broad-based, occurring in nearly all of the major

government agencies. Consistent with spending on non-essential projects, year-end spending is

more pronounced for maintenance and repair of buildings, furnishings and office equipment, and

I.T. services and equipment.
   3 See “Treasury Board president Tony Clement calls for an end to March Madness spending,” Canada Politics Blog,

February 3, 2012.



                                                        2
    We examine the effect on the quality of spending using a newly available dataset on the per-

formance of 686 major information technology (I.T.) projects. Our dataset on large I.T. projects

accounts for $130 billion in spending. It is also a category with a large year-end spike, with 12.3

percent of spending occurring in the last week of the year. Most importantly, our dataset provides

us with a credible measure of project quality, a categorical index that combines assessments from

agency chief information officers (CIOs) with data on cost and timeliness. The index is a central

element in government-wide reviews that sometimes lead to project terminations.

    These data show a sharp drop-off in quality at the end of the year. Projects that originate in

the last week of the fiscal year have 2.2 to 5.6 times higher odds of having a lower quality score.

Ordered logit and OLS regressions show that this effect is stable across a broad set of specifications.

We examine and reject a number of alternative explanations for our finding.

    Having confirmed predictions consistent with our model of wasteful year-end spending, we

turn to policies that could be used to address this problem. A natural solution is to allow agencies

to roll over unused funds into the subsequent fiscal year. We extend the model to allow for rollover

and show that welfare gains crucially depend on the degree to which Congress adjusts future

budget allocations to account for rolled over funds. If Congress reduces budgets one-for-one with

rollover, agencies have no incentive to use this mechanism. If rolled over funds are non-salient or

if Congress can at least partially commit to ignoring them, then welfare gains can be realized.

    Within the U.S. federal government, the Department of Justice (DOJ) has obtained special

authority to roll over unused budget authority for I.T. projects into a fund that can be used on I.T.

expenditure in the following year. We show that DOJ does not have a spike in the volume of I.T.

spending, with only 3.4 percent of I.T. spending occurring in the last week of the year compared

to 9.3 percent for non-I.T. spending. Difference-in-differences analysis that compares I.T. and non-

I.T. spending at DOJ and other agencies indicates that rollover reduces the volume of year-end

spending by 9.5 percentage points, with a p-value of less than 0.1 percent. We also find that DOJ

does not have a drop-off in quality at the end of the year. While the quality results are statistically

significant at the 1 percent level, we caution that our DOJ evidence on quality is based on a small

number of contracts.

    We analyze the potential welfare gains from allowing rollover by calibrating a model to fit

the spike in spending and drop-off in quality. We show that intermediate policies, such as al-

                                                  3
lowing agencies to roll over funds for only a short grace period, can generate welfare gains of

almost three-quarters of the full rollover value. The intuition behind this result is that even a

small amount of rollover allows agencies to avoid the lowest value spending at the end of the year

while maintaining sufficient precautionary balances to respond to emergency spending needs.

      To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first economic analysis of wasteful year-end

spending, either in government or in a private organization. Our primary references are GAO

(1985, 1998, 2004) reports and a master’s thesis by McPherson (2007). Within economics, our work

is most closely related to Oyer (1998), who studies how nonlinear salesperson and executive con-

tracts lead to increased sales at the end of private sector fiscal years.4

      The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a model of wasteful year-end

spending. Section 3 examines the surge in year-end spending using a comprehensive dataset on

federal procurement. Section 4 tests for a year-end drop-off in quality using data on I.T. invest-

ments. Section 5 examines the benefits of rollover. Section 6 concludes.



2     A Model of Wasteful Year-End Spending

In this section, we present a model of year-end spending. The model uses the simplest possible

setup—an annual budget with two six-month subperiods—to make precise what we mean by

wasteful year-end spending. In Section 3 and Section 4, we examine predictions from the model.

In Section 5, we generalize the model to an infinite horizon setting with an indefinite number of

subperiods to examine the welfare effects of alternative approaches to budgeting.


2.1    Model Setup

Consider an annual model of budgeting with Congress and a single government agency. At the

beginning of the year, Congress chooses a budget B for the agency. Divide the year into two six-

month periods, indexed by m = 1, 2. In each period, the agency learns about the marginal value

of spending in that period and makes a spending decision accordingly.

      The model has three key features. First, there are expiring budgets. Resources that are not
  4 Relatively few private sector firms have fiscal years that coincide with the federal government’s, so the effects we

measure are unlikely to result from this channel.




                                                           4
spent by the end of the year are lost to the agency and returned to the Treasury.

     Second, there is uncertainty about the value of spending in future periods. This uncertainty

could arise from either demand or supply factors. Shifts in military strategy or an influenza out-

break, for example, could generate an unanticipated change in demand for budget resources. On

the supply side, uncertainty could be driven by variation in the price or quality of desired goods

and services.5

     Third, there are decreasing returns to spending within each period. Decreasing returns could

result from short-run rigidities in the production function. For example, federal agencies with a

fixed staff of contracting specialists might have less time to devote to each contract in a period

with abnormally high spending. Alternatively, decreasing returns could result from a priority-

based budgeting rule. During a given period, organizations might allocate resources to projects

according to the surplus they provide. We first describe the agency problem and then examine the

problem faced by Congress.

     Agency problem. To model uncertainty and decreasing returns, assume that the amount of

spending xm in period m has a value that is given by αm v( xm ), where αm is a stochastic parameter

drawn from a known distribution Fα (·) with positive support and v(·) is a function that is increas-

ing and concave.6 Conditional on observing the first-period value-of-spending parameter α1 , the

objective for the agency is


                                                           α 1 v ( x 1 ) + Eα2 α 2 v ( x 2 )
                                                                                            
                                 V ( B|α1 ) = max                                                                   (1)
                                               x1 ,x2 ≥0

                                              s.t. x1 + x2 ≤ B.


     Congress’s problem. We model Congress as a unitary actor that places the same value on

spending as the agency but also considers the opportunity cost of the budget it provides.7 At the
   5 As an example of supply side uncertainty, during the 2007-2009 recession, many agencies experienced construction

costs for Recovery Act projects that were below projections.
   6 Allowing for predictable shifts in the distribution of the value of spending F over time (e.g., due to seasonality)
                                                                                   α
would not substantively change the predictions of the model. After netting out predictable changes in volume and
quality of spending, the results below would hold.
   7 By modeling the agency and Congress as having the same preferences over spending, we do not consider settings

where the agency places a high value on projects that the Congress views as wasteful and vice versa. We view this
issue as interesting but conceptually distinct from the issue of how an agency spends its budget allocation over the
year. We cannot think of a prima facie reason why the mismatch between agency and Congress’s preferences should be
greater at the end of the year and no reason why the rollover counterfactual we examine would interact with this type
of allocative efficiency issue.


                                                            5
beginning of the year, it chooses a budget B for the agency to maximize the objective

                                                   h                                          i
                         W ( B) = max       Eα1 ,α2 α1 v( x1∗ ) + α2 v( x2∗ ) − λ( x1∗ + x2∗ ) .                   (2)
                                     B ≥0



In this equation, x1∗ and x2∗ represent the optimal spending choices of the agency for a given level

of B, and λ represents the social cost of funds.8,9


2.2    Model Predictions

We now turn to predictions from the model. The agency always completely exhausts its budget by

the end of the year. This occurs, in the model, because the agency has positive returns to spending

and does not receive any value from returning resources to Congress. In practice, a ratchet effect

(Freixas, Guesnerie and Tirole, 1985) may further increase incentives for the agency to spend its

entire budget. If Congress interprets unspent resources as a signal of reduced need, then unspent

funding not only produces a loss of value in the current period but may also lead to lower budgets

in the future, further reducing the agency’s objective.10

      For the results below, we assume the agency has a precautionary incentive to save resources

in the beginning of the year. In the consumption literature, this incentive exists if the consumption

function is concave in wealth (Carroll and Kimball, 1996; Carroll, 1997). In our context, agencies

have a precautionary incentive if the period 1 spending function x1 (α1 ) is concave in α1 . In Ap-

pendix Section A, we show that this property is satisfied by many standard value of spending

functions including Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA), Constant Relative Risk Aversion

(CRRA) with a parameter of γ ≥ 1 (which includes log as a special case), and quadratic. We
   8 Our   model is similar to models of life-cycle consumption (see Attanasio and Weber (2010) and Carroll (2001) for
reviews), but there are two important distinctions. In life-cycle consumption models, uncertainty about future income
generates uncertainty in the future budget constraint. In our model, the budget constraint is inherently certain, but
there is uncertainty about the value of spending. Our parameterization of uncertainty can be viewed as the reduced
form of a model in which a value of spending is specified for every good or service in every state of nature. A second
distinction is that life-cycle models are designed to capture the date at which spending is consumed, and thus there
is an important distinction in these models between consumption goods that are consumed immediately and durable
goods that yield flow consumption over time. In contrast, we model the date that a contract is signed. Virtually all of
this spending—from the purchase of office supplies to advanced weapons systems—yields value to the agency over
time. The value of spending αm v( xm ) can be thought of as the present discounted value of these purchases.
    9 Our setting also shares similarities with the problem of how to optimally fund and spend down a Flexible Spending

Account (Cardon and Showalter, 2001).
   10 This ratchet effect could potentially have implications for optimal Congressional budget setting. We discuss this

issue in Section 5.




                                                          6
also provide sufficient conditions for x1 (α1 ) to be concave under any generic value of spending

function.

     The first result concerns the volume of spending in each period.

Proposition 1 (Spike in Spending). The expected level of spending is strictly greater in period 2 than in

period 1 (i.e., E[ x2∗ ] > E[ x1∗ ]).

     The proof is a direct application of Jensen’s inequality. Because of uncertainty and the concave

period 1 spending function, the agency on average holds back some spending in the first period

of the year. Because of expiring budgets, the agency then spends this entire amount in the second

period. The agency can be thought of as building up a rainy-day fund or of saving more than it

would in a risk-free environment due to the option value of future spending. The proofs for this

proposition and the proposition that follows are presented in Appendix Section A.

     The next result concerns the quality of spending in each period. Define the quality of spend-

ing in period m as the value of spending per dollar of expenditure: qm = αm v( xm )/xm . Define

expected quality as the spending-weighted expectation of quality: q̄m = Ew(α) [qm ].11

Proposition 2 (Drop-off in Quality). The expected quality of spending is strictly lower in period 2 than

in period 1 (i.e., q̄2 < q̄1 ).

     The result holds because the expected level of spending is higher in the second period and

the returns to spending are concave. Thus, the average quality of spending is lower in the second

period.

     Finally, the model makes precise what we mean by wasteful year-end spending.

Definition 1 (Wasteful Year-end Spending). Wasteful spending is defined as spending for which the

marginal return to the agency is less than the social cost of funds (i.e., αm v0 ( xm
                                                                                    ∗ ) < λ).


Because the agency spends all of its resources in the second period, when the agency draws a

sufficiently low value of α2 , some spending will occur with a value that is below the social cost of

funds. That is, agencies will engage in wasteful year-end spending.
                                                                                                x (α)
  11 The weighted expectation is Ew(α) [qm ] = qm (α)w(α)dFα where the weight is w(α) = R x(α)dF , which is the level
                                                R
                                   R                                                                  α
of spending x (α) normalized by x (α)dFα so it integrates to 1. We weight by the level of spending so that our measure
of average quality is invariant to aggregation. This ensures that the quality measure is the same whether the agency has
a single $100 million project or two $50 million projects with the same quality score. We similarly weight by spending
in the baseline empirical analysis of the effect on quality, but also show that our results are similar when we do not
weight.


                                                           7
    To summarize, decreasing returns and uncertainty can create an incentive for organizations to

build up a rainy-day fund in the first period, spending less than half of their budget on average. At

the end of the year, expected spending increases, average quality drops below that of the earlier

part of the year, and in some circumstances spending occurs despite having a value below the

marginal cost of funds.



3   Does Spending Spike at the End of the Year?

The predictions of the model are straightforward. Spending should spike at the end of the year,

and year-end spending should be of lower quality than spending during the rest of the year. Using

newly available data, we test these predictions, beginning in this section with the first prediction

that spending should spike at the end of the year.

    For many types of government spending, there is little potential for a year-end spike. The 65

percent of U.S. federal spending that is made up of mandatory programs and interest on the debt

is not subject to the timing limitations associated with annual appropriations. The 13 percent of

spending that pays for compensation for federal employees is unlikely to exhibit an end-of-year

surge since new hires bring ongoing costs. This leaves procurement of goods and services from

the private sector as the main category of government spending in which an end-of-year spend-

ing surge could potentially occur. We therefore focus our empirical work on the procurement of

goods and services, a spending category that accounted for $538 billion or 15.3 percent of federal

spending in 2009 (up from $165 billion or 9.2 percent in 2000).

    It is worth noting that even within procurement spending, there are categories of spending for

which it would be unlikely to observe an end-of-year spike. Some types of funding, such as mil-

itary construction, come with longer spending horizons to provide greater flexibility to agencies.

Moreover, there are limits to what kinds of purchases can be made at year’s end.

    In particular, federal law provides that appropriations are available only to “meet the bona

fide needs of the fiscal year for which they are appropriated.” Balances remaining at the end of the

year generally cannot be used to prepay for next year’s needs. A classic example of an improper

obligation is an order for gasoline placed 3 days before the end of the fiscal year to be delivered

in monthly installments throughout the following fiscal year (GAO, 2004). That said, when there


                                                 8
is an ongoing need and it is impossible to separate the purchase into components performed in

different fiscal years, it can be appropriate to enter into a contract in one fiscal year even though

a significant portion of the performance is in the subsequent fiscal year. In contrast, contracts

that are readily severable generally may not cross fiscal years unless specifically authorized by

statute.12


3.1    The Federal Procurement Data System

Falling technology costs and the government transparency movement have combined to produce

an extraordinary increase in the amount of government data available on the web (Fung, Gra-

ham and Weil, 2007; The Economist, 2010). As of October 2010, Data.gov had 2,936 U.S. federal

executive branch datasets available. The Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act

of 2006 required the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to create a public website, show-

ing every federal award, including the name of the entity receiving the award and the amount of

the award, along with other information. USAspending.gov was launched in December 2007 and

now contains extensive data on federal contracts, grants, direct payments, and loans.

      The data currently available on USAspending.gov include the full Federal Procurement Data

System (FPDS) from 2000 to the present. FPDS is the data system that tracks all federal contracts.

Every new contract awarded as well as every follow-on contracting action, such as a renewal or

modification, results in an observation in FPDS. Up to 176 pieces of information are available for

each contract including dollar value, a four digit code describing the product or service being

purchased, the component of the agency making the purchase, the identity of the provider, the

type of contract being used (fixed price, cost-type, time and materials, etc.), and the type of bidding

mechanism used. While FPDS was originally created in 1978, agency reporting was incomplete

for many years, and we have been told by FPDS staff that it would be difficult or impossible

to assemble comprehensive data for years before 2000.13 Moreover, while FPDS is thought to

contain all government contracts from 2000 on, data quality for many fields was uneven before
  12 Over  the past two decades, Congress has significantly expanded multi-year contracting authorities. For example,
the General Services Administration can enter into leases for periods of up to 20 years, and agencies can contract for
services from utilities for periods of up to 10 years.
  13 Indeed, we attempted to download the pre-2000 data using the FPDS web-based “atom feed”. However, the aggre-

gate level of spending and number of contracts in these data were significantly less than the amounts listed in govern-
ment reports. For example, the FY 1999 Federal Procurement Reports lists that the government spent $198 billion on
contracts whereas our atom feed data only covered $99 billion in spending.


                                                          9
the 2003 FPDS modernization. Therefore, for most of the FPDS-based analyses in this paper, we

limit ourselves to data from fiscal years 2004 through 2009.14

      Table 1 shows selected characteristics of the FPDS 2004 to 2009 sample. There were 14.6 mil-

lion contracts awarded during this period, an average of 2.4 million per year. The distribution

of contract size is highly skewed. Ninety-five percent of contracts were for dollar amounts be-

low $100,000, while 78 percent of contract spending is accounted for by contracts of more than $1

million. Seventy percent of contract spending is by the Department of Defense. The Department

of Energy and NASA, which rely on contractors to run large laboratories and production facili-

ties, and the General Services Administration, which enters into government-wide contracts and

contracts on behalf of other agencies, are the next largest agencies in terms of spending over this

period. Twenty-nine percent of contract spending was sourced non-competitively; 20 percent was

on contracts that were sourced competitively but received only a single bid; and 51 percent was

on contracts that received more than one bid. Sixty-five percent of contract spending was on fixed

price contracts; 30 percent was on cost-reimbursement contracts; and 6 percent was on contracts

that paid on a time and materials or labor-hours basis.


3.2    The Within-Year Pattern of Government Procurement Spending

Figure 1 shows contract spending by week, pooling data from 2004 through 2009. There is a clear

spike in spending at the end of the year with 16.5 percent of all spending occurring in the last

month and 8.7 percent occurring in the last week of the year.15 The bottom panel shows that when

measured by the number of contracts rather than the dollar value, there is also clear evidence of an

end-of-the-year spike, with 12.0 percent of spending occurring in the last month and 3.5 percent

occurring in the last week.

      Figure 1 also shows a spike in spending in the first week of the year, along with smaller spikes

at the beginning of each quarter. Appendix Table A1 shows that these increases are predominantly

due to property leases that reset on an annual basis, and service contracts with janitors and nurses
  14 FPDS excludes classified contracts.Data are made available in FPDS immediately after an award. However, during
wartime, the Department of Defense is permitted a 90 day delay to minimize the potential for disclosure of mission
critical information.
  15 This pattern holds in each year. Over 2004 to 2009, the fraction of spending in the last month ranges from 14.8 to

20.1 percent and the fraction of spending in the last week ranges from 6.5 to 11.5 percent.




                                                          10
that reset periodically.16

     Further evidence on the year-end rush-to-spend comes from the geographic distribution of

spending. A former procurement officer, stationed on the West Coast, told us that every September

30th at 9pm Pacific Time, he would receive a call from the East Coast, explaining that the fiscal

year had expired in the Eastern Time zone, and asking whether he had spending needs that could

be fulfilled in the remaining three hours in the Pacific Time zone’s fiscal year.

     Figure 2 shows year-end spending by time zone. The data is split by whether the contract is

below the $100,000 threshold that generates larger oversight requirements and whether it occurred

in the last day of the year or in the last week of the year excluding the last day. Consistent with

this procurement officer’s experience, there is a 75 percent increase in Pacific Time Zone spending

on contracts of less than $100,000 in the last day of the year, and no effect in the other categories.

Appendix Table A2 shows this effect is robust to a rich set of controls.

     Table 2 shows that the end of the year spending surge occurs in all major government agencies.

If spending were distributed uniformly throughout the year, we would expect to see 1.9 percent

in the final week of the year. No agency obligates less than 3.6 percent.

     Table 3 shows the percent of spending on different types of goods and services that occurs

at the end of the year. The table shows some of the largest spending categories along with se-

lected smaller categories that are very similar to the large categories. Construction-related goods

and services, furnishings and office equipment, and I.T. services and equipment all have end-of-

year spending rates that are significantly higher than average. These categories of spending often

represent areas where there is significant flexibility about timing for performing maintenance or

upgrading facilities and equipment, and which, because they represent on-going needs, have a

reasonable chance of satisfying the bona fide needs requirement even if spending is obligated at

the end of the year.

     The categories of spending under the “Services” heading have end-of-year spending rates that

are near the average. For these kinds of services it will often be difficult to meet the bona fide need

requirement unless the services are inseparable from larger purchases, the services are necessary
  16 The final year of our data overlaps with the implementation of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA), which was signed into law on February 17, 2009. While in principle ARRA might have changed incentives to
engage in wasteful year-end spending, actual year-end spending volumes in 2009 are very similar to those during the
rest of our sample. Last month spending is 16.9 percent in 2009 versus 16.5 percent in the pooled 2004 to 2009 sample;
last week spending is 8.7 percent in 2009 which is the same as the 8.7 percent in the pooled 2004 to 2009 sample.


                                                         11
to provide continuity into the beginning of the next fiscal year, or the services are covered by

special multiyear contracting authorities. Thus, it is not surprising that their rate of end-of-year

spending is lower than that for construction, for example. There are two categories of spending

where there is very little year-end surge. The first is ongoing expenses such as fuels for which

attempts to spend at the end of the year would represent a blatant violation of prohibitions against

paying for the following year’s expenses with current year appropriations. The second is military

weapons systems for which because of long planning horizons and the flexibility provided by

special appropriations authorities, one would not expect to see a concentration of spending at the

end of the year.

    It is the exception rather than the rule for Congress to pass annual appropriations bills before

the beginning of the fiscal year. Between 2000 and 2009, the full annual appropriations process

was never completed on time. Analysts have attributed some of the challenges facing federal ac-

quisition to the tardiness of the appropriations process, since these delays introduce uncertainty

and compress the time available to plan and implement a successful acquisition strategy (Acquisi-

tion Advisory Panel, 2007). In Appendix Section B we analyze the relationship between the timing

of the annual appropriations acts and the within-year pattern of government contract spending.

The estimates show that a delay of ten weeks—roughly the average over this time period—raises

the share of spending in the last quarter of the year by 2 percentage points from a base of about 27

percent and the share of spending occurring in the last week of the year by 1 percentage point on

a base of 9 percent.

    Overall, the analysis in this section shows that the end-of-year spending surge is alive and

well, 30 years after Congress and the GAO focused significant attention on the problem and de-

spite reforms designed to limit it. Moreover, claims that late appropriations increase the end-

of-year volume of contracting activity are accurate, suggesting that late appropriations may be

exacerbating the adverse effects of having an acquisition workforce operating beyond capacity at

the end of the year.

    A surge in end-of-year spending does not necessarily imply bad outcomes. Agency acquisi-

tion staff can plan ahead for the possibility that extra funds will be available. Indeed, for large

contracts, weeks or even months of lead-time are generally necessary. The next section of the pa-

per therefore analyzes the relative quality of end-of-year contract spending to explore whether

                                                12
there are any adverse effects of the end-of-year spending surge.



4      Is End-of-Year Spending of Lower Quality?

Our model predicts that end-of-year spending will be of lower quality because agencies will spend

money at the end of the year on low-value projects and because the increased volume of contract-

ing at the end of the year will lead to less effective management of those acquisitions. As men-

tioned in the introduction, it has been challenging historically to study contract quality because

of the limited availability of data measuring quality. In this section of the paper, we use a new

dataset that includes quality information on 686 of the most important federal I.T. procurements

to study whether end-of-the-year procurements are of lower quality.


4.1     I.T. Dashboard

Our data come from the federal I.T. Dashboard (www.itdashboard.gov), which tracks the perfor-

mance of the most important federal I.T. projects. The I.T. Dashboard came online in beta form in

June, 2009 and provides the public with measures of the overall performance of major I.T. projects.

Like the USAspending.gov data discussed earlier, the I.T. Dashboard is part of a trend toward

“open government” and part of a shift in federal management philosophy toward monitoring

performance trends (rather than taking static snapshots of performance) and making the trends

public both for the sake of transparency and to motivate agencies to achieve high performance

(Metzenbaum, 2009).17

       Along with the availability of performance data, studying federal I.T. projects has two other

advantages. The first is the ubiquity of I.T. spending. Major I.T. projects are carried out by nearly

all components of the U.S. federal government. Compared to an analysis of, say, the purchase of

military or medical equipment, an analysis of I.T. spending shines a much broader light on the

workings of government, allowing us to test our hypotheses across agencies with a wide range

of missions and organizational cultures. The second advantage is that federal I.T. spending is an
    17 The
         legislative foundation for the I.T. Dashboard was laid by the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, which established
Chief Information Officers at 27 major federal agencies and called on them to “monitor the performance of the informa-
tion technology programs of the agency, [and] evaluate the performance of those programs on the basis of applicable
performance measurements.” The E-Government Act of 2002 built upon this by requiring the public display of these
data.



                                                         13
important and growing federal activity. Federal I.T. expenditure was $81.9 billion in 2010, and has

been growing at an inflation-adjusted rate of 3.8 percent over the past 5 years.18, 19

      Finally, it should be noted that while we are duly cautious about external validity, the widespread

nature of I.T. investment across all types of organizations, including private sector ones, makes a

study of I.T. purchases more broadly relevant than other categories of spending for which the

federal government is the only purchaser. Not only do non-federal organizations buy similar

products under similar budget structures, but they often purchase these products from the same

firms that sell to U.S. federal agencies. These firms know the end-of-year budgeting game, and

if they play the game at the U.S. federal level, there may be reason to believe that they operate

similarly elsewhere.20


4.2    Data and Summary Statistics

The I.T. Dashboard displays information on major, ongoing projects at 27 of the largest agencies

of the federal government. The information is gleaned from Exhibit 53 and Exhibit 300 forms that

agencies are required to submit to OMB, and is available on the Dashboard website. The data we

use were downloaded in March, 2010, when there were 761 projects being tracked.

      For the analysis, we drop the 73 observations that are missing the quality measures, date of

award, or cost variables. We also drop two enormous projects because their size would cause

them to dominate all of the weighted regression results and because they are too high-profile to be

indicative of normal budgeting practices.21 This leaves us with a baseline sample of 686 projects

and $130 billion in planned total spending.

      Appendix Table A3 shows the year of origination of these projects and the agencies at which

they occurred. Almost two-thirds of these projects (64.6 percent) and half of the spending (50.3

percent) originated in 2005 or later, although there are some ongoing projects that originated more
  18 Analytical Perspectives: Budget of the U.S. Government, 2010.
  19 These expenditure levels do not account for the social surplus from these projects. It is reasonable to think that
information systems used to monitor terrorist activities, administer Social Security payments, and coordinate the health
care of military veterans could have welfare impacts that far exceed their dollar costs.
  20 See Rogerson (1994) for a discussion of the incentives facing government contractors.
  21 These projects are a $45.5 billion project at the Department of Defense and a $19.5 billion project at the Department

of Homeland Security. The next largest project is $3.9 billion, and the average of the remaining observations is $219
million. Because the dropped observations have above average overall ratings and are not from the last week of the
year, omitting the observations works against us finding the effect predicted by our model.




                                                           14
than 20 years ago.22 The projects are distributed broadly across agencies. Although the Depart-

ment of Defense, Department of Transportation, and Department of Veterans Affairs have higher

levels of spending, the vast majority of the agencies have at least 10 projects (21 of 27) and at least

$1 billion in aggregate spending (20 of 27).

     The most prominent measure tracked by the I.T. Dashboard is the overall rating of the project,

which combines subindexes on cost, schedule, and performance. The cost rating subindex is based

on the absolute percent deviation between the planned and actual cost of the project. Projects that

are on average within 5 percent of the scheduled cost receive a score of 10, projects that are within

5 percent to 10 percent on average receive a score of 9, and so on down to zero. Because the

symmetric treatment of under- and over-cost projects is somewhat unnatural, we also construct

an alternative “cost overrun” index, which gives under-cost projects the highest scores and over-

cost projects the lowest. In this index, projects that are at least 45 percent under-cost receive a score

of 10, projects that are 35 percent to 45 percent under-cost receive a score of 9, and so on.

     The schedule rating subindex is based on the average tardiness of the project across mile-

stones, and takes on one of three values. Projects that are no more than 30 days overdue on

average receive a score of 10, projects that are between 30 and 90 days overdue on average receive

a score of 5, and projects that are more than 90 days overdue on average receive a score of 0.

     The third subindex is a subjective Chief Information Officer (CIO) evaluation that is designed

to reflect the CIO’s “assessment of the risk of the investment’s ability to accomplish its goals.”23

CIO evaluations are determined by an agency-level I.T. review process, which combines input

from stakeholders such as program managers and Chief Acquisition Officers. The evaluations

and supporting documentation are key inputs into the government-wide “TechStat” review pro-

cess, which forms the basis for annual I.T. budget requests. There are incentives for CIOs to rank

projects accurately. Contractors are likely to object to unjustifiably low scores. Issuing high scores

to projects that are ultimately viewed as low quality can be a source of embarrassment.24

     Finally, it is important to note that CIO evaluations are not mutually exclusive of the cost and
  22 We address sample selection issues in the sensitivity section below.
  23 Inparticular, CIOs are instructed to assess risk management (e.g., mitigation plans are in place to address risks),
requirements management (e.g., investment objectives are clear and scope is controlled), contractor oversight (e.g.,
agency receives key reports), historical performance (e.g., no significant deviations from planned costs and schedule),
human capital (e.g., qualified management and execution team), and any other factors deemed important.
  24 Of course, idiosyncratic measurement error in the dependent variable does not bias our estimates of the drop-off

in quality, although it can reduce the precision of our estimates.


                                                          15
schedule ratings, with the CIO explicitly instructed to consider deviations from planned cost and

schedule. A reason for this is that the cost and schedule subindices assess progress against current

milestones, but these milestones may have been reset after being missed in the past. Thus, the CIO

rating is able to account for risks associated with a project that has repeatedly missed milestones

in the past even if it is currently on track. The CIO rating is based on a 1-to-5 scale, with 5 being the

best.25 In constructing the overall rating, the I.T. Dashboard converts this 1-to-5 scale to a 0-to-10

scale by subtracting 1 and multiplying by 2.5.

    The overall rating is constructed by taking an average of the three subindices, with the CIO

evaluation replacing the average if the CIO evaluation has a lower value.26 The overall rating falls

on a 0-to-10 scale with 10 being the best, and takes on non-integer values due to the averaging of

subindices. Additional information on the indices can be found in the FAQ of the I.T. Dashboard

website.

    Appendix Table A4 shows summary statistics for the I.T. Dashboard sample. The average

project has a planned cost of $189 million and receives an overall rating of 7.1 out of 10. The

I.T. Dashboard includes information on a given project’s investment phase (e.g., planning, oper-

ations and maintenance), service group (e.g., management of government resources, services for

citizens), and line of business (e.g., communication, revenue collection). The bottom panel of the

table shows the distribution of the sample across these project characteristics. These variables,

along with agency and year fixed effects, are used as controls in the regression specifications.

    To classify year-end projects, we use the date the first contract of the project was signed, cre-

ating an indicator variable for projects that originated in the last seven days of September, the

end of the fiscal year. Most I.T. projects are comprised of a series of contracts that are renewed

and altered as milestones are met and the nature of the project evolves. We think that using the

date the first contract was signed to classify the start date of the project is the best approach; the

key structure of the project is most likely determined at its onset. While future contract awards

may affect the quality of the project, we observe outcomes only at the project level. We view any
  25 A rating of 5 corresponds to “low risk,” 4 corresponds to “moderately low risk,” 3 corresponds to “medium risk,”

2 corresponds to “moderately high risk,” and 1 corresponds to “high risk.”
  26 The exact formula is

                         n 2.5                         1              1                                           o
 Overall_Rating = min          (CIO_Evaluation − 1) + Cost_Rating + Schedule_Rating, 2.5 (CIO_Evaluation − 1)
                            3                          3              3




                                                         16
potential measurement error from our approach as introducing downward bias in our coefficient

of interest as contracts initially awarded before the last week of the year may be contaminated by

modifications made in the last week of a later year, and contracts initially awarded at the rush of

year’s end may be rectified at a later point.

      Figure 3 shows the weekly pattern of spending in the I.T. Dashboard sample. As in the broader

FPDS sample, there is a spike in spending in the last week of the year. Spending and the num-

ber of projects in the last week increase to 7.2 and 8.3 times their rest-of-year weekly averages,

respectively. Alternatively put, while only accounting for 1.9 percent of the days of the year, the

last week accounts for 12.3 percent of spending and 14.0 percent of the number of projects. The

year-end spike in spending is more pronounced in the sample of projects with a value of less than

$100 million. Given the longer planning horizon for larger acquisitions, it is not surprising that

we see more of a year-end spike for the smaller contracts.27


4.3    The Relative Quality of Year-End I.T. Contracts

Figure 4 shows the distributions of the overall rating index for last-week-of-the-year projects and

projects from the rest of the year. In these histograms, the ratings on the 0 to 10 scale are binned

into 5 categories with the lowest category representing overall ratings less than 2, the second low-

est representing overall ratings between 2 and 4, and so on. The top figure shows the distribution

weighted by planned spending, meaning that the effects should be interpreted in terms of dollars

of spending. These effects are closest to the theory, which makes predictions about the average

value of spending in the last period. To show that the effects are not being driven entirely by a

small number of high cost projects, Panel B shows the unweighted distribution of projects for the

last week and the rest of the year.

      Consistent with the model, overall ratings are substantially lower at year’s end. Spending

in the last week of the year (Panel A) is 5.7 times more likely to have an overall rating in the

bottom two categories (48.7 percent versus 8.6 percent) compared to spending during the rest of

the year. Without weighting by spending, projects (Panel B) are almost twice as likely to be below

the central value (10.6 percent versus 5.7 percent).
  27 Asin the broader FPDS sample, the end-of-year spike in the I.T. data is a broad phenomenon, not limited to a few
agencies.



                                                         17
     To control for potentially confounding factors, we examine the effects of the last week within

an ordered logit regression framework. The ordered logit model is a latent index model where

higher values of the latent index are associated with higher values of the categorical variable. An

advantage of the ordered logit model is that by allowing the cut points of the latent index to be

endogenously determined, the model does not place any cardinal assumptions on the dependent

variable.28 In other worlds, the model allows for the range of latent index values that corresponds

to an increase in the overall rating from 1 to 2 to be of a different size than the range that cor-

responds to an increase from 2 to 3. In particular, letting i denote observations and j denote the

values of the categorical variable, the predicted probabilities from the ordered logit model are

given by

                                                       exp( β L Last_Week i + β j + Xi0 β X )
                    Pr(Overall_Ratingi > j) =                                                   ,
                                                     1 + exp( β L Last_Week i + β j + Xi0 β X )

where Last_Week is an indicator for the last week of the fiscal year, β j is an indicator for the overall

rating category, and Xi is a vector of control variables. See Greene and Hensher (2010) for a recent

treatment of ordered choice models.

     Table 4 presents results from maximum likelihood estimates of the ordered logit model on the

I.T. dashboard sample. The estimates in the table are odds ratios. Recall that odds ratios capture

the proportional change in the odds of a higher categorical value associated with a unit increase in

the dependent variable, so that an odds ratio of 1/2 indicates that the odds of a higher categorical

value are 50 percent lower, or reciprocally that the odds of a lower categorical variable are 2 times

as great. The results in this table are weighted by inflation-adjusted spending.

     The first column of the table shows the impact of a last week contract on the rating in a regres-

sion with no covariates. Columns 2 through 4 sequentially add in fixed effects for year, agency,

and project characteristics. In all of the specifications, the odds ratios are well below one—ranging

from 0.18 to 0.46—implying that last week spending is of significantly lower quality than spend-

ing in the rest of the year (the p-values are less than 0.01 in all specifications). The estimates imply

that spending that originates in the last week of the fiscal year has 2.2 to 5.6 times higher odds of
  28 The standard ordered logit model used here does restrict the variables to have a proportional effect on the odds

of a categorical outcome. We fail to reject this assumption using a Brant test that compares the standard ordered logit
model with an alternative model that allows the effects to vary.



                                                          18
having a lower quality score.29


4.4       Sensitivity Analysis

This subsection explores the robustness of the basic estimates. It shows how the results vary

with different treatment of large contracts, with different functional form assumptions, and when

selection into the sample is taken into account.

      Figure 4 showed that the finding that year-end projects are of lower quality was more pro-

nounced in the dollar-weighted analysis than in the unweighted analysis, suggesting that a few

large, poorly performing contracts could be heavily affecting the results. Columns 1 to 4 of Table

5 contain results that analyze this issue. Columns 1 and 2 split the sample at the median contract

size of $62 million. Both coefficients are substantially below one, although the coefficient in col-

umn 1 is less precisely estimated. The point estimate in column 3 from an unweighted regression

is quite similar to the estimate in column 1 for the smaller contracts, but with added precision

from doubling the sample size by including the full sample (p-value of .02). Results in which we

Winsorize the weights, assigning a weight of $1 billion to the 4 percent of projects that are larger

than $1 billion, are about half way between the full sample weighted and unweighted results (p-

value less than 0.01). Overall, it is clear that the pattern of lower rating for end-of-year contracts is

a broad phenomenon. It is also clear that the sample contains several very large low-rated projects

that were originated in the last week of the year.30

      Column 5 of Table 5 shows results from an ordinary least squares (OLS) model in which the

raw overall rating is regressed on an indicator for the contract originating in the last week of the

year and on controls. The regression coefficient of -1.00 shows that I.T. spending contracted in the

last week of the year receives ratings that are on average a full point lower on the 0 to 10 rating

scale. This estimate confirms that the finding of lower quality year-end spending is not limited to

the ordered logit functional form.

      An important feature of our sample is that it reflects only active I.T. projects. Projects that have
  29 Inaddition to the results from the last week of the year, we have also examined spending in the last month of the
year. We find this spending is of moderately lower quality than that in the first 11 months of the year. We have also
examined the quality of spending in the first week of the year (which also spikes). The point estimate for the first week
of the year suggests somewhat higher spending quality, but the odds ratio is not significantly different from 1.0.
  30 The stronger effect for larger contracts need not result from contract size per se, but could occur if large contracts

are more complex on average. For example, if small projects are more likely to be routine “off-the-shelf” I.T. systems,
then there might be less downside risk to these projects than large, unique projects originated at the end of the year.


                                                            19
already been completed or projects that were terminated without reaching completion are not in

our sample. Unfortunately, because the I.T. Dashboard and the CIO ratings are brand new, it is

not possible to acquire rating information on the major I.T. projects that are no longer ongoing.

     Ideally, one would want a sample of all major I.T. projects that originated in a particular period

in time. The bias introduced by the way in which our sample was constructed most likely leads

us to underestimate the end-of-year effect. In particular, very bad contracts begun in the last week

of the year are likely to be canceled and would not appear in our data set. Similarly, very well

executed contracts from earlier in the year are likely to be completed ahead of schedule and also

not appear in our data set. Thus, our estimates likely understate the gap in quality that we would

find if we could compare all contracts from the last week of the year with all contracts from the

rest of the year.

     To explore the extent of bias that a selection mechanism like the one just described might

introduce into our estimates, we assembled a dataset of all 3,859 major I.T. projects that originated

between 2002 and 2010. We were able to assemble this dataset using the annual Exhibit 53 reports

that allow OMB to track I.T. projects across the major federal agencies. These data show that more

recently originated projects are significantly more likely to be in our sample. Our sample contains

85 percent of the total spending on projects that originated in 2007 or later and only 28 percent of

the spending on projects that originated before this date.

     A simple way to assess whether there is selection is to estimate the model on samples split

into earlier and later years. A difference in the coefficient of interest across samples, given the

assumption that there is no time trend in the effect, would be indicative of selection bias. Given

this assumption, however, we can estimate the parameter of interest exactly by using the date

of project origination to identify a selection correction term. Column 6 implements this strategy,

showing estimates from a Heckman selection model in which the year of origination is excluded

from the second stage. The results show a larger effect than the corresponding OLS estimate, but

the lack of precision means that we cannot rule out that the effects are the same.31 The negative

coefficient on the selection term, although statistically indistinguishable from zero, suggests that

lower quality projects are, on net, more likely to remain in the sample over time.
  31 Consistent with this finding, OLS estimates on a sample split in 2007 show a larger point estimate in the later years,

but we cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficients are the same.



                                                            20
4.5    Alternative Mechanisms

The results from the I.T. Dashboard show that, consistent with the predictions of our model, year-

end spending is of lower quality than spending obligated earlier in the year. In our discussion

of the model, we posited two potential channels for this effect: agencies may save low priority

projects for the end of the year and undertake them only if they have no better uses for the funds,

and the high volume of contracting activity at the end of the year might result in less management

attention per project.

      There are, however, other mechanisms that could lead to a drop-off in quality—and have

different implications for the counterfactual of allowing agencies to roll over unused funds into

the subsequent year. One such mechanism is procrastination.32 If the contracting officers who

do a worse job of planning, writing, or managing contracts are also inclined to procrastinate,

then we may see a surge of low quality contracts at the end of the year because that is when

the least effective acquisition professionals get their contracts out the door. This mechanism has

different policy implications because allowing agencies to roll over funds would not necessarily

improve outcomes: the least effective acquisition professionals would simply issue their contracts

at a different time of year.

      To evaluate the importance of this mechanism, we estimate regression specifications that

control for contracting office fixed effects, allowing us to compare the relative performance of

projects procured by the same acquisition professionals at different points in time. In particular,

we worked to obtain data on the contracting office for each contract and merged this information

with the I.T. Dashboard dataset.33 The data on contracting offices is incomplete, but does allow us

to identify the contracting offices for 38 percent of the spending ($48 billion out of $125 billion) and

41 percent (275 of 671) of the projects in our data. Importantly, most of the spending (82 percent)

and projects (84 percent) occur at contracting offices that are involved with more than one project,

allowing us to use variation within contracting offices.

      Columns 1 and 2 of Table A8 show the results of this analysis. We show coefficients from lin-

ear regressions because the maximum likelihood estimates of the ordered logit model with a large
  32 Wethank Steve Kelman for suggesting this mechanism.
  33 Contracting offices are composed of a small number of contracting specialists, technical assistants, and program
managers. As of 2010, there were 35,048 contracting series employees (GS-1102) in the Federal Government (Federal
Acquisition Institute, 2011) and 8,829 unique contracting offices, an average of 4.0 contracting professionals per office.


                                                           21
number of fixed effects does not reliably converge. The drop-off in quality is similar in magnitude

to the baseline estimate of -1.00. While the weighted estimate is imprecise, the unweighted spec-

ification is statistically distinguishable from zero at the 2 percent level. Therefore, the evidence

does not suggest that our results stem from worse contracting offices disproportionally writing

year-end contracts.

    Another mechanism that could lead to a drop-off in quality is priority-based contracting. Sup-

pose agencies (i) fund a fixed set of projects and (ii) undertake projects in priority order, starting

with the highest quality. This mechanism will naturally lead to declining average quality over the

course of the year. However, this mechanism will not, by itself, generate an increase in the volume

of spending at year’s end. But, if we make the additional assumption that agencies undertake a

large number of low priority projects, we can generate a spike in spending at the end of the year.

In this model, agencies always undertake the same set of projects and there is no welfare loss from

wasteful year-end spending.

    Because agencies undertake a fixed set of projects, a key prediction of this priority-based

model is that allowing rollover does not affect the volume of year-end spending. As we discuss in

more detail in Section 5, the Department of Justice (DOJ) has obtained special authority to roll over

unused budget authority for I.T. projects into a fund that can be used on I.T. expenditure in the

following year. We show that DOJ does not have an economically significant spike in the volume

of I.T. spending, with only 3.4 percent of I.T. spending occurring in the last week of the year com-

pared to 9.3 percent for non-I.T. spending. We also conduct difference-in-differences analysis that

compares I.T. and non-I.T. spending at DOJ and other agencies and show that rollover reduces the

volume of year-end spending by 9.5 percentage points. This effect is estimated using thousands

of contracts and has a p-value of less than 0.1 percent.

    Additional evidence against this alternative model comes from examining the second moment

of the volume and quality data. In our model of wasteful year-end spending, value-of-spending

shocks, α, accumulate throughout the year such that there should be significantly more variation

(i.e., a larger second moment) in the volume and the quality of spending at the end of the year. This

higher variance occurs because sometimes agencies receive several low value-of-spending shocks

over the course of the year, resulting in substantial remaining budget authority at the end of the

year and a high volume of low quality spending. At other times, agencies accumulate several

                                                 22
high value-of-spending shocks so that they have little money left to spend at the end of the year

and therefore engage in a low volume of high quality spending.34 In the priority-based model,

variation in the deterministic list of projects might create some variation in within-year spending

patterns but there is no a priori reason why there should be relatively more variation in spending

volumes or spending quality at the end of the year.

     Appendix Table A9 investigates these two predictions. Columns 1 and 2 show the standard

deviation of weekly spending volumes in the last week and the rest-of-the-year in the full FPDS

data. This analysis is conducted using a dataset in which the observations are annual percentages

of spending by agency and by week. Column 1 shows the standard deviations in the raw data,

and column 2 shows the standard deviations after partialling out agency and year fixed effects.35

The table shows that there is significantly more variation at the end of the year, with 50 percent

higher standard deviations across both specifications.

     Columns 3 and 4 examine the standard deviation of the overall ratings of project quality in

the I.T. Dashboard data. This analysis is conducted using the project-level data and is weighted

by spending on each project so that the standard deviations can by interpreted as the variation

per dollar of expenditure. Column 3 shows the standard deviations in the raw data and column

4 shows standard deviations after partialling out agency, year, and product characteristic fixed

effects. The table shows that the variation in project quality at the end of the year is higher in both

specifications.

     The increased variation in volume and quality at the end of the year is inconsistent with the

priority-based model. At the same time, the increased variation is crucial to the welfare gains from

rollover because it implies there are states of the world where the value of spending is well below

the social cost of funds and would be avoided if the agency could roll over these funds into the

subsequent year. Thus, this evidence not only distinguishes between these models but shows they

are different on exactly the dimension that generates the conflicting welfare predictions.

     A final mechanism that could explain the year-end drop-off in quality but would have differ-

ent policy implications is reverse causality. If CIOs give a project a low overall rating not because
  34 We   have confirmed these predictions in simulations of the calibrated model.
  35 Let  yijt denote the percentage of spending at agency i in year j and week t. Columns 1 show the standard deviation
of yijt for week t = 52 and week t < 52. To construct the estimates in column 2, we run the regression yijt = δi + δj + eijt
where δi and δj and agency and year fixed effects, construct the residuals eijt = yijt − δi − δj , and then show the standard
deviation of eijt for week t = 52 and week t < 52.


                                                             23
it is low quality but because the CIO recalls it being originated in the end-of-year rush then our

finding would be spurious and a policy response would not be justified.36

      To evaluate this issue, we examine whether the drop-off in quality is relatively stronger for

CIOs who have had a longer tenure at their agency and for whom the timing of project origination

is likely to be more salient. If the drop-off is stronger for CIOs who were present for the start of the

project, then we might be worried about this reverse casualty channel. To conduct this analysis,

we obtained CIO biographical statements and used the information in these statements to split

the sample into projects for which the CIO has a tenure of more than 3 years at the agency (357 of

671 projects) and projects for which the CIO has a tenure of 3 years or less (235 of 671 projects).37

Columns 3 and 4 of Table A8 show odds ratios from ordered logit regressions on the longer and

shorter tenure samples. The odds ratios are significantly below 1 and similar across both samples,

suggesting that reverse causality is unlikely to be a concern.


4.6    Why Are Year-End Contracts of Lower Quality?

To further explore the mechanism behind poor end-of-year contracts, we examine the subcompo-

nents of the overall rating to see which subindices are responsible for the result. Appendix Table

A5 repeats our main ordered logit analysis with each subindex as the dependent variable. The

results show clearly that it is the evaluation by the agency CIO that is responsible for the main

finding. Neither the cost rating nor the schedule rating has an odds ratio that is significantly dif-

ferent from 1. The CIO evaluation shows that the odds of having a higher rating are one-sixth

as high for last-week-of-the-year contracts. The coefficient in the CIO regression is insensitive to

adding the cost rating and scheduling rating into the regression, suggesting that it is information

in the CIO rating that is not incorporated in the other ratings that is responsible for the result.

      This finding is not all that surprising. As previously mentioned, the I.T. Dashboard explicitly

places more faith in the CIO’s assessment than in the other components by allowing the CIO

assessment to override the other components if it is lower than the other components. Moreover,

the ability to reset milestone targets makes it difficult to assess the cost and schedule ratings. But

while not surprising, the fact that it is the CIO evaluation that is driving the result means that
  36 We thank Nick Bloom for alerting us to the possibility of this mechanism.
  37 Biographical  statements, at the time of writing, were available at https://cio.gov/about/members/. We were
unable to classify CIO tenure for 79 of the projects.


                                                      24
we cannot learn much about the mechanism from the subindices, since the CIO evaluation is a

comprehensive measure of the I.T. project’s performance.

    Another way to explore possible mechanisms is to examine whether other observable fea-

tures of end-of-year contracts are different from those earlier in the year. Specifically, we examine

whether features that policymakers often define as high risk—such as lack of competitive bidding

or use of cost-reimbursement rather than fixed cost pricing—are more prevalent in end-of-year

contracts. For this analysis, we return to the FPDS sample of all contracts from 2004 to 2009. To

facilitate the analysis, we aggregate the 14.6 million observations up to the level of the covariates.

We then estimate linear probability models with indicators for contract characteristics (e.g., a non-

competitively sourced indicator) as the dependent variable on an indicator for last week of the

fiscal year and controls. The regressions are weighted by total spending in each cell.

    Columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table A6 examine shifts in the degree of competitive sourcing at

the end of the year. The use of non-competitive contracts shows little change. However, contracts

that are competitively sourced are significantly more likely to receive only one bid, perhaps be-

cause the end-of-year rush leaves less time to allow bidding to take place. The estimates indicate

that there is almost a 10 percent increase in contracts receiving only a single bid—a 1.7 percent-

age point increase on a base of 20 percent. On net, then, there is a modest increase in “risky”

non-competitive and one-bid contracts at the end of the year.

    Columns 3 and 4 investigate the type of contract used. Because of their open-ended finan-

cial risk, contracts that provide for cost reimbursement rather than specifying a fixed price often

require the contracting officer to obtain extra layers of approval—approval that may be difficult

to obtain during the end-of-the-year crunch. Column 3 shows that cost-reimbursement contracts

are 3.2 percentage points less likely at the end of the year, conditional on detailed controls for the

product or service purchased. The use of time and material or labor hours (T&M/LH), which

also provide cost-based reimbursement, increases by 0.4 percentage points at the end of the year.

T&M/LH contracts are often used when a contracting officer doesn’t have time to specify the exact

requirements of a contract.

    Overall, the analysis in this section provides some evidence on the causes of lower perfor-

mance at the end of the year. The shift in contract type and the rise in competitively sourced

contracts that receive only one bid is consistent with a mechanism in which contracting officers

                                                 25
face substantial time pressure at the end of the year, obtaining fewer bids for each contract and

choosing to use less time-intensive contract vehicles when they have sufficient discretion. The

evidence does not allow us to assess the relative importance of this mechanism compared to other

potential explanations, such as that agencies save lower priority projects for the end of the year

and undertake them only if funds permit.



5      Allowing for Rollover

The existence of wasteful year-end spending raises the question of whether anything can be done

to reduce it. Reducing uncertainty would be helpful but is infeasible in practice for many orga-

nizations due to the inherent unpredictability of some types of shocks. A natural way to increase

efficiency would be to allow organizations to roll over budget authority across years. Under such

a system, budgeting would still occur on an annual basis, but rather than expiring at year’s end,

unused funds would be added to the newly granted budget authority in the next year.

       The idea that budget authority should last for longer than one year is not new. Article 1,

Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution gave Congress the power of taxation to fund 17 categories of

expenditure. For one of these categories, “To raise and support armies”, the Framers placed a

time limit on budget authority, specifying that “no appropriation of money to that use shall be

for longer term than two years.” For all other categories, no limit was specified, suggesting that

periods longer than two years were potentially desirable in a broad range of circumstances.

       More recently, Jones (2005) has argued for extending the U.S. federal government’s obligation

period from 12 to 24 months, and McPherson (2007) has recommended that agencies be allowed

to carry over unused budget authority for one-time or emergency use for an additional year. The

federal government of Canada has adopted a version of rollover, allowing agencies to carry over

up to 5 percent of their budget authority across years. In response to concerns over wasteful

year-end spending, Oklahoma and Washington also allow their agencies to roll over their budget

authority to some extent.38 Finally, within the U.S. federal government, the Department of Justice

(DOJ) has obtained special authority to transfer unused budget authority to an account that can

be used for capital and other similar expenditure in future years.39
    38 See   McPherson (2007) for an in-depth discussion.
    39 See   Public Law 102-140: 28 U.S.C. 527. The special authority is also discussed in a May 18, 2006 Senate hearing


                                                             26
5.1    Extending the Model

To allow for rollover, we extend the model to an infinite horizon setting. At the beginning of each

year, denoted y = 1, 2, 3, . . ., Congress decides on a budget By for the agency. In each month,

m = 1, 2, . . . M, the agency learns about the value of spending in that period αy,m and chooses

a spending level xy,m accordingly. Indexes update like a standard calendar: The index {y, m} is

followed by {y, m + 1} if m < M and {y + 1, 1} if m = M.

      Agency’s problem. It is easiest to present the agency problem in recursive form. Let Vm ( Ay,m )

be the month-specific, present value to the agency from entering a period {y, m} with Ay,m assets.

Let β denote the monthly discount factor. The agency’s problem is to choose a level of spending

to maximize the value of current period spending plus the discounted expected value of next

period’s value function:

                                                                                             
                     Vm ( Ay,m ) =        max           αy,m v( xy,m ) + βEy,m Vm+1 ( Ay,m+1 ) .
                                     Ay,m ≥ xy,m ≥0



In periods before the end of the year, next period’s assets are current assets minus spending. At

the end of the year, next period’s assets are a new budget allocation plus a function g( Ay,M − xy,M )

of remaining assets.
                                           
                                            Ay,m − xy,m
                                           
                                                                              if m < M
                            Ay,m+1 =
                                            By+1 + g( Ay,M − xy,M ) if m = M
                                           


The no-rollover case is given by g( Ay,M − xy,M ) = 0; full rollover is given by g( Ay,M − xy,M ) =

Ay,M − xy,M

      Congress’s problem. As before, Congress places the same value on spending as the agency

but also considers the opportunity cost of funds. Let Ãy ≡ g( Ay−1,M − xy−1,M ) indicate the re-

sources that the agency rolls over from year y − 1 to year y. The recursive form of Congress’s

problem is

                                      h    M                                                M               i
             W ( Ãy ) = max
                         By ≥0
                                 Ey       ∑      βm−1 αm v( xy,m
                                                             ∗
                                                                 ) + β M W ( Ãy+1 ) − λ   ∑      βm−1 xy,m
                                                                                                        ∗
                                                                                                              ,
                                          m =1                                             m =1

entitled, “Unobligated Balanced: Freeing Up Funds, Setting Priorities and Untying Agency Hands.”



                                                             27
where next year’s rolled over amount is given by

                                                                     M
                                          Ãy+1 = g( Ãy + By −      ∑      ∗
                                                                           xy,m )
                                                                    m =1


     ∗ is the agency’s choice for optimal spending, which is affected by the budget B .
and xy,m                                                                             y



5.2    Congressional Commitment

The benefit of rollover depends on the degree to which Congress can refrain from raiding the

agency’s rolled over funds. Suppose full rollover is permitted by law: g( Ay,M − xy,M ) = Ay,M −

xy,M . Consider the case in which Congress cannot commit to a budget rule.

Proposition 3 (No Commitment). If Congress cannot commit to a budget rule, the agency will never roll

over any budget authority, and allowing rollover will not produce an efficiency gain.

      To see this, notice that at the beginning of each year, Congress’s problem yields an optimal

level of assets for the agency that equates the expected marginal value of spending to the so-

cial cost of funds. It follows that if the agency rolls over an additional dollar, it is optimal for

Congress to reduce the agency’s budget allocation to fully offset this amount. Since the agency

values spending, it will be better off spending all of its resources by year’s end and not rolling

over any budget authority. The formal proof for this proposition, and the proposition below, can

be found in Appendix Section A.

      Now suppose that Congress can commit to a budget rule By∗ = Γ( Ay−1,M − xy−1,M ) that could

depend on the amount of rolled over funds.

Proposition 4 (Full Commitment). If Congress can commit to a budget rule, it is optimal for Congress

to provide a constant budget that does not depend on the level of rolled over resources (i.e., By∗ = B̄), and

welfare will be higher than in the no-rollover scenario.

      Because Congress places the same value on spending as the agency, it wants to avoid distort-

ing the agency’s inter-temporal spending decisions. It does this by making future budgets uncon-

ditional on the amount of rolled over funds.40 Agency spending does not spike at the end of the
  40 Thisresult shares intuition with results on optimal unemployment insurance in the presence of hidden savings
(Abdulkadiroglu, Kuruscu and Sahin, 2002; Kocherlakota, 2004). In these papers, hidden savings weakens the link
between optimal unemployment benefits and the length of time unemployed. Here, if Congress can commit to a
budget rule, it is similarly optimal for future budget allocations to be unconditional on the amount of rolled over funds.


                                                           28
year, and there is no year-end drop-off in quality. The only difference between full commitment

and the first-best is that agencies cannot borrow.

      This result also implies that it is never optimal for the budget office to offer to share savings

with an agency, for example by allowing agencies to keep 50 percent of unused funds and then

applying the remaining 50 percent to deficit reduction. So long as the portion of unused funds

retained by the agency is below 100 percent, agencies will have an incentive to do some spending

with a value below the social cost of funds.41

      Finally, the model does not exhibit a ratchet effect phenomenon (Freixas, Guesnerie and Tirole,

1985), in which the pattern of spending over the year provides an informative signal to Congress

on the social value of spending at the agency. This is because the pattern of spending is only in-

dicative of the relative magnitude of the value of spending shocks αy,m compared to their expected

value E[αy,m ] and does not in general provide information on their absolute magnitude, which is

what determines Congress’s budget allocation.42,43


5.3    Empirical Evidence

To explore whether allowing rollover gives rise to the type of beneficial effects that are predicted by

the full commitment equilibrium, we examine procurement data from the Department of Justice.

In 1992, the Department of Justice (DOJ) obtained special authority to roll over up to 4 percent of

annual revenue into a fund that could be used for up to five years on I.T. and related projects.44

DOJ has been using this authority, rolling over $1.8 billion during the 1994 to 2006 period (Senate,

2006), yet may be worried about commitment. In a recent report, Senator Tom Coburn criticized
   41 There are institutional factors that help Congress commit to allowing rollover. Congress and agencies play a re-

peated game. If Congress raids an agency’s rolled over resources in one year, the agency may play a trigger strategy,
never rolling over funds in the future. If multiple agencies were permitted rollover, Congress might be concerned about
its reputation, and refrain from raiding an agency’s rainy-day fund to avoid discouraging other agencies from rolling
over their resources.
   42 To see this, consider a setting with two periods, no rollover, and a spike in spending at the end of the year. Based on

this pattern of spending, Congress is able to infer that the agency received a below average draw for α in the first period
of the year. The pattern of spending, however, cannot be used to determine the average value of spending, which is
what determines Congress’s budget allocation.
   43 There are a number of extensions to the model that would be interesting to consider. For instance, what is the effect

of asymmetric information between Congress and the agency or of a principle-agent setup where moral hazard by the
agency is a central concern.
   44 In particular, the law allows the transfer of unobligated balances into the “capital account of the Working Capital

Fund to be available for the department-wide acquisition of capital equipment, development and implementation of
law enforcement or litigation related automated data processing systems, and for the improvement and implementation
of the Department’s financial management and payroll/personnel systems.” (Public Law 102-140, 28 USC 527) See:
http://www.justice.gov/jmd/costreim/wcf-website-update.pdf.


                                                             29
the agency for its behavior, stating, “Every year the Department ends the year with billions of

unspent dollars. But instead of returning this unneeded and unspent money to the taxpayers, the

DOJ rolls it over year to year” (Coburn, 2008).

    To examine the effects of rollover, we return to the data on the volume and quality of contract

spending analyzed in Sections 3 and 4. Table 6 presents difference-in-differences estimates of

the effect of the DOJ rollover authority on the volume of year-end spending. Rows compare the

fraction of spending that occurs in the last week of the year at DOJ and at other agencies; columns

compare I.T. and non-I.T. projects. The first row shows that at other agencies, 8.5 percent of non-

I.T. spending occurs in the last week of the fiscal year; for I.T. projects, 12.1 percent of spending

occurs in the last week of the year. At DOJ, the fraction of non-I.T. spending that occurs in the last

week of the year is 9.3 percent, similar to the government-wide average. Whereas at other agencies

the fraction of I.T. spending that occurs in the last week of the year is above the fraction of non-I.T.

spending, at DOJ it is significantly lower. At DOJ, only 3.4 percent of I.T. spending occurs in the

last week of the year, much closer to the 1.9 percent that would result from constant expenditure

over the year. The difference-in-differences estimate is a decline of 9.5 percentage points, with a

p-value of less than 0.1 percent.

    Because DOJ has relatively little end-of-year I.T. spending, there is less data to look at the

effects on quality. Table 7 shows difference-in-differences estimates of the effect on overall ratings

using the I.T. Dashboard data. At other agencies, last-week I.T. projects have overall ratings that

are 1.9 points lower than rest-of-year projects on average. DOJ has 15 I.T. projects in the Dashboard

with only 1 occurring in the last week of the year. This project has the highest overall rating of all

the projects undertaken by DOJ and is 1.6 points higher than the average. While one should be

cautious in interpreting a result that comes from a single observation, a difference-in-differences

estimate shows how unlikely it is that the one end-of-year DOJ I.T. project would be of such high

quality if there were no effect of rollover—the DOJ rollover variable has a p-value that is below

.01. Appendix Table A10 show the result is robust across a broad set of regression specifications.

    In sum, the DOJ data provide empirical support for beneficial effects of rollover. Allowing for

the rollover of I.T. funds leads to a substantial decrease in the volume of year-end I.T. spending at

DOJ relative to other agencies, and also seems to lead to an increase in project quality.



                                                  30
5.4    Calibrating the Welfare Gains

The results in the previous section—that permitting rollover eliminates the spike in spending and

the associated decline in quality—gives an indication of the potential welfare gains from permit-

ting rollover. But the theoretical model suggests that a deeper assessment is needed. In particular,

rollover should improve the quality of spending over the front part of the year as well. For in-

stance, in the beginning of the year, agencies with a high value of spending can tap into funds

rolled over from the previous period. Moreover, the gains from permitting rollover depend on

how Congress reacts to rolled-over funds. To study these types of effects and to consider more

generally the welfare gains from alternative rollover policies, we calibrate the infinite horizon

model to fit the spike in spending and the drop-off in quality at the end of the year.

      The model is characterized by a parameter that determines the curvature of the value of

spending function and a parameter that determines the distribution of spending shocks. We cal-

ibrate these parameters such that simulated data from the model has the same spike in spending

and drop-off in quality that we observed in the federal procurement data. In our baseline calibra-
                                          x 1− γ
tion, we specify a CRRA v( x ) =          1− γ     value of spending function with curvature parameter γ and

a log normal ln α ∼ N (0, σ) distribution of spending shocks with standard deviation σ. We set the

number of months per year to M = 12 and the monthly discount factor to β = 0.996.45 We nor-

malize the social cost of funds to λ = 1. While the specific quantitative results are dependent on

the chosen functional form, we show in the appendix that results are quite similar with a CARA

spending function. Full details on the calibration can be found in Appendix Section C.

      As a first step, we assess the welfare gains from rollover by comparing the non-rollover status

quo to three alternative scenarios. In the first scenario, we allow rollover, but reduce the agency’s

budget authority to produce the same expected value of spending as in the no-rollover regime.

This can be thought of as an estimate of the compensating variation from allowing rollover. Ap-

pendix Table A13 shows that Congress could allow rollover, reduce the agency’s budget by 13

percent, and the value of spending would be identical to the status quo.

      The second scenario examines the welfare gain from rollover when Congress can re-optimize

the budget it provides to the agency. In our simulations Congress chooses to reduce the agency’s
 45 This   monthly discount factor implies an annual discount factor of 0.95 = 0.99612 .




                                                            31
budget allocation by an amount that turns out to be similar to the reduction in the compensating

variation scenario because agencies on average enter the year with rolled-over funds, so Congress

does not need to provide as much funding to ensure that the agency can take advantage of high

α periods. Moreover, this effect outweighs the greater willingness of Congress to provide funds

in a rollover environment given that agencies will not squander them on projects with a value

below the social cost of funds. The welfare gains in this Congressional reoptimization scenario are

slightly higher than those in the compensating variation scenario.

    The third scenario examines the welfare gains from the first-best level of spending, defined

as the level of spending that equates the marginal social value of spending to the marginal social

cost of funds in each period. Compared to rollover, which effectively allows agencies to save,

the first-best effectively allows agencies both to save and to borrow. The welfare gains from this

counterfactual are approximately 19 percent, but are an upper bound because, in the real world,

agencies can acquire extra resources in extenuating circumstances through mid-year supplemental

appropriations from Congress, a channel we do not model in our rollover scenario.

    Whether these welfare gains can be achieved depends on Congress’s ability to commit to

future budgets. While Congress cannot completely tie its own hands, it can design policies to

increase the likelihood of commitment. For example, Congress could specify that rolled-over

amounts are not reported in standard budget tables, increasing the cost of obtaining this infor-

mation. Our analysis shows that small commitment probabilities can achieve relatively large wel-

fare gains. We conduct a counterfactual analysis where with probability π Congress commits and

agencies are able to roll over the full amount of unspent resources into the next year, and with

probability 1 − π Congress reneges and unspent resources are taken from the agency and valued

in the welfare function at the social cost of funds. Panel A of Appendix Figure A3 shows that a 25

percent commitment probability leads to welfare gains of more than half the full rollover value, as

agencies prefer to roll over their funds than engage in flat-of-the-curve spending at the end of the

year.

    We also use the model to examine the effect of two intermediate policies. The first is to allow

agencies to roll over funding for a time-limited grace period.46 Such a grace period would not

simply result in a spike in spending at the new deadline. Because next year’s budget authority
 46 We   thank Dan Feenberg for suggesting this counterfactual.


                                                          32
would provide a de facto rainy day fund, even a few months of rollover would allow agencies to

draw down their previous year’s savings over a longer time period while using next year’s allot-

ment to insure against large spending needs.47 We find that a one-month grace period achieves 41

percent of the welfare gains from full rollover; a two-month grace period achieves 66 percent; and

a four-month grace period 90 percent (see Panel B of Appendix Figure A3).

     The second alternative is for Congress to provide more funding on a multi-year basis. While

the full implications of less frequent fiscal policy are outside the scope of this paper, one benefit

of multi-year budgeting is that it reduces the frequency of wasteful year-end spending. In our

calibrated model, we find that two-year budget cycles achieve 70 percent of the gains from full

rollover and three-year budget cycles achieve 90 percent (see Panel C of Appendix Figure A3).

     The results are subject to a number of caveats. We assume that agencies—and their employees—

do not have self-control problems. If agencies are prone to procrastinate, for example, then a year-

end deadline may force agencies to get languishing projects out the door, providing a benefit that

could offset some of the cost of lower quality spending.

     Another assumption we make is that agencies cannot achieve the equivalent of rollover today

by purchasing fungible goods or “parking” funds in contracts that can be repurposed at the end

of the year. The empirical analysis showed relatively little year-end spending in the most fungible

categories—such as fuels, lubricants, oils and waxes—and we would not see a drop-off in quality

if funds were used in this manner. To the extent some funding is already rolled over through such

methods, the benefits of legally permitting rollover would be reduced.



6    Conclusion

Our model of an organization facing a fixed period in which it must spend its budget resources

made three predictions. We have confirmed all three using data on U.S. federal contracting. First,

there is a surge of spending at the end of the year. Second, end-of-year spending is of lower

quality. Third, permitting the rollover of spending into subsequent periods eliminates the end-of-

year spending surge and appears to lead to higher quality.
  47 Because Congress rarely passes a budget on schedule and agencies are operating under continuing resolutions, this

partial rollover period often will have expired by the time that a new budget is determined. In this case, Congress
would have no incentive to take this rolled-over amount into consideration.



                                                         33
    Our welfare simulations suggest that most of the inefficiency from wasteful year-end spend-

ing could be eliminated with relatively modest changes to budget procedures—for example, by

allowing agencies to roll over unused funds into the next fiscal year for use during a four-month

grace period.

    In evaluating possible policy reforms, one should not lose sight of the potential benefits of

one-year budget periods. Shorter appropriations cycles may produce benefits from greater Con-

gressional control over executive branch operations. The use-it-or-lose it feature of appropriated

funds may push projects out the door that would otherwise languish due to bureaucratic delays.

And there may be institutional barriers to achieving the full benefits illustrated in the welfare sim-

ulations. For example, unless the rollover balances stay with the same part of the organization that

managed to save them, agency subcomponents will still have an incentive to use up the entirety

of their allocations.

    While a full assessment of potential policy reforms is beyond the scope of this paper, two

things are clear. First, the conventional wisdom expressed in GAO (1998) that the federal end-

of-year spending problem was largely solved with the budget process reforms of the early 1980s

is wrong. There remains a large surge in spending in the last week of the year. Second, this

spending surge has real consequences. Our finding that year-end I.T. spending is of lower quality

demonstrates for the first time that the end-of-year spending surge does in fact result in lower

quality spending.




                                                 34
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., B. Kuruscu, and A. Sahin. 2002. “Unemployment Insurance and the Role of
 Self-Insurance.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(3): 681–703.

Acquisition Advisory Panel. 2007. “Report of the Acquisition Advisory Panel to the Office of
 Federal Procurement Policy and the United States Congress.”

Attanasio, O.P., and G. Weber. 2010. “Consumption and Saving: Models of Intertemporal Alloca-
  tion and Their Implications for Public Policy.” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(3): 693–751.

Cardon, J.H., and M.H. Showalter. 2001. “An Examination of Flexible Spending Accounts.” Jour-
  nal of Health Economics, 20(6): 935–954.

Carroll, C.D. 2001. “A Theory of the Consumption Function, With and Without Liquidity Con-
  straints.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3): 23–45.

Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hy-
  pothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 1–55.

Carroll, Christopher D, and Miles S Kimball. 1996. “On the Concavity of the Consumption Func-
  tion.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 981–992.

Coburn, Tom. 2008. “Justice Denied: Waste and Mismanagement at the Department of Justice.”
 Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management, Government Information, Federal Services,
 and International Security.

Federal Acquisition Institute. 2011. “FY2010 Annual Report on the Federal Acquisition Work-
  force.”

Freixas, X., R. Guesnerie, and J. Tirole. 1985. “Planning under incomplete information and the
  ratchet effect.” The Review of Economic Studies, 52(2): 173–191.

Fung, A., M. Graham, and D. Weil. 2007. Full Disclosure: The Perils and Promise of Transparency.
  Cambridge University Press.

GAO. 1985. “Federal Year-End Spending Patterns For Fiscal Years 1982, 1983, and 1984.”

GAO. 1998. “Year-End Spending:         Reforms Underway But Better Reporting an Oversight
 Needed.”

GAO. 2004. Principles of Federal Appropriations Law.

Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and E. Renault. 1993. “Indirect Inference.” Journal of Applied Econo-
 metrics.

Greene, W.H., and D.A. Hensher. 2010. Modeling Ordered Choices: A Primer. Cambridge University
 Press.

Jones, L. R. 2005. “Outyear Budgetary Consequences of Agency Cost Savings: International Public
  Management Network Symposium.” International Public Management Review.

Kocherlakota, N.R. 2004. “Figuring out the Impact of Hidden Savings on Optimal Unemployment
 Insurance.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 7(3): 541–554.

                                                35
Laffont, J.J., and J. Tirole. 1986. “Using cost observation to regulate firms.” The Journal of Political
  Economy, 94(3): 614–641.

Lee, Robert D., and Ronad W. Johnson. 1998. Public Budgeting Systems, Sixth Edition. Aspen Pub-
  lishers, Inc.

Ljungqvist, L., and T.J. Sargent. 2004. Recursive Macroeconomic Theory. The MIT Press.

McPherson, Michael. 2007. “An Analysis of Year-End Spending and the Feasibility of a Carryover
 Incentive for Federal Agencies.” Master’s diss. Naval Postgraduate School.

Metzenbaum, Shelley H. 2009. “Performance Management Recommendations for the New Ad-
 ministration.”

Oyer, P. 1998. “Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on Business Sea-
 sonality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Rogerson, W.P. 1994. “Economic incentives and the defense procurement process.” The Journal of
 Economic Perspectives.

Senate, United States. 2006. “Unobligated Balances at Federal Agencies.” Statement Before the
  Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Subcommittee on Federal Finan-
  cial Management, Government Information and International Security, United States Senate.

The Economist. 2010. “The Open Society: Governments Are Letting in the Light.”

Train, Kenneth. 2003. Discrete Choice Methods With Simulation. Cambridge University Press.

Voena, Alessandra. 2012. “Yours, Mine and Ours: Do Divorce Laws Affect the Intertemporal Be-
  havior of Married Couples.” Mimeo.




                                                  36
                   Figure 1: Federal Contracting by Week, Pooled 2004 to 2009 FPDS


                                                $250




                                                $200
                 Spending (billions)




                                                $150




                                                $100




                                                 $50




                                                 $-
                                                              1       2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52




                                                                                                                                                       Week


                                                                                                                                      (a) Spending


                                               800
             Number of contracts (thousands)




                                               600




                                               400




                                               200




                                                      1   2       3       4       5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52




                                                                                                                                                    Week


                                                                                                                          (b) Number of Contracts

Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
Note: Total spending and number of contracts by week of the federal fiscal year. Spending values
inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U.




                                                                                                                                              37
                                                      Figure 2: Year-End Spending by Time Zone
                                     180
  Percent of spending relative to ET
    100      120    140
                     80       160




                                           PT               MT                  CT                     ET
                                                                    Time zone

                                                Last week not day >$100K        Last week not day <$100K
                                                Last day >$100K                 Last day <$100K


Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov
Note: Figure shows percent of annual spending by time zone in the last day and last week excluding the
last day of the fiscal year and by contract size. The x-axis shows time zones displayed from west (PT) to
east (ET) for the contiguous U.S. The y-axis shows the percent of year-end spending in that time zone
relative to the percent of year-end spending in ET to normalize for different levels of spending by time
period and contract size. Spending values inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U.




                                                                           38
                                                                                               Figure 3: I.T. Contracting by Week


                     $16,000




                     $12,000
            Spending (millions)




                                  $8,000




                                  $4,000




                                       $0
                                                1   2   3   4       5       6       7    8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52



                                                                                                                                             Weeks

                                                                                                                               (a) Spending


                         100




                                  80
            Number of projects




                                  60




                                  40




                                  20




                                   0
                                       1    2   3   4   5       6       7       8       9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52




                                                                                                                                          Weeks

                                                                                                                      (b) Number of Projects

Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov.
Note: Total spending and number of I.T projects by week of the federal fiscal year. Spending values
inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U.




                                                                                                                                        39
                          Figure 4: Year-End and Rest-of-Year Overall Ratings

                  40.0%

                                                                                                             36.5%
                                  Last week

                                  Rest of year
                                                                                       32.4%

                  30.0%


                           25.8%
                                                                                                                     24.8%
                                                 22.9%                                                                           22.6%


                  20.0%


                                                                                               15.5%


                                                                         11.0%
                  10.0%


                                                               5.5%

                                         3.0%


                   0.0%
                                   1-2                   3-4                     5-6                   7-8               9-10


                                                                          Overall Rating




                                                                      (a) Spending


                 45.0%

                                                                                                             40.6%
                              Last week

                              Rest of year                                                     37.2%




                                                                                                                                 29.3%
                 30.0%
                                                                                                                     26.6%
                                                                         25.5%
                                                                                     24.4%




                 15.0%



                           8.5%



                                         2.9%                  2.8%
                                                 2.1%

                 0.0%
                                   1                     2                       3                     4                     5

                                                                          Overall Rating




                                                               (b) Number of projects

Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov.
Note: Overall rating histograms for I.T. projects originating in the last week and rest of the year. To
construct this figure, ratings are binned into 5 categories with the lowest category representing overall
ratings less than 2, the second lowest representing overall ratings between 2 and 4, and so on. See text for
details on the overall rating index. Panel A weights projects by inflation-adjusted spending. Panel B
shows unweighted values.




                                                                          40
           Table 1: Summary Statistics: Federal Contracting, Pooled 2004 to 2009 FPDS

                                                                Spending                 Contracts
                                                         Billions      Percent      Count       Percent
Totals                                                   $2,597        100.0%     14,568,153    100.0%

  Year
    2004                                                 $304         11.7%       1,413,320     9.7%
    2005                                                 $355         13.7%       1,857,959     12.8%
    2006                                                 $405         15.6%       2,719,482     18.7%
    2007                                                 $452         17.4%       2,977,431     20.4%
    2008                                                 $542         20.9%       3,292,059     22.6%
    2009                                                 $538         20.7%       2,307,902     15.8%

  Contract size
    Less than $100K                                       $166        6.4%        13,844,183    95.0%
    $100K to $1M                                          $398        15.3%        625,973      4.3%
    At least $1M                                         $2,033       78.3%         97,997      0.7%

  Agency
    Agriculture                                            $25         1.0%        241,626      1.7%
    Commerce                                               $13         0.5%        112,756      0.8%
    Defense                                              $1,824       70.2%       3,536,530    24.3%
    Education                                              $8          0.3%        12,806       0.1%
    Energy                                                $142         5.5%        37,756       0.3%
    Environmental Protection Agency                        $8          0.3%        62,713       0.4%
    General Services Administration                        $82         3.2%       4,830,748    33.2%
    Health and Human Services                              $76         2.9%        249,907      1.7%
    Homeland Security                                      $74         2.8%        255,461      1.8%
    Housing and Urban Development                          $6          0.2%        15,666       0.1%
    Interior                                               $25         1.0%        377,743      2.6%
    Justice                                                $33         1.3%        420,379      2.9%
    Labor                                                  $13         0.5%        41,229       0.3%
    National Aeronautics and Space Administration          $83         3.2%        81,211       0.6%
    National Science Foundation                            $2          0.1%         4,201       0.0%
    Other                                                  $37         1.4%        179,283      1.2%
    Small Business Administration                         < $1        < 0.1%        3,361      < 0.1%
    State                                                  $34         1.3%        239,019      1.6%
    Transportation                                         $21         0.8%        57,235       0.4%
    Treasury                                               $25         1.0%        177,662      1.2%
    Veterans Affairs                                       $67         2.6%       3,630,856    24.9%

  Competition type
    Non-competitive                                       $745        28.7%       3,553,453     24.4%
    Competitive with one bid                              $521        20.0%       3,883,273     26.7%
    Competitive with more than one bid                   $1,332       51.3%       7,131,422     49.0%

  Contract type
    Fixed price                                          $1,675       64.5%       14,167,104    97.2%
    Cost-reimbursement                                    $780        30.0%        151,356      1.0%
    Time and materials/labor hours                        $142        5.5%         249,693      1.7%


   Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
   Note: Contract spending inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U.



                                                    41
            Table 2: Year-End Contract Spending by Agency, Pooled 2004 to 2009 FPDS

                                                     Spending                  Percent of spending
                                                     (billions)         Last month             Last week
Agriculture                                            $24.8              17.0%                  6.2%
Commerce                                               $13.4              21.4%                  5.6%
Defense                                              $1,820.0             16.0%                  8.6%
Education                                              $8.2               18.6%                  11.2%
Energy                                                $142.0               6.6%                  4.0%
Environmental Protection Agency                        $8.1               22.3%                  10.4%
General Services Administration                        $82.0              12.9%                  7.0%
Health and Human Services                              $76.4              25.5%                  12.2%
Homeland Security                                      $73.6              22.7%                  9.4%
Housing and Urban Development                          $5.7               18.5%                  11.7%
Interior                                               $25.3              23.2%                  7.6%
Justice                                                $32.6              17.9%                  9.4%
Labor                                                  $12.7              12.9%                  5.9%
National Aeronautics and Space Administration          $82.7              16.9%                  11.0%
National Science Foundation                            $2.0               27.7%                  11.5%
Small Business Administration                           $.4               31.9%                  16.3%
State                                                  $33.5              34.9%                  20.4%
Transportation                                         $20.5              17.6%                  3.6%
Treasury                                               $24.9              15.3%                  9.6%
Veterans Affairs                                       $66.9              18.2%                  9.5%

Other                                                 $37.4               28.6%                 18.9%
Total                                                $2,600.0             16.5%                 8.7%


   Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
   Note: Contract spending inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U.




                                                    42
   Table 3: Year-End Contract Spending By Selected Product or Service Code, Pooled 2004
   to 2009 FPDS

                                                                Spending                Percent of spending
                                                                (billions)        Last month           Last week
Construction-related
  Construction of structures and facilities                      $136.0             40.9%               28.6%
  Maintenance, repair, or alteration of real property             $72.5             34.8%               20.1%
  Architect and engineering services                              $32.8             26.1%               13.8%
  Installation of equipment                                       $4.0              33.9%               20.4%
  Prefabricated structures and scaffolding                        $3.7              34.9%               18.4%

Furnishings and office equipment
  Furniture                                                       $8.0              37.3%               18.4%
  Office supplies and devices                                     $4.0              24.9%               16.6%
  Household and commercial furnishings and appliances             $1.2              37.8%               20.7%
  Office machines, text processing systems and equipment          $1.1              33.5%               17.0%

I.T. services and equipment
   Automatic data processing and telecom. services               $145.0             21.0%               12.3%
   Automatic data processing equipment                            $53.7             29.2%               14.9%

Services
  Professional, admin, and management support services           $336.0             19.1%               9.9%
  Research and development                                       $309.0             11.3%               5.3%
  Utilities and housekeeping services                             $73.7             15.6%               9.1%

Ongoing
 Fuels, lubricants, oils and waxes                               $72.7              13.2%               0.7%
 Medical services                                                $68.8              4.9%                1.7%
 Chemicals and chemical products                                 $6.2               3.3%                1.3%
 Tires and tubes                                                 $1.0               8.7%                2.7%
 Toiletries                                                      $0.3               12.2%               3.0%

Military weapons systems
  Aircraft and airframe structural components                    $141.0              5.7%               2.9%
  Ships, small craft, pontoons, and floating docks                $48.5              7.5%               2.1%
  Guided missiles                                                 $38.0              8.1%               3.5%

Other                                                           $1,111.6            13.6%               6.8%
Total                                                           $2,600.0            16.5%               8.7%



   Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
   Note: Contract spending in the last month and week of the fiscal year by selected 2-digit product or service
   code, inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U. Categories jointly account for 57.2 percent of total
   spending.




                                                           43
       Table 4: Ordered Logit Regressions of Overall Rating on Last Week and Controls

                                                                    Odds ratio of higher overall rating
                                                   (1)                   (2)                 (3)                          (4)
Last week                                         0.26                  0.46                0.30                         0.18
                                                 (0.07)                (0.14)              (0.10)                       (0.07)
Year FE                                                                   X                   X                            X
Agency FE                                                                                     X                            X
Project characteristics FE                                                                                                 X
N                                                 671                       671                       671                671

Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov
Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov.
Notes: Odds ratios from ordered logit regressions. Overall rating is a quality index that
Note:  Odds that
combines      ratiosCIO
                     fromevaluation,
                           ordered logit  regressions.
                                        cost           Coefficient
                                             rating, and            of 1 indicates
                                                            scheduling             no effect. Overall
                                                                           rating subindexes           ratingfor
                                                                                                  (see text    is a
details). It takes values from 0 to 10, with 10 being the best score. Project characteristics
quality index   that  combines  that  CIO  evaluation, cost rating, and   scheduling  rating  subindices  (see textare
                                                                                                                    for
fixed effects for investment phase, service group, and line of business (see Table 5).
details). It takes values  from  0 to 10, with 10 being the  best. Project  characteristics are fixed effects for
Observations
investment        weighted
              phase,          by inflation-adjusted
                      service group                     spending.
                                      and line of business (see TableStandard     errors inweighted
                                                                       A4). Observations      parentheses.
                                                                                                       by
inflation-adjusted spending. Standard errors in parentheses.




                      Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis of the Effect on Overall Ratings

                                      Odds ratio of higher overall rating from ordered logit           Coefficients from linear model
                                                                                         Winsorized                         Heckman
                           Contracts < $62M Contracts ≥ $62M         Unweighted           weights         OLS           selection model
                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)          (5)                 (6)
Last week                        0.60                0.18                0.56                0.37        -1.00                -1.57
                                (0.23)              (0.11)              (0.14)             (0.12)        (0.39)              (0.64)
Year FE                            X                   X                   X                   X            X
Agency FE                          X                   X                   X                   X            X                   X
Project characteristics            X                   X                   X                   X            X                   X
Weighted by spending               X                   X                                       X            X                   X
λ                                                                                                                             -0.87
                                                                                                                             (0.85)
R-squared                                                                                                 0.69
NNotes: Odds ratios from ordered 335
                                 logit regression of336
                                                     overall score on 671
                                                                      indictor for last week
                                                                                         671 of September 671
                                                                                                          and controls. Project
                                                                                                                             3,803



Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov and 2003 to 2010. Exhibit
53 reports, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/e-gov/docs/.
Note: Columns 1 to 4 show odds ratios from ordered logit regressions. Coefficient of 1 indicates no effect.
Columns 1 and 2 split the sample at the median value. Column 3 shows odds ratios from an unweighted
regression. Column 4 Winsorizes the spending weight at $1 billion (96th percentile). Columns 5 and 6
show regression coefficients from linear regressions. Column 5 reports coefficients from a simple OLS
regression. Column 6 reports coefficient from a Heckman selection model with a linear second stage. In
this regression, the sample is all major I.T. projects recorded in the Exhibit 53 reports. The excluded
variable in this selection model is the year of project origination. The parameter λ is the implied coefficient
on the inverse Mill’s ratio selection term. Overall rating is a quality index that combines that CIO
evaluation, cost rating, and scheduling rating subindices (see text for details). It takes values from 0 to 10,
with 10 being the best. Project characteristics are fixed effects for investment phase, service group, and line
of business (see Table A4).). Observations weighted by inflation-adjusted spending unless otherwise
mentioned. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                    44
        Table 6: Difference-in-Differences of Last Week Spending on Justice and I.T.

                                                                                     Difference-in-
                              Non-I.T.              I.T.           Difference         differences

        Other agencies        0.0850              0.1205            -0.0355
                             (0.0001)            (0.0006)           (0.0007)
                          [N = 5,844,732]     [N = 310,554]

        Justice                0.0931            0.0335              0.0596            -0.0951
                              (0.0006)          (0.0045)            (0.0051)           (0.0058)
                           [N = 250,576]       [N = 1,566]


Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
Note: Table shows fraction of spending in the last week of the year at the Department of Justice and other
agencies on non-I.T. and I.T. contracts. Robust standard errors in parentheses, calculated using the
corresponding regressions specifications.




       Table 7: Difference-in-Differences of Overall Rating on Justice and Last Week

                                                                                    Difference-in-
                                 Last week        Rest-of-year      Difference       differences

         Other agencies             4.730             6.644           -1.914
                                   (0.394)           (0.096)          (1.096)
                                   [N=94]           [N=577]

         Justice                    8.333             6.705            1.628             3.542
                                                     (0.355)          (0.482)           (1.186)
                                   [N=1]             [N=14]


Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov.
Note: Table shows the overall rating of I.T. projects at the Department of Justice and other agencies in the
last week and rest of the year. Robust standard errors in parentheses, calculated using the corresponding
regressions specifications.




                                                      45
APPENDIX FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

A       Proofs
A.1      Proposition 1
Let x1 (α1 ) denote the agency’s period 1 spending conditional on shock α1 . We first show that
x1 (E[α1 ]) = B/2. Recall that α1 and α2 are drawn from the same distribution and that the value-
of-spending function, v( x ), is increasing and concave. Because v(·) is increasing, the constraint
x1 + x2 ≤ B will bind with equality. Substituting this constraint into the first period objective, the
first-order condition for the agency becomes α1 v0 ( x1 ) − E[α2 ]v0 ( B − x1 ) = 0. Substituting E[α1 ] for
α1 yields E[α1 ]v0 ( x1 ) − E[α2 ]v0 ( B − x1 ) = 0. Because E[α1 ] = E[α2 ], this implies v0 ( x1 ) − v0 ( B −
x1 ) = 0 and therefore x1 (E[α1 ]) = B/2.
      Suppose that x1 (α1 ) is concave. Given this assumption, Jensen’s inequality implies that E[ x1 (α1 )] <
x1 (E[α1 ]) = B/2. Because E[ x1 ] < B/2 and E[ x2 ] = B − E[ x1 ] > B/2, it follows that E[ x2 ] >
E[ x1 ].
      Below we show that x1 (α1 ) is concave when the value of spending function, v( x ), is Constant
Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA), Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) with a parameter of
γ ≥ 1 (which includes log as a special case), and quadratic. We provide sufficient conditions for
x1 (α1 ) to be concave under any generic value of spending function.
      The CARA value of spending function is defined by v( x ) = − exp(−rx ) with r > 0. For a
given α1 , the first order condition for period 1 spending is α1 r exp(−rx1 ) = E[α2 ]r exp(−r ( B −
                                                                       ln(α1 /E[α2 ])
x1 )), yielding the period 1 spending function x1 (α1 ) = B2 +               2r       . Differentiation shows that
x10 (α1 ) = 2α11 r > 0 and x100 (α1 ) = − 2α12 r < 0, and therefore that x1 (α1 ) is concave.
                                                    1
                                                                                             x 1− γ
      The CRRA value of spending function is defined by v( x ) =                             1− γ      with γ > 0. For a given
                                                                                   −γ
α1 , the first order condition for period 1 spending is       = E[α2 ]( B − x1 )−γ and yields the
                                                                               α1 x1
period 1 spending function x1 (α1 ) =          B
                                                 1/γ . The first derivative is positive: x10 (α1 ) =
                                                         (E[α2 ]/α1 )    +1
     B(E[α2 ]/α1 )1/γ                                                               B(E[α2 ]/α1 )1/γ (γ(E[α2 ]/α1 )1/γ −(E[α2 ]/α1 )1/γ +γ+1)
                            2   > 0.   The second derivative is x100 (α1 )     =−                                                   3
α1 γ((E[α2 ]/α1 )1/γ +1)                                                                              α21 γ2 ((E[α2 ]/α1 )1/γ +1)
                                                                         1/γ                  1/γ
and is negative if and only if 1 + γ + γ (E[α2 ]/α1 )             > (E[α2 ]/α1 ) . A sufficient condition for
this to hold is γ > 1.
      When γ = 1, the CRRA value of spending function reduces to a log value of spending function
                                                                     E[ α ]
v( x ) = ln( x ). In this case, the first order condition is αx11 = B− x21 , and the period 1 spending function
                                                         BE[α ]                                       2BE[α ]
is x1 (α1 ) = B E[αα]+
                     1
                       α1
                          . Since x10 (α1 ) = (E[α ]+2α )2 > 0 and x100 (α1 ) = − (E[α ]+α2 )3 < 0, the spending
                   2                              2    1                              2    1
function is also concave.
                                                                                                               1
     The quadratic value of spending function is defined by v( x ) = x − bx2 with 0 < b < 2B
so that the value is increasing and concave over the feasible range of spending, x1 ∈ [0, B]. The
first order condition is α1 (1 − bx1 ) = E[α2 ] (1 − 2b( B − x1 )) and yields the period 1 spending
                         α +E[α2 ](2bB−1)
function x1 (α1 ) = 1 2b(α +              . Let us assume that the support of α1 is bounded such the
                               1 E[ α2 ])
agency never finds it optimal to be at a corner solution in the first period. The first derivative
               E[α ](1−bB)                                                       1
is x1 (α1 ) = b(α 2+E[α ])2 > 0, which is positive because 0 < b < 2B              . The second derivative is
                        1        2
               −E[α2 ](1−bB)
x100 (α1 )
       =                  < 0, which is negative due to the same condition. Therefore, we have
               b(α1 +E[α2 ])3
shown that x1 (α1 ) is increasing and concave.
   In the general case with an arbitrary concave value of spending function v( x ), the first order


                                                                    46
                                                                                                                             − v 0 ( x1 )
condition is α1 v0 ( x1 ) = E[α2 ]v0 ( B − x1 ). By the Implicit Function Theorem, x10 (α1 ) =                  α1 v00 ( x1 )+E[α2 ]v00 ( B− x1 )
                                                                                                                                                    >
0. Differentiating yields

                                                                              α1 v000 ( x1 ) − E[α2 ]v000 ( B − x1 )
                           v0 ( x1 )v00 ( x1 ) + v0 ( x1 )v00 ( x1 ) − v0 ( x1 )2
                                                                                α1 v00 ( x1 ) + E[α2 ]v00 ( B − x1 )
            x100 (α1 ) =                                                                    2
                                                      α1 v00 ( x1 ) + E[α2 ]v00 ( B − x1 )

which is negative if

                                        v00 ( x1 )     α1 v000 ( x1 ) − E[α2 ]v000 ( B − x1 )
                                   −2              > −                                        .
                                        v 0 ( x1 )     α1 v00 ( x1 ) + E[α2 ]v00 ( B − x1 )

The left hand side is twice the coefficient of absolute risk aversion and is strictly greater than zero.
The condition trivially holds if v000 ( x ) = 0 and more generally holds if v000 ( x ) is small relative to
the level of absolute risk aversion.

A.2    Proposition 2
We first show that spending-weighted average quality, Ew(α) [qm ], can be alternatively expressed as
the unweighted expected value of spending divided by the unweighted expected level of spend-
ing, E[αm v( xm )]/E[ xm ]. In particular, the spending-weighted expectation of quality is given by
                                                          α v( x )                            x (α)
Ew(α) [qm ] = qm (α)w(α)dFα where quality is qm (α) = m xm m and the weight is w(α) = R x(α)dF .
              R
                                                                                                    α
Plugging in for quality and the weight yields

                                                         αm v( xm )      xm (αm )
                            Z                            Z
                                qm (α)w(α)dFα =                      ·R             dFα
                                                             xm         xm (αm )dFα
                                                       Z                                 
                                                                                    1
                                                     =     αm v( xm )dFα     R
                                                                                xm (αm )dFα
                                                       E[αm v( xm )]
                                                     =
                                                          E[ x m ]

where the expectation in the bottom line is taken over the distribution of αm .
    To show that there is a drop-off in average quality, first suppose, contrary to the fact, that the
agency does not know its period 1 value of spending parameter α1 when it makes its period 1
spending decision x1 . If this is the case, then x1 = x2 = B/2 with expected quality in both periods
         ᾱv( B/2)
equal to           .
            B/2
    Now suppose that α1 is observed prior to the period 1 spending decision as specified in the
model. We will show that observing α1 (i) increases total quality on average across both periods
and (ii) decreases quality on average in period 2. Since total quality equals quality in period 1
plus quality in period 2, this implies that observing α1 increases period 1 quality. A rise in period
1 quality and drop-off in period 2 quality, relative to the case where quality is equal, implies that
quality in period 1 is higher than quality in period 2.
    We first show that total quality on average strictly increases when α1 is observed. To see this,
rewrite the period 1 objective for the agency as

                   V (α1 , θ ) = max           θ (α1 − E[α1 ])v( x1 ) + E[α1 ]v( x1 ) + ᾱv( B − x1 ).
                                       x1



                                                                  47
     The parameter θ takes on values on the closed unit interval θ ∈ [0, 1] and allows us to
smoothly interpolate between the objective function where the agency does not observe α1 (which
is captured by θ = 0) and the objective where the agency observes α1 (which is captured by
                                                       ∂V
θ = 1). From the envelope theorem, we know                   = (α1 − E[α1 ])v( x1 (α)). Assuming the stan-
                                                       ∂θ
                                                                                          ∂
dard conditions that permit the interchange of integration and differentiation,              Eα [V (α1 , θ )] =
                                                                                         ∂θ 1
Eα1 [(α1 − ᾱ)v( x1 (α1 ))]. By the concavity of v(·) and Jensen’s inequality, we know that Eα1 [(α1 −
                                          ∂
E[α1 ])v( x1 (α1 ))] > 0 and therefore      Eα [V (α1 , θ )] > 0 or that total quality over both periods is
                                         ∂θ 1
higher on average when α1 is observed.
     We next show that observing α1 leads to a strict decrease in average period 2 quality. To see
this, notice that observing α1 has two effects on period 2 spending x2 (α1 ) = B − x1 (α1 ). First, from
Proposition 1 we know that the average level of spending increases: E[ x2 (α1 )] > B/2. Second, we
know that for any non-degenerate distribution, observing α1 leads to a mean preserving spread
in spending around E[ x2 (α1 )]. Because of the concavity of v(·), increasingthe average level              of
                                                                                   Eα2 α2 v(Eα1 [ x2 (α1 )]
period 2 spending reduces the average quality of period 2 spending:                                             <
                                                                                        Eα1 [ x2 (α1 )]
E[αt v( B/2)]
                . By the concavity of v(·) and second-order stochastic dominance, a mean-preserving
   E[ B/2]
                                                                                                 Eα2 [α2 v( x2 (α1 )]
spread in x2 (α1 ) around E[ x2 (α1 )] leads to a further drop in average period 2 quality:                           <
                                                                                                   Eα1 [ x2 (α1 )]
Eα2 α2 v(Eα1 [ x2 (α1 )]
                        
                           .
      Eα1 [ x2 (α1 )]
     So we have shown that observing α1 leads to an increase in total quality over both periods and
a drop in period 2 quality relative to the case where quality is equal on average in both periods.
This implies that period 1 quality increases relative to the case where quality is equal on average in
both periods. It then follows that average quality is higher in period 1 than in period 2 or q̄1 > q̄2 .

A.3    Proposition 3
Assume full rollover is permitted by law, and Congress cannot commit to a budget rule. Let
Ãy ≡ Ay−1,M − xy−1,M indicate the budget authority rolled over by the agency. Consider the
budget setting problem for Congress:
                                       h    M                                                M                 i
              W ( Ãy ) = max
                          By ≥0
                                  Ey       ∑       βm−1 αm v( xym
                                                               ∗
                                                                  ) + β M W ( Ãy+1 ) − λ   ∑       βm−1 xym
                                                                                                          ∗
                                           m =1                                             m =1

Since Congress and the agency place the same value on spending (ignoring the cost of funds), we
know that for a given budget allocation the expected value of spending to Congress is equal to the
agency’s value function evaluated at that budget allocation:
                                                       h                       M                i
                          W ( Ãy ) = max
                                           By ≥0
                                                     Ey V1 ( Ãy + By ) − λ   ∑      βm−1 xym
                                                                                           ∗
                                                                              m =1

                                                          d h                i
The first-order conditions for Congress are therefore        E V ( Ãy + By ) = λ. At the optimal
                                                         dBy
budget allocation, the marginal benefit of an additional dollar in budget authority is equal to the
social cost of funds. The optimal budget By∗ is implicitly defined by Ãy + By∗ = Ā(λ) where Ā(λ)

                                                              48
is a constant that depends on the social cost of funds λ. But since dBy∗ /d Ãy = −1, Congress
will decrease the agency’s budget one-for-one to offset any rolled over funding. Since the agency
values spending, the agency can increase its objective by exhausting all of its budget authority and
not rolling over any resources.

A.4   Proposition 4
To show that full rollover is optimal, we will show that for any budget rule that does not have full
rollover, there exists a full rollover budget with the same expected costs and a higher expected
value of spending. This implies that the optimal budget rule must have full rollover.
     Consider any budget rule that does not allow for full rollover By∗ = Γ( Ay−1,M − xy−1,m ) 6= B̄.
                                                                              h                         i
Associated with this budget rule is a discounted expected level of spending E ∑m  M
                                                                                   =1 β m −1 x ∗ ( B ∗ ) .
                                                                                               ym   y
Now consider allowing full rollover. Let By∗∗ indicate the full rollover budget that has the same
expected
  h      level of spending
                      i    ash the budget withouti full rollover, implicitly defined by the equality
E ∑m  M
       =1 β
            m−1 x ∗ ( B∗∗ ) = E
                  ym   y        ∑mM
                                   =1 β
                                        m −1 x ∗ ( B ∗ ) .
                                               ym   y
     To show that the value of spending is higher in the full rollover scenario, consider the first-
order conditions for the agency. With full rollover, the objective for the agency is identical to the
objective for Congress. With incomplete rollover, the agency is distorted away from the optimal
spending path for Congress and therefore produces a lower value of spending.
     Thus we have shown that for any non-rollover budget rule, there exists a policy rule with
full rollover that has the same costs but higher value of spending for Congress, implying that full
rollover is optimal.


B     The Impact of Appropriations Timing on the Within-Year Pattern of
      Government Procurement Spending
It is the exception rather than the rule for Congress to pass annual appropriations bills before the
beginning of the fiscal year. Between 2000 and 2009, the full annual appropriations process was
never completed on time. Although defense appropriations bills were enacted before the start of
the fiscal year four times, in eight of the ten years, appropriations for all or nearly all of the civilian
agencies were enacted in a single consolidated appropriations act well after the start of the fiscal
year.
      Analysts have attributed some of the challenges facing federal acquisition to the tardiness of
the appropriations process, since these delays introduce uncertainty and compress the time avail-
able to plan and implement a successful acquisition strategy (Acquisition Advisory Panel, 2007).
In this subsection we analyze the relationship between the timing of the annual appropriations
acts and the within-year pattern of government contract spending. For this analysis, we use the
full 2000 to 2009 FPDS data, even though the data prior to 2004 are of lower quality. Apparently, in
these earlier years, some contracts were all assigned dates in the middle of the month. Therefore,
the within-month weekly pattern of spending is not fully available.
      Appendix Figure A1 shows results from regressing measures of end-of-year spending on the
timing of annual appropriations. This analysis has two data points for each year, one represent-
ing defense spending and the other representing non-defense spending. For each observation, we
measure the share of annual contract spending occurring in the last quarter, month, and week of
the year and the “weeks late” of the enactment of annual appropriations legislation.48 “Weeks
 48 Enactment   is defined by the date the President signs the legislation.


                                                            49
late” measures time relative to October 1 and takes on negative values when appropriations were
enacted prior to the start of the fiscal year. For defense spending, “weeks late” measures the date
that the defense appropriations bill was enacted. For non-defense spending, the date is assigned
from the date of the consolidated appropriations act, or, in the case of the two years in which there
was not a consolidated act, a date that is the midpoint of the individual non-defense appropria-
tions acts.49
     There is a clear pattern in the data in which later appropriation dates result in a greater fraction
of government spending occurring at the end of the year. In the plots, we show the separate slopes
of the defense and non-defense observations. Defense spending tends to be appropriated earlier
and to have less end-of-year spending, but the slopes for the two types of spending are similar.
The labels show the regression coefficients, including the coefficients from a pooled regression in
which defense and non-defense spending have different intercepts but are constrained to have
the same slope. The estimates show that a delay of ten weeks—roughly the average over this
time period—raises the share of spending in the last quarter by 2 percentage points from a base of
about 27 percent. A ten-week delay raises the share of spending in the last month by 1 percentage
point, from a base of about 15 percent. Both coefficients are statistically significant at the 1 percent
level. As we mentioned above, we do not have reliable within-month data on timing for the years
prior to 2004, so we exclude the pre-2004 years for the analysis of spending during the last week
of the year. The estimates indicate that a 10-week delay raises the share of spending occurring in
the last week of the year by 1 percentage point on a base of 9 percent. Due to the smaller sample,
the estimate is less precise, with a p-value of 0.07.50


C     Calibrating the Welfare Gains
This section describes the procedure we use to estimate the welfare gains from rollover and dis-
cusses the results in more detail. To estimate the welfare gains, we first calibrate the model to
fit the spike in spending and drop-off in quality under the status quo in which rollover is not al-
lowed. Given the calibrated parameters, we then simulate the pattern of spending when rollover
is permitted using value function iteration. A comparison of welfare under these regimes gives us
the welfare gain from rollover and from alternative counterfactual policies.

C.1    Target Moments
The calibrated infinite horizon model is characterized by a parameter that determines the curva-
ture of the value of spending function and a parameter that determines the distribution of spend-
ing shocks. We calibrate these parameters such that simulated data from the model has the same
spike in spending and drop-off in quality that we observed in the federal procurement data.
    Spike in spending. We define the spike in spending as the ratio of last month spending to
average monthly spending over the rest of the year. This ratio is 2.18 in the pooled 2004 to 2009
FPDS.
    Drop-off in quality. We calibrate the drop-off in quality by matching the coefficient on last
month from an ordered logit regression in the I.T. Dashboard data and the coefficient on last month
   49 We aggregate all non-defense spending to facilitate communication of the pattern of results while capturing nearly

all of the available variation. We have also conducted analyses in which we assign each non-defense agency the date of
its individual appropriations act and obtain very similar results.
   50 When appropriations bills are delayed beyond the start of a fiscal year, the government operates under a continuing

resolution that typically maintains spending at the levels set for the prior fiscal year. When a new budget is passed, any
changes in the budget level are prorated to account for the shorter year.


                                                           50
from an analogous regression in simulated data from the model.51
    Recall from Section 2 that the quality of spending in a given month is defined as the value of
spending per dollar of expenditure: qm = αm v( xm )/xm . The logistic regression estimates of the
drop-off in quality are based on the assumption that quality is determined by the data generating
process

                                           qm = β q Last_monthm + σq em

where Last_month is an indicator for the last month of the year and the error term is the product
of a type-I extreme value random variable e and scale factor σq > 0.
     In the I.T. Dashboard data, we do not observe this underlying quality variable but instead
observe a categorical overall rating variable, which we assume is an index of underlying quality.
Because our outcome variable is categorical, we can recover an estimate of β q /σq with an ordered
logit regression of overall rating on the Last_month indicator and controls.52 In the simulated data
from the model we observe quality directly. We recover β q /σq in these data with a straightforward
logistic regression of quality on the Last_month indicator variable.
     Appendix Table A11 shows odds ratios of the coefficient on last month from ordered logit
regressions in the I.T. Dashboard data. In our preferred specification, which includes year, agency,
and project characteristic covariates, projects that are originated in the last month of the year have
0.42 odds of having a higher quality score. We calibrate the model so that the drop-off is the same
in the simulated data from the model.

C.2    Calibrating the Model
We match these two moments by calibrating the model’s two parameters: σ and γ. Specifically, we
assume that the uncertainty shocks, α, are drawn from a log-normal distribution, ln α ∼ N (0, σ),
parameterized by a standard deviation parameter, σ, and the value of spending function, v( xm ; γ),
is parameterized by a curvature parameter, γ. Let θ ≡ {σ, γ} denote the parameters of the model.
We calibrate θ and calculate welfare in the no-rollover regime in the following manner:

    • Step 1. For a given θ, we calculate the value VmNR ( A, θ ) to the agency from having A assets
      in month m by backward induction, numerically integrating over the distribution of α.

    • Step 2. For a given initial budget B and θ, we simulate forward a pattern of spending using
      the estimated VmNR ( A, θ ) from Step 1.

    • Step 3. For each B, we find the θ that matches the spike in spending and drop-off in quality
      moments using a quadratic loss function. The objective is convex with a unique minimum
      value. Label these values θ ( B).

    • Step 4. We search over the domain of B and associated θ ( B) to find the budget that maxi-
      mizes welfare for Congress net the social cost of funds. Label this budget B NR .

The parameters B NR and θ ( B NR ) uniquely determine the value of spending, cost of spending, and
welfare when rollover is not permitted.
  51 The approach of matching regression coefficients in actual and simulated data is sometimes referred to as indirect
inference (Gourieroux, Monfort and Renault, 1993). See Voena (2012) for a recent application of this technique.
  52 Coefficients in a logistic regression model are identified up to the scale factor σ . See Train (2003) for an in-depth
                                                                                        q
discussion of this issue.




                                                            51
C.3    Model Fit
                                                                            1− γ
In our baseline calibration, we specify a CRRA, v( x ) = x1−γ , value of spending function with
curvature parameter γ. We conduct robustness checks to examine the sensitivity of our results
to a CARA functional form. We set the number of months per year to M = 12 and the monthly
discount factor to β = 0.996.53 We normalize the social cost of funds to λ = 1.
     Panel A of Appendix Table A12 shows the target and calibrated moments. The ratio of last
month to rest-of-year spending is 2.18 in the pooled 2004 to 2009 FPDS. The odds that a project
started in the last month of the year has a higher quality score is 0.42 in the I.T. Dashboard data.54
The moments calculated from the simulated data are very similar. Panel B shows the underlying
parameter estimates of γ and σ from the model.55
     Appendix Figure A2 examines how the model fits the monthly pattern of spending. Panel A
plots the percent of spending each month in the pooled 2004 to 2009 FPDS and simulated data
from the model with a CRRA value of spending function. Recall that the model is calibrated
to the ratio of last month to rest-of-year average monthly spending but not to the shape of this
increase by month. Nevertheless, the CRRA model does a good job matching the flat profile of
spending over the first part of the year and the sharp spike at year’s end.56 The simulated data
from the CARA specification, shown in Panel B, also match the pattern of spending over the year.
Because the CARA specification does not capture the sharp uptick in spending between August
and September as well as the CRRA function form, we choose CRRA as our preferred specification.
     Calibrating the model is computationally intensive. Relative to a standard stochastic, dynamic
programing problem, our application is complicated by two factors. The first is that because our
value function varies by calendar month, we need to estimate M value functions. The second is
that our model has two optimizing agents. At the beginning of each year, Congress decides on
a budget for the agency, taking agency behavior as given. At the beginning of each month, the
agency chooses its level of spending, taking Congress’s behavior as given. We account for this in
the calibrations by estimating how the agency would behave over a grid of possible budget values
B > 0 and then searching over this grid to find the budget B∗ that maximizes Congress’s objec-
tive. To speed computation, the calibrations were performed using 12 cores in parallel, running
continuously for approximately one week.

C.4    Welfare with Rollover
We assess the welfare gains from rollover by comparing the non-rollover status quo to three coun-
terfactuals. The first is the compensating variation from rollover, defined as the reduction in bud-
get authority that allows for the same expected value of spending as in the no-rollover regime. The
second is the welfare gain from rollover when Congress can re-optimize the budget it provides to
the agency. The third counterfactual is the welfare gain from the first-best level of spending, de-
fined as the level of spending in each period that equates the marginal social value of spending to
the marginal social cost of funds. Compared to rollover which effectively allows agencies to save,
  53 This  monthly discount factor implies an annual discount factor of 0.95 = 0.99612 .
  54 The  estimate is from an ordered logit specification of overall rating on last month and a full set of controls with the
observations weighted by spending. Appendix Table A11 shows alternative specifications of this model.
   55 We are identified because we have two parameters and two moments. If we calibrated the model using only the

spike in spending, we would be unable to separately identify the parameters because a large spike could arise from
little curvature in the value of spending function and substantial variance in the α’s or from substantial curvature in
the value of spending function and little variance in the α’s.
   56 The model naturally under-predicts spending in October and March because it does not separately account for

spending on items like building leases that reset on an annual or semi-annual basis.



                                                             52
the first-best effectively allows agencies both to save and to borrow. The welfare gains from this
counterfactual are an upper bound because agencies can acquire extra resources in extenuating
circumstances through mid-year supplemental appropriations from Congress.
    The value to the agency VmR ( A) in the rollover regime from having assets A in month m is
calculated by value function iteration. Let superscripts index iterations of the value function. The
algorithm for updating the value function is
                                                    h             i
                                 maxx αv( x ) + βEα V j ( A − x )      if m < M
                      j +1
                    Vm ( A) =                        h m +1           i
                                 maxx αv( x ) + βEα V j ( B + A − x ) if m = M
                                                       1

Notice that this is mathematically identical to iteration on a single composite value function
                                                            h           i
                          Ṽ j+1 (S) = max αv( x ) + βEα Ṽ j g(S, x )
                                        x

where the month index is subsumed into the state variable S = { A, m} and the function g(S, x )
governs the evolution of months and assets. As such, the existence and uniqueness of the solution
follows directly from the standard conditions that v(·) is concave, the constraint set generated by
g(S, x ) is convex and compact, and there is discounting β < 1 (Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2004).
     We calculate welfare in the regime with rollover in the following steps:

   • Step 1. For a given initial budget B and θ ( B NR ) from the within-year calibrations, we esti-
     mate the value function VmR ( A) for each month m = 1 . . . M by value function iteration.

   • Step 2. For this budget, the present value of spending to the agency is the beginning of year
     value function evaluated at this budget allocation V1 ( B), the net present cost of spending is
     the discounted sum of annual budgets B, and welfare is the difference in these values.

   • Step 3. We search over the domain of B to find the value that maximizes welfare. Label this
     value as B R for budget with rollover.

The parameter B R determines the value of spending, cost of spending, and welfare with rollover

    Appendix Table A13 shows the welfare gains from the three counterfactual scenarios. The first
column shows the percent change in the value of spending; the second column shows the percent
change in the social cost of spending (the amount of spending times λ); and the third column
shows the difference between the first two columns, which gives the percent change in overall
social surplus. Values are scaled by the social cost of spending under the no-rollover status quo.
With the preferred CRRA specification, the compensating variation from rollover is 13 percent of
the social cost of spending. That is, Congress could allow rollover, reduce the agency’s budget by
13 percent, and the value of spending would be identical to the status quo.
    Allowing for full Congressional re-optimization leads to slightly higher welfare gains. Spend-
ing levels (social cost) are lower than in the no rollover case. This is the result of two offsetting
effects. Because agencies on average enter the year with rolled-over funds, Congress does not
need to provide as much funding to ensure that the agency can take advantage of high α periods.
On the other hand, Congress is more willing to provide funds given that agencies will not squan-
der them on projects with a value below the social cost of funds. The total value of spending is
slightly lower than in the no-rollover scenario with the CRRA specification and slightly higher
with the CARA functional form.


                                                 53
    The final scenario shows the first-best in which the agency does all spending that exceeds the
social value of funds and no spending that is below. Comparing the rollover scenarios to the first-
best scenario we see that rollover allows the government to capture two-thirds of the benefits of
moving from no-rollover to the first-best.

C.5       Intermediate Policies
Whether these welfare gains can be achieved depends on Congress’s ability to commit to future
budgets. While Congress cannot completely tie its own hands, it can design policy to increase the
likelihood of commitment. For example, Congress could specify that rolled over amounts are not
reported in standard budget tables, increasing the cost of obtaining this information. Similarly,
Congress could allow agencies to roll over funding for a time-limited grace period.57 Such a grace
period would not simply result in a spike in spending at the new deadline. Because next year’s
budget authority would provide a de facto rainy day fund, even a few months of rollover would
allow agencies to draw down their previous year’s savings over a longer time period.58 Finally,
Congress could provide more funding on a multi-year basis. While the full implications of less
frequent fiscal policy are outside the scope of this paper, one benefit of multi-year budgeting is that
it reduces the frequency of wasteful year-end spending. Below we first describe how we simulate
the welfare gains from these intermediate policies and then present our results.
      Partial commitment. Suppose that Congress can only commitment to allowing rollover with
commonly known probability π. Simulating welfare under this regime requires two modifications
to the algorithm described above:
                                                              h                                  i
     • The period M continuation value is replaced by Eα πV1 ( B + A − x ) + (1 − π )V1 ( B) , the
      average of the no-rollover and with-rollover continuation values weighted by their proba-
      bilities.

    • For each B, the cost of spending is decreased by the expected level of reclaimed funds. This
      value is calculated by simulating forward a pattern of spending using the estimated value
      functions. The expected level of reclaimed funds is discounted to account for the fact that
      the budget authority is reclaimed a year after it is authorized.


    Partial rollover. Suppose that agencies can roll over budget authority for no more than m̄
months. Since we assume that budget authority is fungible, this policy constrains period m̄ + 1
budget authority to be no greater than the annual budget B. To simulate welfare under this regime,
we make the following modification to the algorithm described above:
                                                 h                       i
   • The continuation value is replaced with Eα Vm (min{ B + A − x, B}) in periods m > m̄.

Since the agency never rolls over more than B into period m̄ + 1, we do not need to account for
reclaimed funds in our calculation of the cost of spending.

    Multiyear budgeting. Suppose that budgets are provided on a multiyear basis. There is
no rollover across budget cycles, but there is full rollover across years when there is not a new
  57 We   thank Dan Feenberg for suggesting this counterfactual.
  58 Because Congress rarely passes a budget on schedule and agencies are operating under continuing resolutions, this

partial rollover period often will have expired by the time that a new budget is determined. In this case, Congress
would have no incentive to take this rolled over amount into consideration.


                                                           54
budget. We simulate welfare under this policy regime with the backwards induction algorithm
used to calibrate the model with one modification:

    • The number of periods is increased to k × M, where k is the number of years per budget
      cycle. The monthly discount factor β is unaltered.

    Appendix Figure A3 examines the welfare gains from these intermediate policies. In each
plot, the y-axis shows the welfare gain as a percent of the welfare gain from full rollover. Each
point in each plot is calculated from an independent simulation of the baseline model. Panel A
examines the implications of imperfect Congressional commitment. With probability π, Congress
commits and agencies are able to roll over the full amount of unspent resources into the next year.
With probability 1 − π, Congress reneges and unspent resources are taken from the agency and
valued in the welfare function at the social cost of funds. Both the agency and Congress know this
probability π and optimize accordingly. The plot shows that small commitment probabilities can
achieve relatively large welfare gains. For example, a 25 percent commitment probability leads to
welfare gains of more than half the full rollover value, as agencies prefer to roll over their funds
than engage in flat-of-the-curve spending at the end of the year.59
    Panel B of Appendix Figure A3 examines the welfare gains from time-limited grace periods,
in which agencies are allowed to roll over unused funding for m̄ periods of the next year. Since
we assume that budget authority is fungible within an agency, this policy constrains the agency’s
period m̄ + 1 budget to be no greater than their beginning-of-year budget allocation B. As before, a
small amount of rollover can generate large welfare gains. A one-month grace period achieves 41
percent of the welfare gains from full rollover; a two-month grace period achieves 66 percent; and
a four-month grace period 90 percent. Panel C shows the welfare gains from multi-year budgets.
Two-year budget cycles achieve 70 percent of the gains from full rollover; three-year budget cycles
achieve 90 percent.
    In summary, the results indicate that allowing for rollover can lead to economically mean-
ingful gains in welfare. If Congress can fully commit, the welfare gains from rollover are over
10 percent of the social cost of funds. Even if Congress can commit with a modest probability or
provide a short grace period, welfare gains of more than 5 percent could be achieved.




  59 The plot is S-shaped because the value of spending is convex in the commitment probability while the amount of

reclaimed funds is concave. It is the sum of a convex and concave function which gives the plot its shape.


                                                        55
                                                            Figure A1: Year-End Spending by Appropriations Date
                   35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2008                     2004
                                                                      2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                            2009
                                                                                                                          2004
  Last quarter spending (percent)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002




                                                                                                                                                                                Last month spending (percent)
                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                 2007                                                                                                                                                       2003
                                                                                                                                                   2009
                        30




                                                               2006                                                               2003
                                                                                                             2008                                                                                                                                                                          2007    2009
                                                    2007                                    2005                                                                                                                              Non-defense
                                                             2003                                              2006                Defense                                                                                                                                2008                            2009
                                      Non-defense                            2000                                                                                                                                                                   2006          2000




                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2003               200520012006
                                                                                                            2001                                                                                                                         2007                                              Defense
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2002
        25




                                                                                                                  2002                                                                                                 2001
                                                                             2000
                                          2005
                                           2001                                                                                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Non-defense slope = .130 (.078)
                                                                                                                  Non-defense slope = .193 (.094)                                                                                                                 2000
                                                     2004                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Defense slope = .089 (.030)
                                                                                                                  Defense slope = .180 (.053)                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pooled slope = .100 (.029)
                                                                                                                  Pooled slope = .183 (.044)
                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                    -10               0                     10                                                    20                             30                                             -10                           0                  10                         20                   30
                                                                         Weeks late                                                                                                                                                                           Weeks late




                                                    (a) Last Quarter Spending                                                                                                                                                            (b) Last Month Spending

                                                                                                              Non-defense slope = .112 (.146)
                                                                                            16




                                                                                                              Defense slope = .081 (.045)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2004
                                                                                                              Pooled slope = .089 (.047)
                                                                                                       14
                                                                             Last week spending (percent)




                                                                                                                                                          2008
                                                                                              12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Non-defense
                                                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2009

                                                                                                                                    2007                                 2008
                                                                              8




                                                                                                                                                   2006           2005                                                          2009
                                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                   Defense
                                                                                            6




                                                                                                                   2005             2004

                                                                                                            -10                         0                       10                                                     20                         30
                                                                                                                                                             Weeks late




                                                                                                                                        (c) Last Week Spending

Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov and Library
of Congress.
Note: Vertical axes show the percent of annual spending occurring in the last quarter, month, and week of
the fiscal year. Horizontal axes show the passage dates for the non-defense and defense appropriation
bills, relative to the first day of the fiscal year in weeks. For defense spending, weeks late measures the
date that the defense appropriations bill was enacted. For non-defense spending, the date is assigned from
the date of the consolidated appropriations act, or, in the case of the two years in which there was not a
consolidated act, a date that is the midpoint of the individual non-defense appropriations acts. Plots show
fitted lines and slope coefficients from bivariate regressions on defense and non-defense spending. Pooled
coefficients from a regression in which defense and non-defense spending have different intercepts but are
constrained to have the same slope. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                            56
                                                Figure A2: Model Fit

               20.0%$

                             FPDS$     CRRA$

               16.0%$




               12.0%$




                8.0%$




                4.0%$




                0.0%$
                        O$       N$      D$      J$   F$   M$    A$    M$    J$   J$   A$   S$

                                                (a) CRRA Value of Spending

              20.0%$

                               FPDS$    CARA$

              16.0%$




              12.0%$




               8.0%$




               4.0%$




               0.0%$
                        O$      N$       D$      J$   F$    M$   A$    M$    J$   J$   A$   S$

                                                (b) CARA Value of Spending

Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
Note: Dark bars show percent of spending each month in the pooled 2004 to 2009 FPDS. Light bars show
predicted spending by month from the calibrated model parameterized with a CRRA value of spending
function (Panel A) and CARA value of spending function (Panel B). The FPDS spending values are
inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U.




                                                           57
                                Figure A3: Percent of Full Rollover Welfare Gain

100%#                                                                          100%#




 75%#                                                                           75%#




 50%#                                                                           50%#




 25%#                                                                           25%#




  0%#                                                                            0%#
        0#    0.25#             0.5#              0.75#         1#                     0#        2#        4#      6#      8#   10#   12#
                      Commitment(Probability(                                                                   Months''
             (a) Partial Commitment                                                                   (b) Grace Period

                                         100%#




                                          75%#




                                          50%#




                                          25%#




                                           0%#
                                                 1#        2#             3#                4#        5#
                                                                                                      ∞#
                                                                      Years&

                                                          (c) Multi-Year Budgeting

Note: In all panels, the y-axis shows the welfare gain as a percent of the full rollover welfare gain. In Panel
A, the x-axis is the probability that Congress can commit to allowing rollover. In Panel B, the x-axis is the
number of months an agency has to use unspent funding from the previous year. In Panel C, the x-axis
shows the number of years per budget cycle. Each point in each plot is calculated from an independent
simulation of the baseline CRRA specification from Table A13. See Appendix C for details.




                                                                     58
   Table A1: First Week Contract Spending for Selected Product or Service Codes, Pooled
   2004 to 2009 FPDS

                                                                       Spending                   First week
                                                                       (billions)                 (percent)
   Leases
     Lease or rental of facilities                                       $29.2                      26.2%
     Lease or rental of equipment                                        $5.4                       13.1%

   Service contracts
     Utilities and housekeeping services                                 $73.7                      11.1%
     Medical services                                                    $68.8                      11.3%
     Transportation, travel and relocation services                      $39.3                      15.5%
     Social services                                                     $5.5                       9.3%

   Other                                                                $2,378.1                     3.1%
   Total                                                                $2,600.0                     4.0%


   Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
   Note: Contract spending in the first week of the fiscal year by selected 2-digit product or service code,
   inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U. Categories account for 8.5 percent of overall spending
   but 29.7 percent of spending in the first week of the year.




                        Table A2: Year-End Spending by Time Zone Regressions

                                                                 Dependent Variable:
                                         Last day spending                     Last week excluding last day spending
                              Smaller contracts      Larger contracts        Smaller contracts        Larger contracts
                                (<$100K)                 (≥$100K)                (<$100K)                 (≥$100K)
Hours west of GMT                0.0042**                0.0003**                  -0.0013                  0.0002
                                 (0.0018)                 (0.0001)                (0.0014)                 (0.0004)
Year FE                               X                       X                       X                        X
Agency FE                             X                       X                       X                        X
Product and service code FE           X                       X                       X                        X
R-squared                          0.034                    0.010                   0.047                    0.021
N                                409,687                1,541,248                 409,687                1,541,248
Mean of dependent variable        0.0269                   0.0154                  0.0634                   0.0456



   Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
   Note: Table shows coefficients from linear probability model regressions of year-end spending on hours
   west of Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) and controls. To facilitate the analysis, the data is aggregated to the
   level of the covariates and the regressions are weighted by inflation-adjusted spending in each cell.




                                                         59
                  Table A3: Summary Statistics: Major I.T. Projects as of March, 2010

                                                               IT spending                    IT projects
                                                        Millions         Percent         Count          Percent
Total                                                  $129,729          100.0%           686           100.0%

Agency
  Agency for International Development                    $265          0.2%                3           0.4%
  Agriculture                                            $1,864         1.4%               33           4.8%
  Commerce                                              $11,042         8.5%               46           6.7%
  Corps of Engineers                                     $4,012         3.1%               11           1.6%
  Defense                                               $14,889         11.5%              46           6.7%
  Education                                              $1,407         1.1%               25           3.6%
  Energy                                                 $4,914         3.8%               26           3.8%
  Environmental Protection Agency                        $3,166         2.4%               20           2.9%
  General Services Administration                        $2,162         1.7%               25           3.6%
  Health and Human Services                              $8,990         6.9%               64           9.3%
  Homeland Security                                     $13,068         10.1%              70           10.2%
  Housing and Urban Development                          $1,605         1.2%               10           1.5%
  Interior                                               $4,557         3.5%               39           5.7%
  Justice                                                $4,376         3.4%               15           2.2%
  Labor                                                  $2,434         1.9%               34           5.0%
  National Aeronautics and Space Administration          $9,722         7.5%               22           3.2%
  National Archives and Records Administration            $649          0.5%                8           1.2%
  National Science Foundation                             $374          0.3%                6           0.9%
  Nuclear Regulatory Commission                           $515          0.4%               16           2.3%
  Office of Personnel Management                          $497          0.4%                7           1.0%
  Small Business Administration                           $269          0.2%                9           1.3%
  Smithsonian Institution                                  $58          0.0%                9           1.3%
  Social Security Administration                         $1,236         1.0%               13           1.9%
  State                                                  $3,705         2.9%               13           1.9%
  Transportation                                        $12,514         9.6%               42           6.1%
  Treasury                                               $4,921         3.8%               41           6.0%
  Veterans Affairs                                      $16,521         12.7%              33           4.8%

Year of origination
  1981                                                   $2,706         2.1%               1            0.1%
  1991                                                     $61          0.0%               1            0.1%
  1992                                                    $322          0.2%               1            0.1%
  1993                                                    $409          0.3%               2            0.3%
  1994                                                    $155          0.1%               2            0.3%
  1996                                                   $3,050         2.4%               7            1.0%
  1997                                                   $1,430         1.1%               3            0.4%
  1998                                                   $2,891         2.2%               5            0.7%
  1999                                                   $2,814         2.2%              10            1.5%
  2000                                                   $2,855         2.2%              15            2.2%
  2001                                                   $8,463         6.5%              17            2.5%
  2002                                                  $12,577         9.7%              32            4.7%
  2003                                                  $13,860         10.7%             60            8.7%
  2004                                                  $12,818         9.9%              87            12.7%
  2005                                                  $13,529         10.4%             95            13.8%
  2006                                                  $16,169         12.5%             126           18.4%
  2007                                                  $17,935         13.8%             121           17.6%
  2008                                                  $14,176         10.9%             75            10.9%
  2009                                                   $3,508         2.7%              26            3.8%


   Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov.
   Note: Major I.T. investments by federal agency and year of origination, inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars
   using the CPI-U.



                                                        60
Table A4: Summary Statistics: Quality Indexes and Project Characteristics for Major I.T.
Projects

                                                Mean           Std. Dev.          Min              Max
 Planned cost (millions)                       189.11           447.06            0.10           4770.89
 Overall rating                                 7.07             2.30             0.00            10.00

 Rating subindexes
   CIO evaluation                               3.95             0.94             1.00            5.00
   Cost rating                                  8.72             2.52             0.00            10.00
   Cost overrun                                 5.25             1.49             0.00            10.00
   Schedule rating                              8.43             3.09             0.00            10.00

                                                                Count            Percent
 Investment phase
   Full-Acquisition                                              59              8.6%
   Mixed Life Cycle                                              304             44.3%
   Multi-Agency Collaboration                                    29              4.2%
   Operations and Maintenance                                    278             40.5%
   Planning                                                      16              2.3%

 Service group
   Management of Government Resources                            124             18.1%
   Missing                                                        2              0.3%
   Service Types and Components                                  125             18.2%
   Services for Citizens                                         344             50.2%
   Support Delivery of Services to Citizen                       91              13.3%

 Line of business
   Administrative Management                                     15              2.2%
   Controls and Oversight                                        12              1.8%
   Defense and National Security                                 30              4.4%
   Disaster Management                                           20              2.9%
   Economic Development                                           9              1.3%
   Education                                                     16              2.3%
   Energy                                                         5              0.7%
   Environmental Management                                      32              4.7%
   Financial Management                                          81              11.8%
   General Government [CA]                                       45              6.6%
   General Science and Innovation                                22              3.2%
   Health                                                        55              8.0%
   Homeland Security                                             40              5.8%
   Human Resource Management                                     24              3.5%
   Income Security                                               17              2.5%
   Information and Technology Management                         85              12.4%
   International Affairs and Commerce                             7              1.0%
   Law Enforcement                                               12              1.8%
   Natural Resources                                             16              2.3%
   Planning and Budgeting                                         8              1.2%
   Public Affairs                                                13              1.9%
   Revenue Collection                                             8              1.2%
   Supply Chain Management                                       25              3.6%
   Transportation                                                45              6.6%
   Workforce Management                                           5              0.7%
   Other                                                         39              5.7%
 Total                                                           686            100.0%



Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov
Note: Planned total cost is inflation-adjusted to 2009 dollars using the CPI-U. Overall rating is a quality
index that combines that CIO evaluation, cost rating, and scheduling rating subindexes (see text for
details). It takes values from 0 to 10, with 10 being the best score. The CIO evaluation is the agency CIO’s
assessment of project quality. It takes values from 1 to 5, with 5 being the best. The cost rating is based on
the absolute percent deviation between the planned and actual cost of the project. The cost overrun is a
non-absolute measure that assigns over-cost projects the lowest scores. The schedule rating is based on the
average tardiness of the project. The cost and schedule indices take values from 0 to 10, with 10 being the
best. The line of business “other” category combines all categories with 4 or fewer projects.

                                                        61
        Table A5: Ordered Logit Regressions of Subindices on Last Week and Controls

                                                     Odds ratio of higher subindex value
                                         Evalutation by Agency                   Cost    Schedule
                                                  CIO             Cost rating overrun     rating
                                             (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)
  Last week of September                    0.14        0.16          0.80       0.74      1.15
                                           (0.06)      (0.07)        (0.36)     (0.30)    (0.66)
  Cost and schedule rating                                X
  Agency FE                                   X           X             X          X         X
  Year FE                                     X           X             X          X         X
  Project characteristics                     X           X             X          X         X
  Weighted by spending                        X           X             X          X         X
  N                                         671         671           671        671       671


  Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov
  Note: Odds ratios from ordered logit regressions. Coefficient of 1 indicates no effect. The CIO evaluation is
  the agency CIO’s assessment of project quality. It takes values from 1 to 5, with 5 being the best. The cost
  rating is based on the absolute percent deviation between the planned and actual cost of the project. The
  cost overrun is a non-absolute measure that assigns over-cost projects the lowest scores. The schedule
  rating is based on the average tardiness of the project. The cost and schedule indices take values from 0 to
  10, with 10 being the best. Project characteristics are fixed effects for investment phase, service group, and
  line of business (see Appendix Table A4). Standard errors in parentheses.


                     Table A6: Year-End Contract Characteristics Regressions

                                                               Dependent Variable:
                                                                               Cost-
                                   Noncomopetitive          One bid      reimbursement               T&M/LH
                                         (1)                  (2)               (3)                    (4)
Last week                              -0.002                0.017            -0.032                  0.004
                                       (0.002)              (0.002)          (0.002)                 (0.001)
Year FE                                   X                    X                 X                      X
Agency FE                                 X                    X                 X                      X
Product or service code FE                X                    X                 X                      X
R-squared                               0.41                 0.31              0.52                   0.21
N                                     402,400               402,400          402,400                 402,400
Mean of dependent variable              0.287                0.200            0.300                   0.055


  Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
  Note: Table shows coefficients from linear probability model regressions of contract type and competition
  type indicators on last week and controls. Noncompetitive is an indicator for noncompetitively sourced
  contract; one bid is an indicator for contracts that are competitively sourced but only receive one bid;
  cost-reimbursement is an indicator for a cost-reimbursement contract; T&M/LH is an indicator for a time
  and materials or labor-hours contract; the omitted category is fixed price contract. To facilitate the
  analysis, the data is aggregated to the level of the covariates and the regressions are weighted by
  inflation-adjusted spending in each cell.



                                                       62
                            Table A7: Percent of Projects in I.T. Dashboard Data

                                    Spending                                         Projects
                                                   % in I.T.                                         % in I.T.
                      All         I.T Dashboard   Dashboard             All        I.T Dashboard    Dashboard
Year of origin
  ≤ 2001           $68,460          $14,538         21.2%              813             48             5.9%
  2002             $114,668         $12,848         11.2%             1,018            61             6.0%
  2003             $115,286         $51,004         44.2%              653             113            17.3%
  2004             $53,151          $10,309         19.4%              467             71             15.2%
  2005             $35,027          $16,456         47.0%              250             56             22.4%
  2006             $13,023           $5,172         39.7%              191             77             40.3%
  2007             $61,953          $55,665         89.8%              248             183            73.8%
  2008             $19,864          $19,752         99.4%              135             127            94.1%
  2009               $498             $491          98.7%              16              13             81.3%
  2010               $285             $273          95.5%              13              10             76.9%
Total              $482,215         $186,509        38.7%             3,803            759            20.0%


   Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov and 2003 to 2010 Exhibit
   53 reports, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/e-gov/docs/.
   Note: All spending and projects are totals from agency Exhibit 53 reports. I.T. Dashboard spending and
   projects are totals in the I.T. Dashboard dataset (including projects dropped from the baseline sample due
   to missing values). Spending values inflation-adjusted using the CPI-U.




                                                       63
             Table A8: Alternative Mechanisms for the Effect on Overall Ratings

                                                                       Odds ratio of higher overall rating
                             Coefficients from linear model                   from ordered logit
                          Contracting office Contracting office        Longer tenure      Shorter tenure
                            FE weighted       FE unweighted             (> 3 years)         (≤ 3 years)
                                 (1)                 (2)                    (3)                 (4)
Last week                       -0.66               -0.82                  0.07                0.28
                               (0.73)              (0.40)                 (0.06)              (0.22)
Year FE                           X                   X                      X                   X
Agency FE                         X                   X                      X                   X
Project characteristics           X                   X                      X                   X
Contracting office FE             X                   X
Weighted by spending              X                                           X                    X
R-sq                           0.889               0.696
N                                275                 275                     235                  357


Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov and 2003 to 2010. CIO
biographies, available at www.cio.gov. Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via
www.usaspending.gov.
Note: Columns 1 and 2 show coefficients from linear regressions with contracting office fixed effects.
Columns 3 and 4 show odds ratios from ordered logit regressions by CIO tenure at the agency. Coefficient
of 1 indicates no effect. Overall rating is a quality index that combines that CIO evaluation, cost rating,
and scheduling rating subindices (see text for details). It takes values from 0 to 10, with 10 being the best.
CIO tenure is determined from CIO biographies and includes time at the agency in another position (e.g.,
deputy CIO). Tenure denoted as missing when tenure cannot be determined from the biographical
statement. Project characteristics are fixed effects for investment phase, service group, and line of business
(see Appendix Table A4). Observations weighted by inflation-adjusted spending unless otherwise
mentioned. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                     64
Table A9: Standard Deviations of Year-End and Rest-of-Year of Spending Volumes and
Overall Ratings

                                    Percent of Spending                      Quality of Spending
                                Std. Dev.      Residual Std. Dev.       Std. Dev.       Residual Std. Dev.
                                   (1)                (2)                  (3)                 (4)

 Last Week of September           5.92                5.55                 3.82               1.86
                                 (0.46)              (0.43)               (0.39)             (0.19)
 Rest of Year                     3.78                3.39                 2.31               1.40
                                 (0.04)              (0.04)               (0.10)             (0.06)



Source: Federal Procurement Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov and I.T.
Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov. .
Note: Columns 1 and 2 show the standard deviations of the percent of spending in the full FPDS data for
contracts originated during the last week of the year and during earlier weeks in the year. Columns 3 and
4 show the standard deviations of the overall rating quality index from the I.T. Dashboard data for
contracts originated during the last week of the year and during earlier weeks in the year. Columns 1 and
3 show the standard deviations in the raw data. Columns 2 and 4 show these standard deviations after
partialling out fixed effects. The percent of spending statistics are calculated using observations that are
the percentage of spending by agency and by week in each year. The fixed effects are for agency and year.
In constructing the agency-week-year observations for the I.T. Dashboard data set, the individual project
data is weighted by spending on each project so that the standard deviations can by interpreted as the
variation per dollar of expenditure. The residual analysis for the I.T. Dashboard data partials out agency,
year, and product characteristics fixed effects. Project characteristics are fixed effects for investment phase,
service group, and line of business (see Appendix Table A4).




                                                      65
   Table A10: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of Overall Rating on Justice and Last Week

                                                                  OLS Estimates
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)
Justice X last week             3.54           2.29            2.85          2.36           2.251           2.49
                               (1.19)         (1.16)          (0.75)        (0.65)          0.593          0.898
Last week                      -1.91          -1.06           -0.93          -0.99         -0.814          -0.468
                               (1.10)         (0.82)          (0.48)        (0.39)          0.391          0.238
Justice                         0.06          -0.59           -3.33          -3.88         -4.022          -2.028
                               (0.51)         (0.49)          (0.47)        (0.59)          0.578           1.01
Year FE                                          X               X             X              X               X
Agency FE                                                        X             X              X               X
Project characteristics                                                        X              X               X
Weighted by spending             X              X                X             X         Winsorized*
R-squared                       0.06           0.22            0.58          0.68           0.60            0.48
N                               686            686             686            686            686            686


   Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov .
   Note: Coefficients from OLS regressions of overall rating on fully interacted Justice and last week
   indicators and controls. Overall rating is a quality index that combines the CIO evaluation, cost rating,
   and scheduling rating subindexes (see text for details). It takes values from 0 to 10, with 10 being the best
   score. Project characteristics are fixed effects for investment phase, service group, and line of business (see
   Appendix Table A4). Robust standard errors in parentheses.
   *Spending weight Winsorized at $1 billion (96th percentile).




                                                         66
  Table A11: Ordered Logit Regressions of Overall Rating on Last Month and Controls

                                                   Odds ratio of higher overall rating
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)                 (4)
       Last month                         0.57            0.65           0.54                0.42
                                         (0.09)          (0.12)         (0.12)              (0.11)
       Year FE                                              X              X                   X
       Agency FE                                                           X                   X
       Project characteristics FE                                                              X
       N                                   671             671              671              671


Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov.
Note: Odds ratios from ordered logit regressions. Overall rating is a quality index that combines that CIO
evaluation, cost rating, and scheduling rating subindices (see text for details). It takes values from 0 to 10,
with 10 being the best. Project characteristics are fixed effects for investment phase, service group, and line
of business (see Appendix Table A4). Observations weighted by inflation-adjusted spending. Standard
errors in parentheses.




                                                      67
                              Table A12: Target and Calibrated Moments

                                                                                 Moments in Simulated Data
                                                             Target Moments     CRRA Model      CARA Model
                                                   Panel A: Moments

     Spike in spending
       Ratio of last month to rest-of-year monthly average        2.18              2.17             2.18

     Drop-off in quality
       Odds ratio of high quality in last month                   0.42              0.42             0.41

                                                  Panel B: Parameters

     Curvature of value of spending (γ)                                             3.02             1.86

     Standard deviation of shocks (σ)                                               1.73             2.02




Source: I.T. Dashboard data, accessed March, 2010 via http://it.usaspending.gov. Federal Procurement
Data System, accessed October, 2010 via www.usaspending.gov.
Note: Panel A shows target and calibrated moments for the spike in spending and the drop-off in quality.
The target spike is calculated as the ratio of last monthly to rest-of-year average month spending in the
pooled 2004 to 2009 FPDS. The target drop off is the odds ratio of a high quality score from an order logit
regression of overall rating on last week and controls in the I.T. Dashboard data. The specification is also
shown in column 4 of Appendix Table A11.



                                 Table A13: Welfare Gain from Rollover

                                                        Δ Value          Δ Social Cost     Δ Social Surplus
         No Rollover                                     0.0%               0.0%                0.0%

         CRRA
           Compensating Variation                        0.0%              -13.1%              13.1%
           Full Congressional Reoptimization             -2.1%             -15.4%              13.3%
           First Best                                    2.4%              -16.2%              18.6%

         CARA
           Compensating Variation                        0.0%              -20.5%              20.5%
           Full Congressional Reoptimization             1.7%              -18.9%              20.6%
           First Best                                    1.5%              -24.9%              26.3%


Note: Welfare gains from rollover from the calibrated model with CRRA and CARA value-of-spending
functions. Compensating variation is the reduction in budget authority that could be provided to the
agency with rollover to achieve the same expected value of spending as in the no-rollover regime. Full
Congressional reoptimization allows Congress to adjust the budget for the agency. First best is the level of
spending that equates the marginal value of spending to the marginal social cost in each sub-year period.
The first column shows the percent change in the value of spending, the second column shows the percent
change in the social cost of spending, and the third column shows the percent change in social surplus. All
values are normalized by the social cost of spending under the no-rollover status quo. See Appendix C for
details.



                                                          68
