NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ESTIMATING EARNINGS ADJUSTMENT FRICTIONS:
METHOD AND EVIDENCE FROM THE SOCIAL SECURITY EARNINGS TEST
Alexander M. Gelber
Damon Jones
Daniel W. Sacks
Working Paper 19491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19491
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
October 2013, Revised January 2019
Previously circulated as "Earnings Adjustment Frictions: Evidence from the Social Security
Earnings Test" and "Estimating Earnings Adjustment Frictions: Method and Evidence from the
Social Security Earnings Test." We thank Raj Chetty, Jim Cole, Mark Duggan, John Friedman,
Bill Gale, Hilary Hoynes, Henrik Kleven, Camille Landais, Olivia Mitchell, Daniel Reck,
Emmanuel Saez, Chris Walters, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. We are
extremely grateful to David Pattison for generously running the code on the data. We
acknowledge financial support from the Wharton Center for Human Resources and the Wharton
Risk and Decision Processes Center, from the Steven H. Sandell Grant Program through the
Boston College Center for Retirement Research, from NIH grant #1R03 AG043039-01, from a
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-0822219, and
from support from the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #5RRC08098400-05-00
to the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) as part of the SSA Retirement Research
Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not
represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. The research
uses data from the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics Program, which
was partially supported by the following National Science Foundation Grants: SES-9978093,
SES-0339191 and ITR-0427889; National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. All errors are our own. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed. All errors are our own.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19491.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Alexander M. Gelber, Damon Jones, and Daniel W. Sacks. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Earnings Adjustment Frictions: Method and Evidence from the Social Security
Earnings Test
Alexander M. Gelber, Damon Jones, and Daniel W. Sacks
NBER Working Paper No. 19491
October 2013, Revised January 2019
JEL No. H20,H31,J14,J26
ABSTRACT
We introduce a method for estimating the cost of adjusting earnings, as well as the earnings
elasticity. Our method uses information on bunching in the earnings distribution at convex budget
set kinks before and after policy-induced changes in the magnitude of the kinks: the larger is the
adjustment cost, the smaller is the absolute change in bunching from before to after the policy
change. In the context of the Social Security Earnings Test, our results demonstrate that the shortrun impact of changes in the effective marginal tax rate can be substantially attenuated.

Alexander M. Gelber
Department of Economics
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr.
San Diego, CA 92093
and NBER
gelber@gmail.com
Damon Jones
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
damonjones@uchicago.edu

Daniel W. Sacks
Indiana University
1309 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405
dansacks@indiana.edu

1

Introduction

When a policy changes, do frictions prevent economic behavior from adjusting? How long
does it take for economic agents to overcome these frictions? Does it appear that long-run
responses are larger than short-run responses? How do we measure the magnitude of these
frictions, as well as agents’underlying responsiveness in the absence of frictions? This paper
develops and implements methods to answer these questions.
We must account for such frictions to estimate the earnings or labor supply response to
taxation, our key context of interest. Adjustment frictions in this context could encompass
several factors, including a lack of knowledge of a tax regime, the cost of negotiating a new
contract with an employer, or the time and …nancial cost of job search. In a cross-section of
data, frictions attenuate the response to taxation (Chetty et al., 2011; Chetty, 2012; Chetty
et al., 2013; Kleven and Waseem, 2013). For example, wage-earners typically do not “bunch”
in the earnings distribution at many convex budget set kinks, as they should in the absence
of frictions (Saez, 2010).
Looking over time, it has been postulated that long-run responses are signi…cantly larger
than the short-run responses that are typically measured, due to frictions that impede adjustment in the short run (Saez 2010; Saez et al., 2012). This could help explain patterns
in the data like the slow rise in retirement at age 62 subsequent to the introduction of the
Social Security Early Retirement Age (Gruber and Wise, 2013). Such attenuated and slow
responses matter to policy-makers, who often wish to estimate the timing of the earnings
or labor supply reaction to changes in tax and transfer policies, as well as the magnitude of
long-run responses beyond the short-run empirical estimation windows typically examined
(e.g. Congressional Budget O¢ ce, 2009). However, the existing literature has not yet developed a method for estimating earnings adjustment frictions, or their implications for the
speed of adjustment or the estimation of long-run elasticities.
We make three main contributions to understanding adjustment frictions in the earnings
context. First, we introduce a method for documenting adjustment frictions and estimating
the amount of time it takes to adjust fully to policy changes. In the absence of adjustment
frictions, the removal of a convex kink in the e¤ective tax schedule should result in the

1

immediate dissolution of bunching at the former kink; thus, any observed delay in reaching
zero bunching should re‡ect adjustment frictions. The time delay reveals the speed of adjustment. We implement this in the context of a kink, but the method applies equally to
the context of a notch.
Second, formalizing and generalizing this insight, we specify a model of earnings adjustment that allows us to estimate adjustment costs and the elasticity of earnings with respect
to the e¤ective net-of-tax rate.1 Adding adjustment frictions to the model of Saez (2010),
we develop tractable methods that allow the estimation of elasticities and adjustment costs.
Our starting point is the context of a kinked budget set. When tax rates change around
a kink in our framework, ceteris paribus the absolute change in the amount of bunching is
decreasing in the adjustment cost, while the initial amount of bunching is increasing in the
elasticity. We extend our method to the dynamic case, to estimate the speed of arrival of
adjustment opportunities along with the elasticity and adjustment cost. We focus on the
special case of …xed adjustment costs, but we address how to estimate adjustment costs with
any polynomial functional form.
Third, we apply our methods to estimate these parameters and document adjustment
frictions in the context of the U.S. Social Security Annual Earnings Test (“Earnings Test”).
The Earnings Test reduces Social Security Old Age and Survivors Insurance (“Social Security”) bene…ts in a given year as a proportion of a Social Security claimant’s earnings above
an exempt amount in that year. For example, for Social Security claimants under age 66 in
2019, current Social Security bene…ts are reduced by one dollar for every two dollars earned
above $17,640. Previous literature has found that Social Security claimants bunch at this
convex kink (Burtless and Mo¢ tt, 1985; Friedberg, 1998, 2000; Song and Manchester, 2007;
Engelhardt and Kumar, 2014). In addition to providing a laboratory for studying adjustment costs and earnings elasticities, the Earnings Test is important to policy-makers in its
own right. In the latest year of the available micro-data in 2003, the Earnings Test led to an
estimated total of $4.3 billion in current bene…t reductions for around 538,000 bene…ciaries,
thus substantially a¤ecting bene…ts and their timing. The importance of the Earnings Test
1 For consistency with the previous literature on kink points that has focused on the e¤ect of taxation, we sometimes use “tax”
as shorthand for “tax-and-transfer,” while recognizing that the AET reduces Social Security bene…ts and is not administered
through the tax system. The “e¤ective” marginal tax rate is potentially a¤ected by the AET BRR, among other factors. The
net-of-tax rate (or equivalently, net-of-tax share) is de…ned as one minus the e¤ective marginal tax rate.

2

is now increasing as the a¤ected age range expands gradually to encompass age 67 for those
born in 1960 and later.
Using Social Security Administration (SSA) administrative tax data on a one percent
sample of the U.S. population, we document clear evidence of adjustment frictions: after
individuals no longer face the Earnings Test, they continue to bunch around the location of
the former exempt amount. In a baseline speci…cation, we estimate that the …xed adjustment
cost within one year of the policy change is around $280 (in 2010 dollars). We also estimate
that the earnings elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax rate is 0.35. When we allow for
dynamic adjustment, these parameter estimates are comparable— the long-run elasticity is
0.36, the adjustment cost is around $245— and we also estimate that full adjustment occurs
only after three years.
Our estimates demonstrate that incorporating adjustment costs can change earnings elasticity estimates signi…cantly. The frictionless Saez (2010) method estimates an average elasticity of 0.19 in our Earnings Test context; our method’s estimate is nearly twice as large.
Moreover, simulations based on our parameter estimates show that the adjustment frictions
we estimate can greatly attenuate the short-run earnings reaction even to a large change in
the e¤ective marginal tax rate, frustrating the goal of a¤ecting short-run earnings as envisioned in many discussions and projections of the e¤ects of tax and transfer policies. The
results also suggest that the time frame of three years often used to assess earnings responses
to taxation (Gruber and Saez 2002; Saez et al. 2012) appears su¢ cient to capture long-run
responses in our context, in contrast to hypotheses that long-run responses may be much
larger.
This paper builds on previous literature that has documented the importance of adjustment frictions but has not yet developed methods for estimating them (Chetty et al., 2011;
Chetty, 2012; Chetty et al., 2013). Our method complements Kleven and Waseem (2013),
who innovate a static method to estimate elasticities and the share of the population that is
inert in the presence of a notch in the budget set. Our method is di¤erent in three primary
ways. First, our method allows estimation of adjustment cost rather than an inert population share. The adjustment cost is necessary for welfare calculations in many applications
(Chetty et al., 2009), and is a structural parameter that can be used to perform counterfac3

tual exercises across di¤erent contexts. Second, our basic method developed here applies to
kinks (see also the applications of our method in He, Peng, and Wang, 2016; Schächtele 2016;
and Mortenson et al. 2017), and has been adapted to the case of notches as well to estimate
adjustment costs (Gudgeon and Trenkle, 2016; Zaresani, 2016). Third, our dynamic method
allows us to estimate the parameters of the gradual adjustment process over time, as well as
the speed of adjustment.
Our paper also follows a large existing literature on adjustment costs in areas outside labor
and public economics. For example, adjustment costs have long been studied in inventory
theory (e.g. Arrow et al., 1951, and subsequent literature), macroeconomics (e.g. Baumol,
1952, and subsequent literature), …rm investment (e.g. Abel and Eberly, 1994), durable good
consumption (e.g. Grossman and Laroque, 1990), pricing and in‡ation (e.g. Sheshinski and
Weiss, 1977), and other settings including the “s-S” literature (see literature reviews in
Leahy, 2008, or Stokey, 2008). In our paper, changes in non-linear budget sets generate
clear changes in bunching that can be mapped to our parameter estimates in a manner that
transparently follows the patterns in the data.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the policy environment.
Section 3 presents the method for quantifying bunching. Section 4 describes our data. Section
5 documents on adjustment frictions empirically. Section 6 speci…es our model. Section 7
presents our parameter estimates. Section 8 describes simulations based on the estimates.
Section 9 concludes. The Appendix contains additional results. More results are available
in an earlier working paper version of the present paper (Gelber, Jones, and Sacks, 2013).

2

Policy Environment

Social Security provides annuity income to the elderly and to survivors of deceased workers.
Individuals with su¢ cient years of eligible earnings can claim Social Security bene…ts through
their own earnings history as early as age 62. Individuals in our sample reach the Normal
Retirement Age at 65, when they can claim their full Social Security bene…ts.
Individuals who claim Social Security may keep working, but their earning are subject
to the Earnings Test. For each dollar they earn above an exempt amount, their bene…ts are
reduced. Figure 1 shows that the Earnings Test became less stringent over 1961-2009. Prior
4

to 1989, the bene…t reduction rate above the exempt amount was 50 percent. In 1990 and
after, the bene…t reduction rate fell to 33.33 percent for bene…ciaries at or older than 65; this
change had been scheduled since the 1983 Social Security Amendments. During our period of
interest from 1983 to 1999 period, the Earnings Test applied to Social Security bene…ciaries
aged 62-69 (prior to 1983, it applied to those 62-71). Starting in 1978, bene…ciaries younger
than 65 faced a lower exempt amount than those at 65 or above.
When current Social Security bene…ts are lost to the Earnings Test, future scheduled bene…ts are increased in some circumstances, which is sometimes called “bene…t enhancement.”
This can reduce the e¤ective tax rate associated with the Earnings Test. For bene…ciaries
subject to the Earnings Test aged Normal Retirement Age and older, a one percent Delayed
Retirement Credit was introduced in 1972, meaning that each year of foregone bene…ts led
to a one percent increase in future yearly bene…ts. The Delayed Retirement Credit was
raised to three percent in 1982 and gradually rose to eight percent for cohorts reaching Normal Retirement Age from 1990 to 2008. An increase in future bene…ts between seven and
eight percent is approximately actuarially fair on average, meaning that an individual with
no liquidity constraints and average life expectancy should be indi¤erent between claiming
bene…ts now or delaying claiming and receiving higher bene…ts once she begins to collect
Social Security (Diamond and Gruber, 1999).
The Delayed Retirement Credit only raises claimants’future bene…ts when annual earnings are high enough that the Earnings Test reduces at least an entire month’s worth of
bene…ts (Friedberg, 1998; Social Security Administration, 2012a). In particular, an entire
month’s bene…ts are lost— and bene…t enhancement occurs— once the individual earns z
+(M B= ) or higher, where z is the annual exempt amount, M B is the monthly bene…t,
and

is the Earnings Test bene…t reduction rate. With a typical monthly bene…t of $1,000

and a bene…t reduction rate of 33.33 percent, one month’s bene…t enhancement occurs when
the individual’s annual earnings are $3,000 (=$1,000/0.3333) above the exempt amount.
Although the Earnings Test withholds bene…ts at the monthly level, the Earnings Test is
generally applied based on annual earnings— the object we observe in our data. We model
the Earnings Test as creating a positive implicit marginal tax rate for some individuals—
re‡ecting the reduction in current bene…ts— consistent with both the empirical bunching at
5

Earnings Test kinks and with the practice in previous literature.
For individuals considering earning in a region well above the Earnings Test exempt
amount, thus triggering bene…t enhancement, the Earnings Test could also a¤ect decisions
for several reasons. The Earnings Test was roughly actuarially fair only beginning in the late
1990s. Those whose expected life span is shorter than average should expect to collect Social
Security bene…ts for less long than average, implying that the Earnings Test is more …nancially punitive. Liquidity-constrained individuals or those who discount faster than average
could also reduce work in response to the Earnings Test. Finally, some may not understand
the Earnings Test bene…t enhancement or other aspects of Social Security (Liebman and
Luttmer 2012; Brown, Kapteyn, Mitchell, and Mattox, 2013). We follow previous work and
do not distinguish among these potential reasons in our main analysis (Gelber, Jones, and
Sacks 2013 analyze certain reasons for the response).
For bene…ciaries under Normal Retirement Age, the actuarial adjustment raises future
bene…ts whenever an individual earns over the Earnings Test exempt amount (Social Security
Administration, 2012, Section 728.2; Gruber and Orszag, 2003), by 0.55 percent per month
of bene…ts withheld. Thus, bene…ciaries in this age range do not face a pure kink in the
budget set at the exempt amount. To address this, we limit the sample to ages above Normal
Retirement Age in our estimates of elasticities and adjustment costs.

3

Initial Bunching Framework

To understand the e¤ects of the kink created by the Earnings Test, we begin with a model
with no frictions to illustrate our technique for estimating bunching at kinks (Saez 2010).
Agents maximize utility u (c; z; a) over consumption c and pre-tax earnings z, subject to
a budget constraint c = (1

) z + R, where R is virtual income.2

Greater earnings

are associated with greater disutility due to the cost of e¤ort. The …rst-order condition,
(1

) uc + uz = 0, implicitly de…nes an earnings supply function z ((1

) ; R; a).

The parameter a re‡ects heterogeneous “ability,”i.e. the trade-o¤ between consumption
and earnings supply. Following previous literature, we assume rank preservation in earnings
2 We can write c = z
T (z), where T (z) is a general, nonlinear tax schedule. As in the public …nance literature (e.g.
Hausman, 1981) we rewrite the budget constraint in linearized form, c = (1
) z + R, where
T 0 (z) is the marginal tax
rate and R T 0 (z) z T (z) is virtual income, i.e. the intercept of a linear budget set passing through the point (z; T (z)).

6

as a function of a. Thus, a is isomorphic to the level of earnings that would occur in the
absence of any tax. a is distributed according a smooth CDF. Under a constant marginal
tax rate of

0,

this implies a smooth distribution of earnings H0 ( ), with pdf h0 ( ).

Starting with a linear tax at a rate of

0,

suppose the Earnings Test is additionally

introduced, so that the marginal net-of-tax rate decreases to 1
threshold z ; where

1

>

0.

1

for earnings above a

Individuals earning in the neighborhood above z reduce their

earnings due to the higher tax. If ability is smoothly distributed, a range of individuals
initially locating between z and z + 4z will “bunch” exactly at z , due to the reduced
incentive to earn above z . In practice, previous literature …nds empirically that individuals
locate in the neighborhood of z , rather than exactly at z .
To quantify the amount of bunching, or “excess mass,” we use a technique similar to
Chetty et al. (2011) and Kleven and Waseem (2013). For each earnings bin zi of width
calculate pi , the proportion of all people with annual earnings in the range [zi

we

=2; zi + =2).

We estimate this regression:
pi =

D
X

d (zi

d=0

d

z ) +

k
X

j= k

j 1fzi

z =j

g + ui

(1)

This expresses the annual earnings distribution as a degree D polynomial, plus a set of
indicators for each bin with a midpoint within k of the kink.
^ = Pk
Our measure of bunching is B
j= k ^ j , the estimated excess probability of locating at

the kink, relative to the polynomial …t. To obtain a measure of excess mass that is comparable
^ 0 (z ) = ^ = . We
across di¤erent kinks, we scale by the counterfactual density at z , i.e. h
0
refer to the density of earnings in the absence of the earnings test, under a linear tax schedule
with a constant marginal tax rate, as the “counterfactual”or “initial”earnings density. Thus,
.
.
^
^
^
^
our estimate of “normalized excess mass” is b = B h0 (z ) = B ^ 0 . In our empirical
application, we choose D = 7,

= 800 and k = 4 as a baseline, implying that our estimate

of bunching is driven by individuals with annual earnings within $3,600 of the kink. We
also show our results under alternative choices of D; ; and k. We estimate bootstrapped
standard errors.

7

4

Data

We apply this bunching framework on a one percent random sample of Social Security
numbers from the restricted-access Social Security Administration Master Earnings File,
linked to the Master Bene…ciary Record. The data contain a complete longitudinal earnings
history with information on earnings in each calendar year since 1951; year of birth; the year
(if any) that claiming began; date of death; and sex. In a calendar year, “age”is de…ned as
the highest age an individual attains in that calendar year.
Starting in 1978, the earnings measure re‡ects total wage compensation, as reported on
W-2 tax forms. Earnings are not subject to manipulation through tax deductions, credits, or
exemptions, and are subject to third-party reporting among the non-self-employed. Separate
information is available on self-employment earnings and non-self-employment earnings. The
data do not contain information on hours worked or job amenities.
Our main sample at each age and year consists of individuals who have ultimately claimed
at an age less than or equal to 65, which allows us to investigate a constant sample across
ages. We exclude person-years with positive self-employment income. Because we focus on
the intensive margin response, we further limit the sample in a given year to observations
with positive earnings in that year.
Table 1 shows summary statistics in our main sample, 62 to 69 year-olds in 1990 to 1999.
The sample has 376,431 observations. The sample is 57 percent male. Median earnings,
$14,555.56, is not far from the Earnings Test exempt amount, which averages $16,738 for
those 65 and older and $11,650 for those younger than 65 over this period. Conditional on
positive earnings, mean earnings is $28,892.63.
Our second data source is the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD) of
the U.S. Census (Abowd et al., 2009), which longitudinally follows the earnings of around
nine-tenths of workers in covered states. We use a 20 percent random subsample of these
individuals from 1990 to 1999. We use these data only in one …gure, for which the large
sample size in the LEHD is helpful.
To generate the e¤ective marginal tax rate, in our baseline we incorporate the Earnings
Test bene…t reduction rate as well as the average federal and state income and payroll

8

marginal tax rates. We calculate marginal tax rates using TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts,
1993) and information on individuals within $2,000 of the kink in the Statistics of Income
data in the years we examine.
In our estimates and model we abstract from the claiming decision by examining those
who have already claimed Social Security. This is only a trivial abstraction here because
nearly everyone (over 90 percent) has claimed by the ages we study in our main evidence,
66 to 71.

5

Documenting Earnings Adjustment Frictions

Using the administrative data, we document several pieces of evidence for adjustment frictions by examining the pattern of bunching across ages. We focus on the period 1990 to
1999, when the Earnings Test applied from ages 62 to 69. The policy changes at ages 62
and 70— when the Earnings Test is imposed and removed, respectively, for Social Security
claimants— would be anticipated by those who have knowledge of the relevant policies. Figure 2 Panel A plots earnings histograms for each age from 59 to 73, along with the estimated
smooth counterfactual polynomial density.
First, we show that “de-bunching”— movement away from the former kink among those
initially bunching at the kink— does not occur immediately for some individuals. Figure 2
Panel A shows clear visual evidence of substantial bunching from ages 62 to 69, when the
Earnings Test applies to claimants’ Social Security bene…ts, and no excess mass at earlier
ages. At ages 70 and 71, which are not subject to the Earnings Test, there is still clear visual
evidence of bunching in the region of the kink.
We estimate that there is substantial and signi…cant excess mass at ages 70 and 71.
Figure 2 Panel B shows that normalized excess mass is statistically signi…cantly di¤erent
from zero at each age from 62 to 71 (p < 0:01 at each age). Normalized excess mass rises
from 62 to 63 and remains around this level until age 69 (with a dip at age 65 that we discuss
below). When we pool data from 1983 to 1999 in Figure 4— giving us more power than in
our baseline sample over 1990 to 1999 when the Earnings Test does not change— bunching
above age 70 is even more visually apparent, and excess mass at age 71 is highly signi…cant
and clearly positive.
9

Second, we exploit the panel dimension of the data to demonstrate inertia near the kink
at the individual level. Figure 5 shows that conditional on earnings at ages 70 or 71 within
$1,000 of the exempt amount, the density of earnings at age 69 spikes at the exempt amount.
Similarly, conditional on earnings at age 69 within $1,000 of the exempt amount, the density
of age 70 or age 71 earnings spikes near the exempt amount. It is notable that we document
adjustment frictions even among those who were ‡exible enough to bunch at the kink initially.
Third, Figure 3 shows spikes near the exempt amount in the mean percentage change
in earnings from ages 69 to 70 and 70 to 71, consistent with de-bunching from age 69 to
70, and from age 70 to 71, among those initially near the kink in the LEHD. This shows
that bunchers are returning to higher earnings, as predicted by theory, and that this process
continues at least until age 71.3
Fourth, Figure 2 Panel B shows that bunching is substantially lower at age 65 than
surrounding ages. The location of the kink changes substantially from age 64 to age 65
because the exempt amount rises greatly (Figure 1). Individuals may have di¢ culty adjusting
to the new location of the kink within one year. This delay suggests that individuals also
face adjustment frictions in this context.4
Fifth, the amount of bunching rises from age 62 to 63, suggesting gradual adjustment.
Appendix Figure B.2 shows that when the sample at a given age consists of those who have
claimed by that age, we still …nd a substantial increase in bunching from 62 to 63.
Each of these several pieces of evidence points to adjustment frictions. In Appendix
Table B.2, we probe the robustness of our results by varying the bandwidth, the degree
of the polynomial, and the excluded region when we estimate bunching. We also conduct
3 We classify claimants as age 70 when they attain age 70 during that calendar year. As a result, some individuals will be
classi…ed as age 70 but will have been subject to the Earnings Test for a portion of the year (in the extreme case of a December
31 birthday, for all but one day). In principle, this is one potential explanation for continued bunching at age 70 that does
not rely on earnings adjustment frictions. However, other evidence is su¢ cient to document earnings adjustment frictions,
namely: (1) the continued bunching at age 71, which cannot be explained through the coarse measure of age; (2) the continued
adjustment away from the kink from age 70 to age 71 in Figure 3; and (3) the spike in the elasticity estimated using the Saez
(2010) approach in 1990, documented in Figure 8 and explained below. Moreover, Appendix Table B.1 shows that those born
in January to March— who are subject to the Earnings Test for only a small portion of the calendar year when they turn age
70— also show signi…cant bunching at ages 70 (p<0.05) and 71 (p<0.10) from 1983 to 1999.
4 This interpretation of the patterns around ages 64 and 65 is consistent with Figure B.1, which shows that conditional on
age 64 earnings near the age 64 exempt amount, the age 65 earnings density shows a large spike at the kink that prevailed at
age 64 and a smaller spike at the current, age 65 kink. Also, conditional on age 65 earnings near the age 65 exempt amount,
the density of age 64 earnings shows a spike near the exempt amount for age 64. In principle, our coarse measure of age could
a¤ect these patterns: individuals turning 65 in a given calendar year face the age-65 exempt amount for only the part of the
calendar year after they turn 65, which could serve as a partial explanation for continued bunching at age 65 at the exempt
amount applying to age 64. However, we would then expect the age 64 and age 65 exempt amounts to display equal amounts
of bunching, which is not the case.

10

several additional analyses in Gelber, Jones, and Sacks (2013), including varying the time
period examined. Overall, these additional analyses generally show similar patterns.

6

Model Underlying Estimation

The results thus far suggest a role for adjustment frictions in individuals’earnings choices.
To estimate such adjustment costs as well as earnings elasticities, we build on the frictionless
Saez (2010) model described in Section 3. There we considered a transition from a linear
tax schedule with a constant marginal tax rate
the rate below the kink earnings level z is

0,

0

to a schedule with a convex kink, where

and the rate above z is

1

>

0.

We refer

to this kink at z as K1 . Next, as in our empirical context, we consider a decrease in the
higher marginal tax rate above z to

2

<

5
1.

We refer to this less sharply bent kink as K2 .

In the presence of a kink Kj with marginal tax rate

0

below z and

j

above z , j 2 f1; 2g,

the share of individuals bunching at z in the frictionless model is:
Z z + zj
h0 ( ) d
Bj =

(2)

z

For small tax rate changes, we can relate the elasticity to the earnings change 4zj for the
individual with the highest ex ante earnings who bunches ex post:
"=
where d

j

=

j

0

4zj =z
d j = (1

and " is the elasticity, "

(3)

0)

( @z/ z) = ( @ / (1

)) : The higher the

elasticity and the change in taxes at the kink, the larger is the range 4zj of bunchers.

6.1

Bunching in a Single Cross-Section with Adjustment Costs

We now extend the model to include a cost of adjusting earnings. In a basic version of the
model, individuals must pay a …xed utility cost of

similar to Chetty et. al. (2011); we

discuss later how this can be extended to any polynomial adjustment cost function with any
number of parameters. The …xed cost could represent the information costs associated with
navigating a new tax-and-transfer regime if, for example, individuals only make the e¤ort to
understand their earnings incentives when the utility gains from doing so are su¢ ciently large
5 The

case of d

2

>d

1

is governed by an analogous set of formulas.

11

(e.g. Simon, 1955; Chetty et al., 2007; Hoopes, Reck, and Slemrod, 2015). Alternatively,
the …xed cost may represent frictions such as the cost of negotiating a new contract with
an employer or the time and …nancial cost of job search, assuming that these costs do not
depend on the size of the desired earnings change.6
Our model of …xed costs relates to labor economics literature on constraints on hours
worked, as well as public …nance literature that explores frictions in earnings. One common
feature of models of earnings frictions in labor economics (e.g. Cogan, 1981; Altonji and
Paxson, 1990, 1992; Dickens and Lundberg, 1993) and public …nance (e.g. Chetty et al.,
2011; Chetty, 2012) is that the decision-making setting is generally static. We begin by
adopting this modeling convention.
Figure 6 Panel A illustrates how a …xed adjustment cost attenuates the level of bunching,
relative to equation (2), and obscures the estimation of " in a single cross-section that is
possible in the Saez (2010) model. Consider the individual at point 0, who initially earns z 1
along the linear budget constraint with tax rate
tax rate

1

0.

This individual faces a higher marginal

after the kink is introduced. Because she faces an adjustment cost, she may

decide to keep her earnings at z 1 and locate at point 1. Alternatively, with a su¢ ciently low
adjustment cost, she incurs the adjustment cost and reduces her earnings to z (point 2).
We assume that the bene…t of relocating to the kink is increasing in the distance from
the kink for initial earnings in the range [z ; z +

z1 ]. This requires that the size of the

optimal adjustment in earnings increases in a at a rate faster than the decrease in the
marginal utility of consumption.7 This is true, for example, if utility is quasilinear, as
in related recent public …nance literature (e.g. Saez, 2010; Chetty et al., 2011; Kleven
and Waseem, 2013; Kleven, Landais, Saez, and Schultz, 2014). This implies that above a
threshold level of initial earnings, z 1 , individuals adjust their earnings to the kink, and below
this threshold individuals remain inert. In Figure 6, this individual is the marginal buncher
6 Inattention or the di¢ culty of negotiating new contracts should be associated with positive adjustment costs, consistent
with the empirical patterns in Section 5, including continued bunching at former kinks. That could distinguish this context
from others such as the …rm context in Garicano et al. (2016), who …nd negative …xed costs attributed to within-…rm positive
spillovers from information collection, which seem less applicable in our context.
7 To see this, note that the utility gain from reoptimizing is u ((1
u ((1
uc
1 ) z1 + R1 ; z1 ; a)
1 ) z0 + R1 ; z0 ; a)
(1
z0 ] + uz [z1 z0 ] = uc ( 1
z1 ], where in the …rst expression, we have used a …rst-order approximation
1 ) [z1
0 ) [z0
for utility at ((1
0 ) z0 + R0 ; z0 ) ; and in the second expression we have used the …rst order condtion uz = uc (1
0 ). The
…rst term, uc , is decreasing as a (and therefore initial earnings z0 ) increases. Thus, in order for the gain in utility to be
increasing in a, we need the size of earnings adjustment [z0 z1 ] to increase at a rate that dominates.

12

who is indi¤erent between staying at the initial level of earnings z 1 (point 1) and moving to
the kink earnings level z (point 2) by paying the adjustment cost .
Panel B of Figure 6 illustrates the degree of attenuation of bunching due to the adjustment cost. With the adjustment cost, only individuals with initial earnings in the range
[z 1 ; z +

z1 ] bunch at the kink K1 . Bunching is given by the integral of the initial earnings

density, h0 ( ), over this range:
B1 (

1 ; z ; "; ) =

Z

z + z1

h0 ( ) d ;

(4)

z1

where

1

= ( 0;

1)

re‡ects the tax rates below and above z . The threshold level of earnings

z 1 is an increasing function of , because larger adjustment costs attenuate the earnings of a
greater range of individuals. The lower limit of the integral, z 1 , is implicitly de…ned by the
indi¤erence condition shown in Figure 6, Panel A:
= u ((1

1 )z

+ R1 ; z ; a1 )

u ((1

1 )z 1

+ R1 ; z 1 ; a1 )

(5)

where R1 is virtual income and a1 is the ability level of this marginal buncher.
Bunching therefore depends on the preference parameters " and , the tax rates below
and above the kink,

1

= ( 0;

1 ),

and the density h0 ( ) near the exempt amount z . With

only one kink and without further assumptions, we cannot estimate both " and , as the
level of bunching depends on both parameters.

6.2

Estimation Using Variation in Kink Size

We can estimate elasticities and adjustment costs when we observe bunching at a kink both
before and after a change in d . We assume that ability a is …xed over time from K1 to
K2 , described above. Some individuals will remain bunching at the kink, even though they
would prefer to move away from the kink in the absence of an adjustment cost, because the
gain from de-bunching is not large enough to overcome the adjustment cost. The adjustment
cost therefore attenuates the reduction in bunching, relative to a frictionless case.
Attenuation in the change in bunching is driven by those in area iii of Panel B in Figure
6. Under a frictionless model, individuals in this range do not bunch under K2 . However,
when moving from K1 to K2 in the presence of frictions, those in area iii continue to bunch
13

because their gains from adjusting from K1 to K2 are smaller than the adjustment cost, as
shown in Panel C of Figure 6. At point 0, we show an individual’s initial earnings z0 under
a constant marginal tax rate of

0.

The individual responds to K1 by bunching at z (point

1), since z0 > z 1 . Under K2 , this individual would have chosen earnings z2 > z (point 2) in
a frictionless setting; we have illustrated the marginal buncher who, due to the …xed cost, is
indi¤erent between staying at z and moving to z2 .
Thus, bunching under K2 is:
~2 (~ 2 ; z ; "; ) =
B

Z

z0

(6)

h0 ( ) d ;

z1

where ~ 2 = ( 0 ;

1;

2 ),

and the “ ” indicates that K2 was preceded by a larger kink K1 .

The critical earnings levels for the marginal buncher, z0 and z2 , are implicitly de…ned by:8

u ((1

2 ) z2

+ R2 ; z2 ; a2 )

uz (c2 ; z2 ; a2 )
= (1
uc (c2 ; z2 ; a2 )
2 ) z + R2 ; z ; a2 ) =
uz (c0 ; z0 ; a2 )
= (1
uc (c0 ; z0 ; a2 )

u ((1

2)

(7)

0) :

The earnings elasticity is related to the adjustment of the marginal buncher: " =

z0 z2 (1
z2
d

0)
2

.

The equations in (4), (5), (6) and (7) together pin down four unknowns (4z1 , z 1 , z0 and
z2 ), each of which is a function of " and . In our “comparative static method,”we draw on
~2 , to identify our two key parameters, " and .
two empirical moments in the data, B1 and B
The features of the data that help drive our estimates of the elasticity and adjustment
cost are intuitive. In the frictionless model of Saez (2010), bunching at a convex kink is
approximately proportional to d ; when d falls in this model, bunching at the kink falls
proportionately. As we move from the more pronounced kink to the less pronounced kink in
our model, bunching falls by a less-than-proportional amount— consistent with our empirical
observation that individuals continue to bunch at the location of a former kink. In the
extreme case in which a kink has been eliminated, we can attribute any residual bunching to
adjustment costs. Moreover, we show in Gelber, Jones, and Sacks (2013) that the absolute
8 We additionally require that z
z + 4z1 . When this inequality is binding, none of the bunchers move away from the
0
kink at z when the kink is reduced from K1 to K2 . Since we observe a reduction in bunching in our empirical setting, we
ignore this inequality.

14

value of the decrease in bunching from K1 to K2 is decreasing in the adjustment cost: z0 is
increasing in the adjustment cost, and therefore area iv is decreasing in the adjustment cost.
As in the frictionless case, the amount of bunching at K1 is still increasing in the elasticity.
By applying our approach thus far to study adjustment over a given time frame, the
resulting parameters should be interpreted as meaning that bunching in this time frame
can be predicted if individuals behaved as if they faced the indicated adjustment cost and
elasticity, in the spirit of Friedman (1953). This framework may be applied to yield “as if”
estimates separately for each period.

6.3

Dynamic Version of Model

To account for how bunching evolves over time, as in the lagged adjustment shown in Section 5, we can nest our comparative static model within a framework incorporating more
dynamic elements. We use a Calvo (1983) or “CalvoPlus” framework (e.g. Nakamura and
Steinsson, 2010), in which there is a positive probability in each period of facing a …nite,
…xed adjustment cost.
We assume that the adjustment cost in any period is drawn from a discrete distribution
f0; g. This generates a gradual response to policy, as agents may adjust only when a
su¢ ciently low value of the …xed cost is drawn. Such variation over time in the size of the
adjustment cost from this discrete distribution could capture, for example, the stochastic
arrival of available jobs or information about the policy.
How we model dynamics is also in‡uenced by a key feature observed in the data: the
lack of an anticipatory response to policy changes. In Appendix A.1 we solve a completely
forward-looking model in which agents anticipate a policy change. This model nests the
models presented in the main text. If agents were to place weight on the future in our
forward-looking model, they should begin to bunch in anticipation of facing a kink, and
they should begin to de-bunch in anticipation of the disappearance of a kink— neither of
which we have observed in the data. Meanwhile, we observe a degree of delayed response
to policy changes. We can capture both of these features of the data by assuming that a
stochastic process determines whether an agent faces the cost of adjustment, but agents do
not anticipate the policy change.

15

Formally, our main dynamic model without anticipatory behavior extends the notation
from above as follows. As before, we assume that agents begin with their optimal frictionless level of earnings in period 0. Flow utility in each period is v (ca;t ; za;t ; a; za;t 1 ) =
u (ca;t ; za;t ; a)

~ t 1 (za;t 6= za;t 1 ), where 1 ( ) is the indicator function for changing earn-

ings, which incurs a cost ~ t . In each period, an agent draws ~ t from a discrete distribution,
which equals

with probability

t t

and equals 0 with probability 1

t t

. To capture

the observed features of the data, in which the probability of adjusting (conditional on initially locating at the kink) appears to vary over time, we allow the probability
a function of the time elapsed since the most recent policy change, t

t t

to be

t . Individuals are

again indexed by a time-invariant heterogeneity parameter, a, which captures ability.
Individuals make decisions over a …nite horizon. In period 0, individuals face a linear
tax schedule, T0 (z) =

0 z,

with marginal tax rate

0.

In period 1, a kink, K1 , is introduced

at the earnings level z . This tax schedule is implemented for T1 periods, after which the
tax schedule features a less pronounced kink, K2 , at the earnings level z . For simplicity,
we assume quasilinear utility, u (c; z; a) = c

a
1+1="

z 1+1="
,
a

to abstract from income e¤ects

and focus on the dynamics created by the presence of adjustment costs. In each period,
individuals draw ~ t and then maximize ‡ow utility subject to a per-period budget constraint
za;t

Tj (za;t )

ca;t

m, where m re‡ects a borrowing constraint.9

These assumptions generate a simple decision rule. Let z~a;t be the optimal frictionless
level of earnings for an individual with ability a in period t. An agent will choose this level
of earnings provided that the ‡ow utility gain of moving from last-period earnings za;t

to

1

the frictionless optimum z~a;t exceeds the currently-drawn cost of adjustment, ~ t . Otherwise,
the agent remains at za;t 1 .
We can now generalize our earlier expressions for bunching under K1 and K2 . Denote
B1t as bunching at K1 in period t 2 [1; T1 ]. We have the following dynamic version of (4):
B1t

=
=

Z

z + z1

z1
t
j=1 j

h0 ( ) d + 1

t
j=1 j

Z

z1

h0 ( ) d

z

t
j=1 j

B1 + 1

B1

(8)

9 The quasilinearity assumption implies that the borrowing constraint does not directly a¤ect the earnings decision. However,
when agents are not forward looking, the borrowing constraint is necessary to rule out in…nite borrowing.

16

where B1 is the frictionless level of bunching de…ned in (2) when j = 1. The …rst line of
(8) shows that bunching in period t at K1 is composed of two components added together.
The …rst integral represents those who immediately adjust in period 1— the same group as in
Section 6.3, areas ii through iv in Figure 6 Panel B. The second integral represents those in
area i of the …gure, who only adjust if they draw a zero cost of adjustment. The probability
that this occurs by period t is 1

t
j=1 j .

The second line of (8) shows that as t grows,

bunching converges to the frictionless level of bunching B1 .
We can similarly derive an expression for B2t , bunching at K2 in period t > T1 :
Z z + z2
Z z0
t T1
t
B2 =
h0 ( ) d
h0 ( ) d + j=1 j
z1
z + z2
Z z1
t T1
T1
+ 1
h0 ( ) d
j=1 j
j=1 j
z
h
i
t T1
T1
t T1
~
=
B
+
1
[B
B
]
+ 1
2
1
1
j=1 j
j=1 j
j=1 j B2

(9)

where B2 is the frictionless level of bunching at K2 . In the …rst two lines, bunching in period
t at K2 consists of three components added together. First, individuals in area ii in the
…gure immediately bunched in period 1, and remain bunching at the smaller kink. Second,
in area iii of the …gure, excess bunchers who immediately bunched in period 1 now de-bunch
when a zero cost of adjustment is drawn. Third, those in area i of the …gure would like to
bunch under both K1 and K2 , but only do so once a zero cost of adjustment is drawn. On
the third line, we again see that as the time between period t and T1 grows, the level of
bunching converges to the frictionless amount, B2 , shown in areas i and ii of the …gure.
Relative to the dynamic model, the comparative static model from Sections 6.1-6.2 has
both strengths and weaknesses. The comparative static model has the strength of transparently illustrating the basic forces determining the elasticity and adjustment cost. We assume
that ability is …xed throughout the window of estimation, which may be more plausible in
the case of the comparative static model— when we only use two cross-sections from adjacent time periods— than when we use a dynamic model and study a longer time frame. The
estimation of the more dynamic model requires more moments from the data to estimate
additional parameters. However, the dynamic model has the strength of allowing us to account for the time pattern of bunching. The comparative static model corresponds to the
17

special case of the dynamic model in which individuals never draw zero adjustment cost, so
that

6.4

j

= 1.

Extensions

Our framework can be extended in a number of ways. First, we can extend the model
to accommodate heterogeneity in elasticities and adjustment costs. In Appendix A.2 we
derive generalized formulae for bunching that allow us to interpret our comparative static
model estimates as average parameters among the set of bunchers. Appendix A.2.2 further
discusses how the dynamic model can be interpreted in the presence of heterogeneity in these
parameters and the vector

10
i.

Second, our model above assumes that initial earnings under

0

are located at the friction-

less optimum. However, it is also possible to assume that individuals may …nd themselves
away from their frictionless optimum in period 0, due to the same adjustment costs that
attenuate bunching under K1 and K2 . In Appendix A.3, we extend the model to allow
individuals to be arbitrarily located in a neighborhood of their frictionless optimum. As in
Chetty (2012), we only require that earnings are close enough to the optimum to preclude
any further utility gains that outweigh the adjustment cost

. We report estimates under

this method below.
Third, the model with a …xed cost of adjustment can be generalized to any polynomial
functional form of the adjustment. In Appendix A.0.1, we discuss estimation of a model with
a cost of adjustment that has both a …xed cost component and a component that is linear
in the size of the earnings adjustment. In general, we can allow for the adjustment cost to
be an arbitrary polynomial function of order n that depends on the size of the adjustment;
this requires n + 1 moments for estimation.

6.5

Econometric Estimation of the Model

We estimate the model we have described using a minimum distance estimator. As explained
in Appendix A.5, to estimate ("; ) in the static setting, we seek the values of the parameters that make predicted bunching and actual (estimated) bunching as close as possible on
1 0 Special cases of our model have implications for other moments of the earnings distribution. However, with heterogeneity
in the parameters it is not possible to use these moments without more stringent distributional assumptions.

18

average.
Equations (8) and (9) illustrate how we estimate the elasticity and adjustment cost
in the dynamic setting. We require as many observations of bunching as the parameters,
("; ;

1 ; :::;

J ),

and these moments must span a change in d . Suppose we observe the

pattern of bunching over time around two or more di¤erent policy changes. Loosely speaking,
the

’s are estimated relative to one another from the time pattern of bunching: a delay

in adjustment in a given period will generally correspond to a higher probability of facing
the adjustment cost (all else equal). This relationship is linear, as the degree of “inertia”
in bunching in each period increases linearly in

1:

Meanwhile, a higher

implies a larger

amount of inertia in all periods until bunching has fully dissipated (in a way that depends on
the earnings distribution, the elasticity, and the size of the tax change). Finally, a higher "
will correspond to a larger amount of bunching once bunching has had time to adjust fully to
the policy changes. Intuitively, these features of the data help us to identify the parameters
using our dynamic model.
In our baseline, we use a non-parametric density for the counterfactual earnings distribution, H0 . Once H0 is known, in the comparative static model we use (4) and (6) to obtain
predicted bunching from the model. To recover H0 non-parametrically we use the empirical
earnings distribution for 72 year-olds in $800 bins as the counterfactual distribution. 72
year-olds’ earnings density represents a reasonable counterfactual because they no longer
face the Earnings Test, no longer show bunching, and are close in age to those aged 70 or
71.11
Our estimator assumes a quasilinear utility function, u(c; z; a) = c

a
1+1="

z 1+1="
,
a

as

in previous literature. Without the quasi-linearity assumption, there are income e¤ects on
labor supply. To estimate the parameters of the model, we would need additional parametric
assumptions, as well as additional data: in a static model we would need individual-level data
on unearned income, and in a lifecycle earnings supply model we would need data on lifetime
wealth including assets (Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999). We do not have data on unearned
income or assets, though these may be available in other applications. Given such data, our
1 1 Because we use the age-72 density as our counterfactual density, our method is not subject to the Blomquist and Newey
(2017) point that preference heterogeneity cannot be simultaneously estimated with the taxable income elasticity.

19

estimates of the parameters could be performed with two moments under any one-parameter
utility function that satis…es the single-crossing property, which will generate a unique cuto¤
level of counterfactual earnings above which individuals adjust to the kink. With an nparameter utility function, we would require n + 1 moments. Assuming that unearned
income is not changing over time across counterfactual earnings levels due to factors other
than the Earnings Test, the estimated elasticity in the comparative static model will be a
weighted average of the compensated and uncompensated elasticity (Kleven 2016, footnote
5).12
For each bootstrap sample, generated using the procedure of Chetty et al. (2011), we
compute the estimated values of the parameters. We determine whether an estimate of
the adjustment cost ^ is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero by assessing how frequently the
constraint

0 binds in our estimation. In Appendix A.4 we demonstrate identi…cation

more formally.

7

Estimates of Elasticity and Adjustment Cost

7.1

Estimates using the Comparative Static Method

To estimate " and

using our “comparative static”method, we …rst examine the reduction

in the rate in 1990 as a baseline and next turn to the elimination of the Earnings Test at
ages 70 and older. No other key policy changes occurred in 1990 that would have materially
a¤ected bunching near the kink.
Figure 7 shows the patterns driving the parameter estimates for the 1990 change. Figure
7 shows bunching among 66-68 year-olds, for whom the bene…t reduction rate fell from 50
percent to 33.33 percent in 1990. Bunching fell negligibly from 1989 to 1990 but fell more
subsequent to 1990.
Table 2 presents estimates of our static model, examining 66-68 year-olds in 1989 and
1990. We estimate an elasticity of 0.35 and an adjustment cost of $278, both signi…cantly different from zero (p < 0:01). This estimated adjustment cost represents the cost of adjusting
1 2 Assuming that leisure is a normal good— so that increases in unearned income decreases earnings— the implied compensated
elasticity will be larger than the observed policy elasticity (Hendren 2016). The presence of income e¤ects would have an
ambiguous e¤ect on the magnitude of our estimated adjustment costs. In our dynamic model, the income e¤ects would add a
savings decision and a new state variable, assets, unless we continue to assume myopia.

20

earnings in the …rst year after the policy change.
When we constrain the adjustment cost to zero using 1990 data in Column (3), as most
previous literature has implicitly done, we estimate a substantially larger elasticity of 0.58.
Consistent with our discussion above, the estimated elasticity is higher when we do not
allow for adjustment costs than when we do, because adjustment costs keep individuals
bunching at the kink even though tax rates have fallen. The di¤erence in the constrained and
unconstrained estimates of the elasticity is substantial — 66 percent higher in the constrained
case — and statistically signi…cant (p < 0:01). Similarly, when we apply the frictionless Saez
method over the years 1982 to 1993 (excluding the transitional year of 1990), the average
elasticity we estimate is 0.19 (p < 0:01) — just over half our baseline elasticity — because
adjustment frictions attenuate the degree of bunching and elasticity estimate.
Other speci…cations in Table 2 show similar results. We adjust the marginal tax rate to
take account of bene…t enhancement, following the calculations of the e¤ective Social Security
tax rate net of bene…t enhancement in Coile and Gruber (2001). This raises the estimated
elasticity but yields similar qualitative patterns across the constrained and unconstrained
estimates. The next rows show that our estimates are similar under other speci…cations:
excluding FICA taxes from the baseline tax rate; using a locally uniform density; other
bandwidths; and other years of analysis.
Returning to the baseline speci…cation, the point estimates in Appendix Table B.3 show
that across groups, elasticities tend to be similar, but women have higher adjustment costs
than men, those with low prior lifetime real earnings have higher adjustment costs than
those with high prior earnings, and those with high and low volatility of prior earnings have
similar adjustment costs. In Appendix Table B.4 we …nd similar results when we apply our
method to the 1990 policy change but allow individuals to be initially located away from
their frictionless optimum, as described above and in Appendix A.3.
We believe that three factors make the identi…cation strategy in Table 2 credible. First,
Figure 7 shows that in a “control group” of 62-64 year-olds who do not experience a policy
change in 1990, bunching is very stable in the years before and after 1990, suggesting that the
66-68 year-old group will be su¢ cient to pick up changes in bunching due to the policy change.
Appendix Table B.5 veri…es that in a “di¤erences-in-di¤erences speci…cation”comparing 6621

68 year-olds to 62-64 year-olds, bunching among 66-68 year-olds falls insigni…cantly in 1990
relative to before 1990, bunching is signi…cantly smaller among 66-68 year-olds in years after
1990, and these estimates are very similar to the time series estimates comparing only 66-68
year-olds over time.
Second, Figure 8 shows that the elasticity we estimate among 66-68 year-olds using
the frictionless Saez (2010) method shows a sudden upward spike in bunching in 1990 but
subsequently reverts to near its previous level. This relates directly to our theory, which
predicts that following a reduction in the change in the marginal tax rate at the kink, there
may be excess bunching due to inertia re‡ected in area iv in Figure 6, Panel B. Once we
allow for an adjustment cost, this excess bunching is attributed to optimization frictions.
Third, Table 3 shows comparable evidence of frictions when we examine the removal
of the kink at age 70 (pooling years 1990-1999). When comparing adjustment at age 70
to adjustment in 1990, a key pattern consistent with our model is that the decrease in
normalized excess mass from 1989 to 1990 in Figure 7 is much smaller in absolute and
percentage terms than the decrease in normalized excess mass from age 69 to age 70 in
Figure 2 Panel B. With an adjustment cost preventing immediate adjustment, normalized
excess mass should fall less when the jump in marginal tax rates at the kink falls less (in the
change from a 50 percent to a 33.33 percent bene…t reduction rate in 1990) than when the
jump in marginal tax rates at the kink falls more (in the change from a 33.33 percent to a
0 percent bene…t reduction rate at age 70). Table 4 shows that we estimate similar results
when we pool data from the ages 69 to 71 transition with the 1989 to 1990 transition.
Our estimates of elasticities and adjustment costs, and our earlier descriptive evidence
documenting the speed of adjustment, are local to the population that is observed bunching
at the kinks. Local estimates are a general feature of quasi-experimental settings. With
enough variation in the location of kinks, the set of bunchers— and the resulting parameter
estimates— could in principle jointly cover much of the earnings distribution and population.
With respect to external validity in our speci…c context, it is encouraging that the local
parameter estimates are similar in both the context of the change in the bene…t reduction
rate in 1990 from 50 percent to 33.33 percent, and the change at age 70 from 33.33 percent
to zero percent.
22

7.2

Estimates using the Dynamic Method

Table 5 shows the estimates of the dynamic model. There are several parameters to estimate—
", , and the vector of observed

t t

’s— but a limited number of years in the data with useful

variation: bunching varies little from year to year prior to the policy changes in 1990 or at
age 70, and bunching fully dissipates by at most three years after the policy changes. So
that we have a su¢ cient number of moments to estimate the parameters, as in Table 4 we
pool data on bunching from 1990 to 1999 at ages 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, and 72, with data on
bunching among 66-68 year-olds in 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, and 1992. This gives us
twelve moments (six moments for each of two policy changes) with which to estimate seven
parameters (", ,

1,

1 2,

1 2 3,

We estimate " = 0:36 and

1 2 3 4,

and

1 2 3 4 5 ).

= $243 in the baseline dynamic speci…cation. The estimates

of " are remarkably similar under the static and dynamic models applied to comparable data
in Tables 4 and 5, respectively. The estimates of
estimate of

1

are also in the same range. The point

varies across speci…cations from 0.64 in the baseline to 1, indicating that a

minority of individuals are able to adjust in the year of the policy change. This mirrors our
earlier …nding that while some individuals adjust in the year of a policy change, many do not.
The point estimate of

1 2

varies across speci…cations from 0.00 to 0.47, indicating that a

majority of individuals are able to adjust by the year following a policy change. This mirrors
our earlier …nding that substantial adjustment occurs with a lag. In all speci…cations,

1 2 3

is estimated to be zero, indicating that individuals are fully able to adjust by the third year
after a policy change. This mirrors our earlier …nding that adjustment fully occurs by three
years after the policy change.
Given our estimates of the

j ’s,

it makes sense that we estimate comparable results from

the static and dynamic models. If hypothetically adjustment were completely constrained in
years 1 and 2 after the policy change and subsequently completely unconstrained, then we
should estimate essentially identical results in the static and dynamic models because the
static model e¤ectively assumes that the only barrier to adjustment is the adjustment cost
— similar to assuming that

j

= 1 for the periods over which adjustment is estimated. The

estimates of the dynamic model are not very di¤erent from this hypothetical scenario:

23

1

is

well over 50 percent, and

8

1 2

is substantial but under 50 percent.

Simulations of the E¤ect of Policy Changes

Our parameter estimates imply that incorporating adjustment costs into the analysis can
have important implications for predicting the short-run impact of policy changes on earnings, as policy-makers often seek to do. In particular, the adjustment costs we estimate
greatly attenuate the predicted short-run impact of policy changes on earnings.
We use our estimates of the static model, using the year before through the year after a
policy change as in our baseline, to simulate the e¤ect in our data of two illustrative policy
changes. Details are provided in Appendix A.6 and Appendix Table B.6. Reducing the
marginal tax rate above the kink by 50 percentage points— as could be implied by a policy
like eliminating the Earnings Test for 62-64 year-olds— would cause a large, 23.4 percent rise
in earnings at the intensive margin. However, a less large change— in particular, any cut in
the marginal tax rate above the exempt amount of 17.22 percentage points or smaller— would
cause no change in earnings within a one-year time horizon because the potential gains from
adjusting are not large enough to overcome the adjustment cost.
This illustrates a principle: because the gains to relocation are second-order near the
kink, even a modest adjustment cost around $280 can prevent adjustment in the short
run— and even following a substantial cut in marginal tax rates. Moreover, the lack of
immediate response predicted with a change of 17.22 percentage points makes sense in light
of the empirical patterns we observe, in particular the negligible change in bunching seen
in the data from 1989 to 1990 when the marginal tax rate falls by 17 percentage points.
Similarly, this sheds light on why our estimated adjustment cost is small despite signi…cant
attenuation. The Appendix shows this conclusion is robust to other assumptions. Under
our estimates of the dynamic model we would still …nd that the short-run reaction even to
large taxes changes is greatly attenuated, since the dynamic model estimates show that most
individuals are constrained from adjusting immediately.

24

9

Conclusion

We introduce a method for documenting adjustment frictions: examining the speed of adjustment to the disappearance of convex kinks in the e¤ective tax schedule. We document
delays in earnings adjustment to large changes in the Social Security Earnings Test. The
lack of immediate response suggests that the short-run impact of changes in the e¤ective
marginal tax rate can be substantially attenuated, even with large policy changes.
Next, we develop a method to estimate earnings elasticities and adjustment costs relying
on bunching at convex budget set kinks. Examining data in the year of a policy change,
we estimate that the elasticity is 0.35 and the adjustment cost is around $280. When we
estimate a frictionless model with zero adjustment cost, the elasticity is quite di¤erent. We
extend our methods to a dynamic context and estimate that full adjustment takes three
years.
Even modest …xed adjustment costs— like the $280 cost we estimate in our baseline— can
greatly impede short-run adjustment to large reforms because the costs of deviating from the
frictionless optimum are second order. Our simulations con…rm that adjustment costs can
make a dramatic di¤erence in the predictions. This could frustrate the goal of immediately
impacting short-run earnings, as envisioned in many recent policy discussions, and could
have important implications for policy-makers’projections of the magnitude and timing of
the earnings reaction to changes in tax and transfer policies.
We …nd bunching among wage earners, whereas previous studies in the U.S. have found
substantial earnings bunching only among the self-employed (Saez 2010, Chetty, Friedman,
and Saez 2013). Our study suggests a possible reason for this: adjustment costs can imply
that only large kinks should generate bunching, at least before individuals have an opportunity to adjust. Our results could be uncovering a positive and substantial labor supply
elasticity that can be obscured in other contexts, in which kinks are usually smaller. It
is also possible that elasticities are larger, that adjustment costs are smaller, or that the
time needed to make an adjustment is shorter in our context than in others. Bunching does
occur in many settings, and our method can be, and has been, used in such settings, both
within and outside the labor supply context (He, Peng, and Wang, 2016; Schächtele 2016;

25

Mortenson et al. 2017; Gudgeon and Trenkle, 2016; Zaresani, 2016).
Further analysis could enrich our …ndings. First, further work distinguishing among the
possible reasons for reaction to the Earnings Test, including misperceptions, remains an
important issue, as is understanding the mechanisms that underlie adjustment costs. Our
graphs show that more individuals “bunch” under the exempt amount than over it; it is
worth investigating whether this relates to mis-perceptions of the Earnings Test. Second, if
labor supply adjustments are sluggish more broadly, then it would be interesting to study
whether forecasters such as the Congressional Budget O¢ ce systematically over-estimate
the near-term employment and revenue e¤ects of changes in e¤ective tax rates. Third,
most empirical speci…cations have related an individual’s tax rate in a given year to the
individual’s earnings in that year. Our methods and …ndings could be used in selecting the
time horizon for estimating responses to policy. If our results on the speed of adjustment
generalize, this would also suggest that relatively short time frames can capture long-run
responses. Investigating the speed of adjustment in other contexts would be valuable.
Finally, kinked budget sets are common across a wide variety of economic applications,
including electricity demand (e.g. Ito, 2014), health insurance (e.g. Einav, Finkelstein, and
Schrimpf, 2015), and retirement savings (e.g. Bernheim, Fradkin, and Popov, 2015). Our
method could be adapted to estimate elasticities and adjustment frictions in the context of
other consumption decisions.

References
Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (1994), “A Uni…ed Model of Investment Under Uncertainty,”
American Economic Review, 84, 1369-1384.
Abowd, J. M., B. E. Stephens, L. Vilhuber, F. Andersson, K. L. McKinney, M.
Roemer, and S. Woodcock (2009), “The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the
Quarterly Workforce Indicators.”In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, 149–230,
University of Chicago Press.
Altonji, J. G. and C. H. Paxson (1988), “Labor Supply Preferences, Hours Constraints,
and Hours-Wage Trade-O¤s,” Journal of Labor Economics, 6, 254-276.
Arrow, K., T. Harris and J. Marschak (1951), “Optimal Inventory Policy,”Econometrica,
19, 205-272.
Bernheim, B. D., A. Fradkin, and I. Popov (forthcoming), “The Welfare Economics of
Default Options in 401(k) Plans,” American Economic Review.
Baumol, W. J. (1952), “The Transactions Demand for Cash,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 66, 545-556.

26

Blomquist, S., and W. Newey (2017), “The Bunching Estimator Cannot Identify the Taxable Income Elasticity.” MIT working paper.
Blundell, R., and T. MaCurdy (1999), “Labor Supply.” In Handbook of Labor Economics,
vol. 3, Elsevier.
Brown, J., A. Kapteyn, O. Mitchell, and T. Mattox (2013), “Framing the Social Security
Earnings Test,” Wharton Pension Research Council Working Paper 2013-06.
Burtless, G. and R. A. Mo¢ tt (1985), “The Joint Choice of Retirement Age and Postretirement Hours of Work,” Journal of Labor Economics, 3, 209–236.
Calvo, G. (1983), “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,”Journal of Monetary
Economics, 12, 383-398.
Chetty, R. (2012), “Bounds on Elasticities With Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 80, 969–1018.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, T. Olsen, and L. Pistaferri (2011), “Adjustment Costs, Firm
Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 749-804.
Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2012), “Does Indivisible Labor Explain the Di¤erence Between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin
Elasticities.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012, vol. 27, University of Chicago Press.
Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2007), “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 13330.
Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2009), “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 99, 1145–1177.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and E. Saez (2013), “Using Di¤erences in Knowledge Across
Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings,” American Economic Review,
103, 2683-2721.
Coile, C., and J. Gruber (2001), “Social security incentives for retirement.” In Themes in
the Economics of Aging (David Wise, ed.), 311-354, University of Chicago Press.
Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2009), “Estimated Macroeconomic Impacts of the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.” Washington, D.C.: Government Printing O¢ ce.
Diamond, P., and J. Gruber (1999), “Social Security and Retirement in the United States.”
In Social Security and Retirement around the World (Jonathan Gruber and David Wise, eds.), 437473, University of Chicago Press.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2015), “The Response of Drug Expenditure
to Nonlinear Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
130(2), 841-899.
Engelhardt, G., and A. Kumar (2014), “Taxes and the Labor Supply of Older Americans:
Recent Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test,” National Tax Journal, 67(2), 443-458.
Feenberg, D., and E. Coutts (1993), “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model,”Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 12, 189-194.
Friedman, M. (1953), Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedberg, L. (1998), “The Social Security earnings test and labor supply of older men.” In
Tax Policy and the Economy (James M. Poterba, ed.), 121–150, University of Chicago Press.
Friedberg, L. (2000), “The Labor Supply E¤ects of the Social Security Earnings Test,”Review
of Economics and Statistics, 82, 48–63.
Garicano, L., C. Lelarge, and J. Van Reenen (2016), “Firm Size Distortions and the
Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France,” American Economic Review, 106(11), 3439-79.

27

Gelber, A., D. Jones, and D. Sacks (2013), “Earnings Adjustment Frictions: Evidence
from the Social Security Earnings Test,” NBER Working Paper 19491.
Grossman, S. and G. Laroque (1990), “Asset pricing and optimal portfolio choice in the
presence of illiquid durable consumption goods,” Econometrica, 58, 25-51.
Gruber, J. and D. Wise (1999), “Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the
World: Introduction and Summary.” In Social Security and Retirement Around the World, J.
Gruber and D. Wise, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1-36.
Gruber, J. and P. Orszag (2003), “Does the Social Security Earnings Test A¤ect Labor
Supply and Bene…ts Receipt?” National Tax Journal, 56, 755–773.
Gudgeon, M., and S. Trenkle (2016), “Frictions in Adjusting Earnings: Evidence from
Notches in German Mini Jobs,” Boston University Working Paper.
Hausman, J. A. (1981), “Labor Supply.”In How Taxes A¤ ect Economic Behavior (Henry J.
Aaron and Joseph A. Pechman, eds.), 27–71, Brookings Institution.
He, D., L. Peng, and X. Wang (2016), “Understanding China’s Personal Income Tax,”
UCSD Working Paper.
Hoopes, J., D. Reck, and J. Slemrod (2015), “Taxpayer Search for Information: Implications for Rational Attention,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7, 177-208.
Kleven, H. (2016), “Bunching,” Annual Review of Economics, 8, 435-464.
Kleven, H., M. Knudsen, C. Kreiner, S. Pedersen, and E. Saez (2011), “Unwilling or
Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark,”Econometrica, 79, 651-692.
Kleven, H., C. Landais, E. Saez, and E. Schultz (2014), “Migration and Wage E¤ects of
Taxing Top Earners: Evidence from the Foreigners’Tax Scheme in Denmark,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 129, 333-378.
Kleven, H. and M. Waseem (2013), “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frictions and
Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128,
669-723.
Kline, P., and C. Walters (2016), “Evaluating Public Programs with Close Substitutes: The
Case of Head Start,” forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Leahy, J. (2008), “s-S Models.”In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Second Edition
(Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume, eds.), Palgrave MacMillan.
Liebman, J., and E. F. P. Luttmer (2012), “The Perception of Social Security Incentives
for Labor Supply and Retirement: The Median Voter Knows More Than You’d Think.” In Tax
Policy and the Economy 26, 1-42.
Mortenson, J., H. Schramm, and A. Whitten (2017), “The E¤ects of Required Minimum
Distribution Rules on Withdrawals from Traditional IRAs.”Joint Committee on Taxation working
paper.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2010), “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multisector Menu
Cost Model,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 961-1013.
Newey, W., and D. McFadden (1994), “Large Sample Estimation and Hypothesis Testing.”
In R.F. Engle and D. McFadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 4.
Saez, E. (2010), “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2, 180–212.
Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. H. Giertz (2012), “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with
Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50, 3–50.
Schächtele, S. (2016). “Deduction Responses to the Income Tax: Bunching Evidence from
Germany,”Beiträge zur Jahrestagung des Vereins für Socialpolitik 2016: Demographischer Wandel
- Session: Tax Responses, No. E10-V2.

28

Simon, H. A. (1955), “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99–118.
Sheshinski, E. and Y. Weiss (1977), “In‡ation and the cost of price adjustment,” Review
of Economic Studies, 44, 287-303.
Social Security Administration (2012a), Annual Statistical Supplement. Washington, D.C.
Social Security Administration (2012b), Social Security Handbook. Washington, D.C.
Song, J. G. and J. Manchester (2007), “New evidence on earnings and bene…t claims
following changes in the retirement earnings test in 2000,” Journal of Public Economics, 91, 669–
700.
Stokey, N. (2008), The Economics of Inaction, Princeton University Press.
Zaresani, A. (2016), “Adjustment Costs and Incentives to Work: Evidence from a Disability
Insurance Program.” University of Calgary working paper.

Figure 1: Key Earnings Test Rules, 1961-2009

Notes: The right vertical axis measures the bene…t reduction rate in Social Security payments for every dollar earned beyond
the exempt amount. The left vertical axis measures the real value of the exempt amount over time.

29

Figure 2: Earnings Histograms and Normalized Excess Mass by Age
A. Histograms by Age

B. Normalized Excess Mass by Age

Notes: The sample is a one percent random sample of all Social Security numbers, among individuals who claim Social
Security bene…ts by age 65, over calendar years 1990 to 1999. We exclude person-years with self-employment income or with
zero non-self-employment earnings. The bin width is $800. In Panel A, the earnings level zero, shown by the vertical lines,
denotes the kink. The dots show the histograms using the raw data, and the polynomial curves show the estimated
counterfactual densities estimated using data away from the kink. Panel B shows normalized bunching at the Earnings Test
kink, calculated as described in Section 3. Dashed lines denote 95% con…dence intervals. The vertical lines show the ages at
which the Earnings Test …rst applies (62) and ceases to apply (70). For ages younger than 62 (70 and older), we de…ne the
“placebo” kink in a given year as the kink that applies to pre-Normal Retirement Age (post-NRA) claimants in that year.

30

Figure 3: Mean Percentage Change in Earnings from Age t to t+1, by Earnings at Age t,
1990-1998
A. Growth from Age 69 to 70

B. Growth from Age 70 to 71

Notes: The …gure shows the mean percentage change in earnings from age t to age t (y-axis), against earnings at age t
(x-axis). In Panel A, t=69, and in Panel B, t=70. Dashed lines denote 95 percent con…dence intervals. Earnings are measured
relative to the kink, shown at zero on the x-axis. The data are a 20 percent random sample of 69-year-olds in the LEHD in
1990-1998. We exclude 1999 as a base year in this and similar graphs because the Earnings Test is eliminated for those older
than Normal Retirement Age in 2000. Higher earnings growth far below the kink re‡ects mean reversion visible in this part of
the earnings distribution at all ages.

31

Figure 4: Normalized Excess Mass of Claimants, Ages 69 to 72, 1983 to 1999

Note: See notes from Figure 2. Panel A of this …gure di¤ers from Figure 2 because here we pool 1983 to 1999 to gain extra
statistical power. The continued bunching at age 71 is more evident. In the main sample, we pool only 1990 to 1999 because
the bene…t reduction rate was constant over this period, avoiding issues relating to the transition to a lower rate in 1990.
Panel B of the …gure shows normalized excess mass by age, demonstrating that excess normalized mass remains signi…cant
until age 71 and smoothly decreases from age 69 to age 72.

32

Figure 5: Inertia in Bunching from 69 to 70 and 71

Notes: Using data from 1990 to 1999, the …gure shows that those bunching at age 69 tend to remain near the kink at ages 70
and 71, and that those bunching at ages 70 and 71 were also bunching at age 69. Speci…cally, the …gure shows the density of
earnings at age 69 conditional on having earnings near the kink at age 70 (Panel A), the density of earnings at age 69
conditional on having earnings near the kink at age 71 (Panel B), the density of earnings at age 70 conditional on having
earnings near the kink at age 69 (Panel C), and the density of earnings at age 71 conditional on having earnings near the kink
at age 69 (Panel D). Having earnings “near the kink” is de…ned as having earnings within $1,000 of the exempt amount
applying to that age. See also notes from Figure B.1.

33

Figure 6: Bunching Responses to a Convex Kink, with Fixed Adjustment Costs

Note: See Section 6 for an explanation of the …gures.

34

Figure 7: Comparison of Normalized Excess Mass Among 62-64 Year-Olds and 66-68
Year-Olds, 1982-1993

Notes: The …gure shows normalized bunching among 62-64 year-olds and 66-68 year-olds in each year from 1982 to 1993.
See other notes from Figure 2.

Figure 8: Elasticity Estimates by Year, Saez (2010) Method, 1982-1993

Notes: The …gure shows elasticities estimated using the Saez (2010) method, by year from 1982 to 1993, among 66-68
year-old Social Security claimants. Dashed lines denote 95 percent con…dence intervals. We use our methods for estimating
normalized excess mass but use Saez’(2010) formula
to calculate
h
i elasticities, under a constant density. This method yields the
1 0
b
following formula: " = log
+1
log 1 1 .
z

35

Table 1: Summary Statistics, Social Security Administration Master Earnings File
Ages 62-69
Mean Earnings

10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

Percentile
Percentile
Percentile
Percentile
Percentile

28,892.63
(78,842.99)
1,193.64
5,887.75
14,555.56
35,073.00
64,647.40

Fraction Male

0.57

Observations

376,431

Notes: The data are taken from a one percent random sample of the SSA Master Earnings File and Master Bene…ciary
Record. The data cover those in 1990-1999 who are aged 62-69, claim by age 65, do not report self-employment earnings, and
have positive earnings. Earnings are expressed in 2010 dollars. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations.

36

Table 2: Estimates of Elasticity and Adjustment Cost: Variation Around 1990 Policy
Change
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
"
Baseline

0.35
[0.31, 0.43]***
Uniform Density
0.21
[0.18, 0.24]***
Bene…t Enhancement
0.58
[0.50, 0.72]***
Excluding FICA
0.49
[0.44, 0.59]***
Bandwidth = $400
0.45
[0.36, 0.58]***
Bandwidth = $1,600
0.33
[0.29, 0.43]***

"j = 0
$278
[58, 391]***
$162
[55, 211]***
$151
[17, 226]***
$318
[60, 364]***
$103
[0, 478]*
$251
[34, 407]***

1990

1989

0.58
[0.45, 0.73]***
0.36
[0.30, 0.43]***
0.87
[0.69, 1.11]***
0.74
[0.58, 0.94]***
0.62
[0.47, 0.81]***
0.55
[0.43, 0.72]***

0.31
[0.24, 0.39]***
0.19
[0.16, 0.23]***
0.52
[0.41, 0.66]***
0.42
[0.33, 0.54]***
0.43
[0.32, 0.56]***
0.30
[0.23, 0.40]***

Notes: The table shows estimates of the elasticity and adjustment cost using the method described in Section 6.2, investigating the 1990 reduction in the Earnings Test bene…t reduction rate from 50 percent to 33.33 percent. This is our baseline
because it facilitates a comparison of our estimates to the Saez (2010) method. We report bootstrapped 95 percent con…dence
intervals in parentheses. The baseline speci…cation uses a nonparametric density taken from the age 72 earnings distribution,
calculates the e¤ective marginal tax rate by including the e¤ects of the Earnings Test and federal and state income and FICA
taxes, uses data from 1989 and 1990, and calculates bunching using a bin width of $800. The estimates that include bene…t
enhancement use e¤ective marginal tax rates due to the Earnings Test based on the authors’calculations relying on Coile and
Gruber (2001) (assuming that individuals are considering earning just enough to trigger bene…t enhancement), which imply the
bene…t reduction rate falls from 36% to 24% due to the 1990 policy change. Columns (1) and (2) report joint estimates with

0 imposed (consistent with theory), while Columns (3) and (4) impose the restriction

= 0.

The constrained estimate

in Column (3) only uses data from 1990, Column (4) uses only data from 1989. *** indicates that the left endpoint of the 99%
con…dence interval (CI) is greater than zero, ** the 95% CI and * the 90% CI.

37

Table 3: Estimates of Elasticity and Adjustment Cost: Disappearance of Kink at Age 70
(1)
(2)
(3)
"j = 0, Age 69

"
Baseline

0.42
$90
[0.35, 0.53]*** [20, 349]***
Uniform Density
0.28
$90
[0.24, 0.33]*** [21, 238]***
Bene…t Enhancement
0.62
$59
[0.53, 0.77]*** [13, 205]***
Excluding FICA
0.53
$83
[0.45, 0.66]*** [19, 305]***
Bandwidth = $400
0.39
$62
[0.31, 0.48]*** [25, 133]***
Bandwidth = $1,600
0.45
$100
[0.37, 0.56]*** [20, 444]***
68-70 year-olds
0.44
$42
[0.38, 0.58]*** [0.49, 267]**
69, 71 year-olds
0.45
$175
[0.36, 0.86]*** [30, 1053]***
Born January-March
0.48
$86
[0.36, 0.76]*** [10, 1008]***

0.38
[0.32, 0.47]***
0.25
[0.22, 0.30]***
0.58
[0.49, 0.71]***
0.49
[0.42, 0.61]***
0.36
[0.28, 0.45]***
0.41
[0.33, 0.49]***
0.43
[0.37, 0.50]***
0.38
[0.32, 0.47]***
0.49
[0.37, 0.71]***

Notes: The table estimates parameters using the removal of the Earnings Test at age 70, using data on 69-71 year-olds in
1990-1999. The estimates of bunching at age 70 are potentially a¤ected by the coarse measure of age that we use, as explained
in the main text. Thus, we use both age 70 and age 71 in estimating these results, and alternatively use only ages 69 and 71,
which shows very similar results. The …nal row shows the results only for those born in January to March, again to address
this issue. For this sample, we pool 1983-1989 and 1990-1999 (accounting for the di¤erent bene…t reduction rates in each
period) to maximize statistical power. See also notes from Table 2.

38

Table 4: Estimates of Elasticity and Adjustment Cost: Pooling 69/70 Transition and
1989/1990 Transition
(1)

(2)

"
Baseline

0.39
[0.34, 0.46]***
Uniform Density
0.22
[0.20, 0.25]***
Bene…t Enhancement
0.62
[0.55, 0.75]***
Excluding FICA
0.41
[0.37, 0.56]***
Bandwidth = $400
0.46
[0.39, 0.56]***
Bandwidth = $1,600
0.37
[0.32, 0.45]***

$160
[59, 362]***
$105
[47, 185]***
$100
[33, 211]***
$67
[9, 192]***
$94
[25, 399]***
$135
[43, 299]***

Notes: This table implements our “comparative static” method, applied to pooled data from two policy changes: (1) around
the 1989/1990 transition analyzed in Table 2, and (2) around the age 69/70 transition analyzed in Table 3. The table shows
extremely similar results to the dynamic speci…cation in Table 5, where we also pool data from around these two policy
changes. See also notes from Tables 2 and 3.

39

40

$243
[34, 671]***
$81
[31, 183]***
$53
[18, 169]***
$55
[9, 165]***
$74
[20, 271]***
$99
[19, 401]***

1 2

1 2 3

1,

2,

3,

4 , or

1 2 3 4 and

1 2 3 4 5 are

only the 1989/1990 or 69/70 policy changes alone using the dynamic speci…cation (results available upon request). *** indicates p<0.01;**p<0.05; * p<0.10.

always estimated to 0.00, with a con…dence interval that rules out more than a small value (results available upon request). The results are comparable when we investigate

di¤erent from zero, even though the reported point estimates are 0.00, because the point estimates are positive but round to zero.

1 2 3 are statistically signi…cantly

5 equals zero, none of the subsequent probabilities is identi…ed. The model is estimated by matching predicted and observed bunching, using

bunching on 66-68 year-olds (pooled) for each year 1987-1992, and bunching on 1990-1999 (pooled) for each age 67-72. Estimates of

of

cost

, and the cumulative probability in each period t of having drawn t > 0 for each period following the policy change, i.e. 1 as well as 1 2 . 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and
are
not all separately identi…ed; only the cumulative probabilities are identi…ed, i.e. 1 , 1 2 , 1 2 3 , 1 2 3 4 , and 1 2 3 4 5 . The reason is that once one
5

", the adjustment

0.64
0.22
0.00
[0.39, 1.00]***
[0.00, 0.94]*
[0.00, 0.14]*
1.00
0.31
0.00
[0.72, 1.00]*** [0.00, 0.92]*** [0.00, 0.16]***
1.00
0.37
0.00
[0.76, 1.00]*** [0.00, 1.00]*** [0.00, 0.084]***
1.00
0.00
0.00
[1.00, 1.00]*** [0.00, 0.00]*** [0.00, 0.00]***
1.00
0.47
0.00
[0.74, 1.00]*** [0.094, 0.94]*** [0.00, 0.20]***
0.88
0.52
0.00
[0.40, 1.00]*** [0.043, 1.00]*** [0.00, 0.071]***

1

(5)

Notes: The table shows estimates of the elasticity and adjustment cost using the dynamic method described in Section 7. The table reports the elasticity

0.36
[0.34, 0.40]***
Uniform Density
0.21
[0.20, 0.23]***
Bene…t Enhancement
0.59
[0.54, 0.64]***
Excluding FICA
0.40
[0.37, 0.43]***
Bandwidth = $400
0.40
[0.36, 0.44]***
Bandwidth = $1,600
0.36
[0.34, 0.39]***

Baseline

"

Table 5: Estimates of Elasticity and Adjustment Cost Using Dynamic Model
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

A
A.0.1

Appendix (for online publication)
Polynomial Adjustment Costs

We now extend the adjustment cost to encompass a polynomial adjustment cost, allowing for
greater generality than a …xed cost. We begin with an adjustment cost that increases linearly
in the size of the adjustment, which illustrates how the method generalizes for higher-order
polynomials. Assume that given an initial level of earnings z0 , agents must pay a cost of
jz z0 j when they change their earnings to a new level z. Utility u~ at the new earnings
level can be represented as:
jz

u~ (c; z; n; z0 ) = u (c; z; n)

z0 j :

The …rst order condition for earnings can be characterized as:
uz (c; z; n)
= (1
uc (c; z; n)
=

sgn (z

=
(1
(1

z0 ))

) if z > z0
;
+ ) if z < z0

where
= uc (c ; z ; n) is the Lagrange multiplier and = = is the dollar equivalent of
the linear adjustment cost .
The individual chooses earnings as if he faces an e¤ective marginal tax rate of ~ =
+ sgn(z z0 ). It follows that our predictions about earnings adjustment are similar to
our previous predictions, except that the e¤ective marginal tax rate ~ appears, rather than
. Thus, we can solve for the elasticity of earnings as a function of the change in earnings
4z due to introduction of a kink in the tax schedule and the jump in marginal tax rate
d 1:
4z =z
d~1 = (1 ~0 )
4z =z
=
(d 1 2 ) = (1

" =

0

)

:

Since the right-hand side is increasing in , the estimate of the elasticity increases as the
linear adjustment cost increases. This makes intuitive sense: the adjustment cost attenuates
bunching, so holding constant the level of bunching, the elasticity must be higher as the
adjustment cost increases.
Now assume that when an individual adjusts his earnings, he incurs a linear adjustment
cost L for every unit of change in earnings, as well as a …xed cost F associated with any
change in earnings. Consider again bunching at z , with a tax rate jump of d 1 = 1
0

41

at earnings level z . We have the following set of expressions for excess mass:
Z z +4z
B =
h0 ( ) d
z

" =
F

+

L

(z

d

4z =z
= 1
2
L

1

z ) = u (1

1) z

0
0

+ R ;z ;n

L

u (1

1) z

0

+ R ; z; n :

In this case, we need at least three kinks to separately identify "; F ; L . A similar argument generalizes this to the case of any polynomial adjustment cost: for a polynomial
adjustment cost of order n, we need n + 1 moments to identify these parameters as well as
the elasticity.

A.1

Dynamic Model with Forward-Looking Behavior

We present in this appendix a version of the dynamic model in Section 6.3 in which we
allow for forward-looking behavior. The key di¤erence in implications is that in addition
to a gradual, lagged response to policy changes, this version of the model also predicts
anticipatory adjustment by agents when policy changes are anticipated in advance. We
have essentially the same setting as in Section 6.3, except that we will alter three of the
assumptions. First, in each period, an individual draws a cost of adjustment, ~ t , from a
discrete distribution, which takes a value of with probability and a value of 0 with
probability 1
.13 Second, individuals make decisions over a …nite horizon, living until
Period T . In period 0, the individuals face a linear tax schedule, T0 (z) = 0 z, with marginal
tax rate 0 . In period 1, a kink, K1 , is introduced at the earnings level z . This tax schedule
is implemented for T1 periods, after which the tax schedule features a smaller kink, K2 , at
the earnings level z . The smaller kink is present until period T2 , after which we return to
the linear tax schedule, T0 . As before, the kink Kj , j 2 f1; 2g, features a top marginal tax
rate of j for earnings above z .14 Finally, in each period, individuals solve this maximization
problem:
max v (ca;t ; za;t ; a; za;t 1 ) + Va;t+1 (za;t ; Aa;t ) ;
(A.1)
(ca;t ;za;t )

where v (ca;t ; za;t ; a; za;t 1 ) u (ca;t ; za;t ; a) ~ t 1 (za;t 6= za;t 1 ),
Va;t+1 is the value function moving forward in Period t + 1:
Va;t+1 ( ; Aa;t ) = E

max

(ca;t+1 ;za;t+1 )

is the discount factor, and

v (ca;t+1 ; za;t+1 ; a; ) + Va;t+2 (za;t+1 ; Aa;t+1 ) :

(A.2)

Va;t+1 is a function of where the individual has chosen to earn in Period t and assets Aa;t . The
expectation E [ ] is taken over the distribution of ~ t . The intertemporal budget constraint
13

For expositional purposes, we constrain the probability
Q of drawing a jnonzero …xed costs to be in all
periods. Thus, the terms from Section 6.3 of the form
in this appendix. All results go
j simplify to
through with the more ‡exible distribution of adjustment costs in Section 6.3.
14
In Section 6.3, we do not specify time T2 , when the smaller kink, K2 , is removed, as it is not relevant to
the case where individuals are not forward-looking.

42

is:
Aa;t = (1 + r) (Aa;t

1

+ za;t

T (za;t )

ca;t ) :

(A.3)

We assume that (1 + r) = 1. Because individuals have quasilinear preferences, this
implies that consumption can be set to disposable income in each period: ca;t = za;t T (za;t ).
We therefore use the following shorthand:
uja (z) = u (z Tj (z) ; z; a)
Va;t (z) = Va;t (z; Aa;t 1 )

(A.4)

Next, we de…ne two operators that measure the utility gain (or loss) following a discrete
change in earnings:
4uja (z; z 0 ) = uja (z) uja (z 0 )
4Va;t (z; z 0 ) = Va;t (z) Va;t (z 0 )

(A.5)

In each case above, the utility and utility di¤erential depend on the tax schedule. We de…ne
zaj as the optimal level of earnings under a frictionless, static optimization problem, facing
the tax schedule Tj . We will refer to the frictionless, dynamic optimum in any given period
as z~a;t .15 This is the optimal level of earnings when there is a …xed cost of zero drawn in
the current period, but a nonzero …xed cost may be drawn in future periods. We will also
make a distinction between two types of earnings adjustments: active and passive. An active
earnings adjustment takes place in the presence of a nonzero …xed cost, while a passive
earnings adjustment takes place only when a …xed cost of zero is drawn. We solve the model
recursively, beginning in the regime after time T2 , when the smaller kink, K2 , has been
removed, continuing with the solution while the kink K2 is present between times T1 and T2 ,
and …nally considering the …rst regime when the kink K1 is present between time period 1
and T1 .16
A.1.1

Earnings between T2 and T

We will now derive the value function Va;T2 +1 (z). We begin with the following result: If an
individual with initial earnings z makes an active adjustment in period t > T2 + 1, then it
must be the case that
1 ( )T1 +1 t
4u0a za0 ; z
:
(A.6)
1
We demonstrate this result with a constructive proof, showing the result for periods
T and T
1. Because the tax schedule is constant throughout this terminal period, the
frictionless, dynamic optimum is equal to the static optimum: z~a;t = za0 . First, consider an
agent in period T , with initial earnings z, who is considering maintaining earnings at z or
paying the …xed cost and making an active adjustment to za0 , the frictionless, dynamic
15

In a model with no forward-looking behavior, zaj = z~a;t .
Our recursive method can be extended to the case of multiple, successive kinks. The e¤ect on bunching
of a sequence of more kinks depends on the relative size of the successive kinks.
16

43

optimum in period T . The agent will make the adjustment if:
4u0a za0 ; z

1
1

=

(A.7)

:

Rearranging terms, we have satis…ed the inequality in (A.6).
Now consider agents in period T 1 with initial earnings z. There are two types, those
who would make an active adjustment to za0 in period T if the earnings z are carried forward
and those who would not. Consider those who would not. If the agent remains with earnings
of z, then utility will be u0a (z) + Va;T (z) = u0a (z) + [ (u0a (z)) + (1
) u0a (za0 )]. If the
agent actively adjusts to za0 , then utility will be u0a (za0 )
+ u0a (za0 ). The agent will actively
adjust in period T 1 if:
4u0a za0 ; z

1
1+
1
=
1 (

)2

(A.8)

:

Once again, rearranging terms con…rms that (A.6) holds. Finally, consider agents who would
actively adjust from z to za0 if earnings level z is carried forward. In this case, the agent’s
utility when remaining at z is:
u0a (z) + Va;T (z) = u0a (z) +
= u0a (z) +

u0a za0

+ (1

u0a za0

) u0a za0

(A.9)

:

Intuitively, the agent will receive the optimal level of utility in the next period, and with
probability the agent will have to pay the …xed cost to achieve it. Similarly, the agent’s
+ u0a (za0 ). The agent will
utility after actively adjusting to za0 in period T 1 is u0a (za0 )
therefore adjust in period T if:
4u0a za0 ; z

(1

) :

(A.10)

However, we know from (A.7) that this already holds for the agent who actively adjusts in
period T . Finally, note that (A.7) implies (A.8). It follows that in period T 1, adjustment
implies (A.7). We can similarly show the result for earlier periods by considering separately:
(a) those who would actively adjust in the current period, but not in any future period; and
(b) those who would adjust in some future period. Both types will satisfy the key inequality.
As a corollary, note that if an individual with initial earnings z makes an active adjustment
in period t > T2 + 1, then she will also …nd it optimal to do so in any period t0 , where
T2 < t0 < t. To see this, note that if (A.6) holds for t, then it also holds for t0 < t. It follows
that the agent would also actively adjust in period t0 .
Now consider an agent who earns z in period T2 . Note that our results above imply
that any active adjustment that takes place after T2 will only happen in period T2 + 1.
These agents will receive a stream of discounted payo¤s of u0a (za0 ) for T
T2 periods, i.e.
44

PT

T2 1
j=0

j 0
ua

T

T2

(za0 ) = 1 1
u0a (za0 ), and pay a …xed cost of in period T2 with probability
. Otherwise, an agent will adjust to the dynamic frictionless optimum za0 only when a …xed
cost of zero is drawn. In the latter case, the agent receives a payo¤ of u0a (z) until a …xed
cost of zero is drawn, after which, the agent receives u0a (za0 ). We can therefore derive the
following value function:17
(
T T2
1 T T2 0
if 1 ( 1 )
ua (za0 )
4u0a (za0 ; z)
1
Va;T2 +1 (z) =
:
1 ( )T T2
1 T T2 0
0
0
0
u
(z
)
4u
(z
;
z)
otherwise
a
a
a
a
1
1
(A.11)
To gain some intuition for (A.6), note that the left side of (A.6) is the net present value
of the stream of the utility di¤erential once the agent adjusts from z to za0 . If this exceeds
the up-front cost of adjustment, , then the agent actively adjusts. The discount factor for
j periods in the future, however, is ( )j , instead of only j . The reason is that current
adjustment only a¤ects future utility j periods from now if j consecutive nonzero …xed costs
are drawn, which happens with probability j . To better understand our second result
t
regarding the timing of active changes, note that if the gains from adjustment over T
periods exceed the up-front cost, then the agent should also be willing to adjust in period
t0 < t and accrue T t0 periods of this gain, for the same up-front cost of .
A.1.2

Earnings between T1 and T2

We now derive the value function Va;T1 +1 (z). In this case, the dynamic frictionless optimum
in each period, z~a;t , is not constant. Intuitively, the agent trades o¤ the gains from adjusting
earnings in response to K2 with the e¤ect of this adjustment on the value function Va;T2 +1 .
In general, the optimum is de…ned as:
z~a;t = arg max
2 0

z2[za ;za ]

1

( )T2 +1
1

t

u2a (z) +

T2 +1 t T2 t

Va;T2 +1 (z) :

(A.12)

We restrict the maximization to the interval [za2 ; za0 ], since reducing earnings below za2 or
raising earnings above za0 weakly reduces utility in any current and all future periods for
t > T1 . From (A.11), we know that Va;T2 +1 is continuous, and thus the solution in (A.12)
exists.18 We present two results analogous to those in Section A.1.1, without proof. The
proofs, nearly identical to those in the previous section, are available upon request. First, if
an individual with initial earnings z makes an active adjustment in period t, T1 < t T2 ,
then:
1 ( )T2 +1 t
4u2a (~
za;t ; z) + T2 +1 t T2 t 4Va;T2 +1 (~
za;t ; z)
:
(A.13)
1
Furthermore, if an individual with initial earnings z makes an active adjustment in period
t, T1 < t T2 , then she will also …nd it optimal to do so in any period t0 , where T1 < t0 < t.
The condition in (A.13) di¤ers from that in (A.6) because the e¤ect of adjustment on the
17

The expected utility for passive adjusters is constructed recursively, working backward from period T
to period T2 + 1.
18
Technically, we can see from (A.11) that while the function Va;P2 +1 is continuous, it is kinked, which
creates a nonconvexity. Thus, the solution in (A.12) may not always be single-valued. In such cases, we
de…ne z~a;t as the lowest level of earnings that maximizes utility.

45

utility beyond period T2 is taken into account, in addition to the up-front cost of adjustment,
. Any adjustment in this time interval, active or passive, will be to the dynamic, frictionless
optimum for the current period, z~a;t . As before, (A.13) implies that all active adjustment
occurring between T1 + 1 and T2 takes place in period T1 + 1. Those who adjust in period
T1 + 1 will earn z~a;T1 +1 . Thereafter, they only adjust to z~a;t when a …xed cost of zero is
drawn. Likewise, those who only adjust passively earn za;T1 in period T1 + 1, and thereafter
adjust to z~a;t when a …xed cost of zero is drawn. We can therefore derive the following value
function:
8
T2 P
T1 1
>
j 2
>
>
za;T2 )
ua (~
za;T1 +1+j ) + T2 T1 4Va;T2 +1 (~
>
>
j=0
>
>
>
T2 P
T1 2
>
>
( )T2 T1
>
4Va;T2 +1 (~
za;T1 +2+j ; z~a;T1 +1+j )
if (A.13) is satis…ed
>
j+1
>
>
j=0
>
when t = T1 + 1
>
>
T2 P
T1 2
>
1 ( )T2 T1 1 j j+1
>
2
>
za;T1 +2+j ; z~a;T1 +1+j )
4ua (~
>
1
>
>
j=0
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
T1 1
>
< T2 P
j 2
za;T1 +1+j ) + T2 T1 4Va;T2 +1 (~
ua (~
za;T2 )
Va;T1 +1 (z) =
j=0
>
>
T2 P
T1 2
>
>
( )T2 T1
>
4Va;T2 +1 (~
za;T1 +2+j ; z~a;T1 +1+j )
>
j+1
>
>
j=0
>
>
>
T2 P
T1 2
>
1 ( )T2 T1 1 j j+1
>
>
za;T1 +2+j ; z~a;T1 +1+j ) otherwise
4u2a (~
>
1
>
>
j=0
>
(
>
>
T2 P
T1 1
>
>
>
( )j 4u2a (~
za;T1 +1 ; z)
>
>
>
j=0
>
>
)
>
>
>
>
T2 T1 T2 +1 T1
>
4Va;T2 +1 (~
za;T1 +1 ; z)
>
:
(A.14)
The …rst case in (A.14) applies to those who actively adjust in period T1 + 1 and passively
adjust thereafter. The …rst line is the utility that would accrue if a …xed cost of zero were
drawn in each period. The next two lines represent the deviation from this stream of utility,
due to nonzero …xed costs potentially drawn in periods T1 + 1 through T2 . The …nal line
represents the …xed cost that is paid in period T1 + 1 with probability . The second case
in (A.14) applies to those who only passively adjust. The …rst three lines remain the same.
The …nal two lines represent a loss in utility attributed to fact that earnings in period T1 + 1
may not be z~a;T1 +1 . Note that earnings in period T1 can only a¤ect utility through this last
channel.

46

A.1.3

Earnings between Period 1 and T1

Earnings during the …rst period, when the kink K1 is present, can be derived similarly. The
dynamic, frictionless optimum is now de…ned as:
z~a;t = arg max
1 0

( )T1 +1
1

1

z2[za ;za ]

t

u1a (z) +

T1 +1 t T1 t

Va;T1 +1 (z) :19

(A.15)

Similar to the other cases, if an individual with initial earnings z makes an active adjustment
in period t, 0 < t T1 , then it must be the case that
1

(
1

)T1 +1

t
T1 +1 t T1 t

4u1a (~
za;t ; z) +

4Va;T1 +1 (~
za;t ; z)

:

(A.16)

Furthermore, if an individual with initial earnings z makes an active adjustment in period
t, 0 < t T1 , then she will also …nd it optimal to do so in any period t0 , where 0 < t0 < t.
Again, this implies that all active adjustment will take place in period 1. Since individuals
begin with earnings of za0 , we know that all active adjustment will be downward. Thereafter,
it can be shown that z~a;t is weakly increasing, and upward adjustment will occur passively.
A.1.4

Characterizing Bunching

Given these results, we can now derive expressions for excess mass at z analogous to (8)
and (9). For notational convenience, we de…ne Aj (z) as the set of individuals, a, with initial
earnings z who actively adjust in period j. Again, denote B1t as bunching at K1 in period
t 2 [1; T1 ]. We have the following generalized version of (8):
"
Z
z +4z1

B1t =

1 f~
za;1 = z ; a 2 A1 ( )g

z

+

t
X

1

j

t j

j=1

t 1
X
j=1

1

t j

1 fsup flj l

1 fsup flj l

t; z~a;l = z g = j; a 2
= A1 ( )g
#

t; z~a;l = z g = j; a 2 A1 ( )g h0 ( ) d :
(A.17)

We have partitioned the set of potential bunchers into three groups in (A.17). In the …rst
line, we have the set of active bunchers in period 1. In the second line, we capture individuals
who are passive bunchers, i.e. a 2
= A1 (za0 ). For j 2 [1; t 1], the indicator function selects
the individual who has z~a;j = z but z~a;j+1 6= z . Since z~a;t is weakly increasing, the optimal
earnings for this individual is z in periods 1 through j 1. The probability that the
j
individual bunches by period j is 1
. Thereafter, the individual will de-bunch if a …xed
cost of zero is drawn. The probability of only drawing nonzero …xed costs thereafter is
t j
. For j = t, the indicator function selects agents for whom z~a;t = z . Their probability
19

Note, the objective function now features two potential nonconvexities. In cases where the solution is
multi-valued, we again de…ne z~a;t as the lowest earnings level from the set of solutions.

47

t
of passively bunching by period t is 1
. The third line captures the out‡ow of active
bunchers, for whom z~a;t ceases to be z starting in period j. The probability of having drawn
t j
a nonzero …xed cost and de-bunching since period j is 1
.
Equation (A.17) di¤ers from (8) in three key ways. First, the set of active bunchers
in period 1 is di¤erent, as can be seen by comparing (A.16) and the relevant condition
for active bunchers in Section 6.3, 4u1a (z ; za0 )
. The utility gain accrues for multiple
periods in the forward-looking case, increasing the probability of actively bunching, but
the e¤ect of adjustment on future payo¤s via Va;T1 +1 may either reinforce or o¤set this
incentive. Furthermore, passive bunchers are (weakly) less likely to remain bunching, as
they de-bunch in anticipation of policy changes in future periods. To see this, note that the
t j
factor is decreasing in t. Finally, the set of active bunchers similarly de-bunch passively,
in anticipation of future policy changes. The model therefore predicts a gradual out‡ow from
the set of bunchers, in anticipation of the shift from K1 to K2 . Nonetheless, the overall net
change in bunching over time is ambiguous.
We now turn to bunching starting in period T + 1. It can be shown, similarly to the
cases above, that if an agent would be willing to actively bunch in period T1 + 1, she will also
be willing to actively bunch in earlier periods. Thus, the only active adjustment occurring
that a¤ects bunching will be de-bunching. The set of individuals who actively de-bunch,
AT1 +1 (z ), are those for whom (A.13) is satis…ed, when evaluated at t = T1 + 1 and z = z .
The remaining changes in bunching between T1 and T2 consist of passive adjustment among
those who were bunching at the end of period T1 . We can thus characterize B2t , bunching at
K2 in period t 2 T1 + 1; T , in a manner analogous to (9):20
"
Z
z +4z1

B2t =

1 fa 2
= AT1 +1 (z )g

z

(

(

+

t T1

1 f~
za;T1 +1 6= z g +

t
X

t j

j=T1 +1

1 fsup flj l

t; z~a;l = z g = jg

)

1 f~
za;1 = z ; a 2 A1 ( )g

T1
X

j

1

T1 j

j=1

TX
1 1
j=1

1

T1 j

1 fsup flj l

1 fsup flj l

T1 ; z~a;l = z g = j; a 2
= A1 ( )g
T1 ; z~a;l = z g = j; a 2 A1 ( )g

)#

h0 ( ) d :
(A.18)

The …rst line of this expression selects only those agents who do not actively de-bunch
immediately in period T1 + 1. The second line selects the set of agents who would like to
passively de-bunch beginning at some period j > T1 +1. They are weighted by the probability
of continuing to bunch due to consecutive draws of nonzero …xed costs. The …nal three lines
20

When T1 = 1, we set the very last summation to zero.

48

select agents from the set of bunchers at the end of period T1 . As with our simpler model in
Section 6.3, bunching gradually decreases following a reduction in the size of the kink from
K1 to K2 . However, in this case, the reduction is due to both …xed costs of adjustment and
anticipation of the removal of the kink K2 in period T2 + 1.
As in Section 6.3, the richer model in this appendix nests the dynamic model without
forward looking behavior when we set = 0, collapses to the comparative static model of
Sections 6.1-6.2 if we additionally assume that = 1 and is equivalent to the frictionless
model when either = 0 or = 0.

A.2
A.2.1

Derivation of Bunching Formulae with Heterogeneity
Comparative Static Model

Under heterogenous preferences, our estimates can be interpreted as re‡ecting average parameters among the set of bunchers (as in Saez, 2010, and Kleven and Waseem, 2013). As
described in the main text, suppose ("i ; i ; ai ) is jointly distributed according to a smooth
CDF, which translates to a smooth, joint distribution of elasticities, …xed costs and earnings.
Let the joint density of earnings, adjustment costs and elasticities be h0 (z; "; ) under a linear
tax of 0 . Assume that the density of earnings is constant over the interval [z ; z + z ],
conditional on " and . When moving from no kink to a kink, we derive a formula for
bunching at K1 in the presence of heterogeneity as follows:

B1 =

ZZZ
ZZ

z + z1

h0 ( ; ; ') d d d'
z1

[z + z1 z 1 ] h0 (z ; ; ') d d'
ZZ
h (z ; ; ')
= h0 (z )
[z + z1 z 1 ] 0
d d'
h0 (z )
= h0 (z ) E [z + z1 z 1 ] ,
=

(A.19)

RR
h0 (z ; ; ') d d',
where we have used the assumption of constant h0 ( ) in line two, h0 (z ) =
and , and ' are dummies of integration. The expectation E [ ] is taken over the set of
bunchers, under the various combinations of " and throughout the support. It follows that
normalized bunching can be expressed as follows:
b1 = z + E [ z1 ]

E [z 1 ] :

(A.20)

Under heterogeneity, the level of bunching identi…es the average behavioral response, z ,
and threshold earnings, z 1 , among the marginal bunchers under each possible combination
of parameters " and . Under certain parameter values, there is no bunching, and thus, the
values of the elasticity and adjustment cost in these cases do not contribute our estimates.
When we move sequentially from a larger kink, K1 to a smaller kink, K2 , our formula for

49

bunching under K2 in the presence of heterogeneity is likewise derived as follows:
Z Z Z z0
~
B2 =
h0 ( ; ; ') d d d'
z1
ZZ
=
[z0 z 1 ] h0 (z ; ; ') d d'
ZZ
h (z ; ; ')
d d'
= h0 (z )
[z0 z 1 ] 0
h0 (z )
= h0 (z ) E [z0 z 1 ] .

(A.21)

Similarly, normalized bunching can now be expressed as follows:
~b2 = E [z0 ]

E [z 1 ] :

(A.22)

Once again, the expectations are taken over the population of bunchers.
Following the approach in Kleven and Waseem (2013, pg. 682), the average value of the
parameters z1 , z 1 and z0 can then be related to " and , assuming a quasi-linear utility
z2 =
function and using (5) and (7) and the identities 4z1 = "z d 1 = (1
0 ) and z0
"z2 d 2 = (1
).
0
A.2.2

Dynamic Model

A similar interpretation of our results holds when we turn to our more dynamic framework
in Section 6.3. Suppose now that ("i ; i ; ai ; i ) is jointly distributed according to a smooth
CDF, which results in a smooth, joint distribution of elasticities, …xed costs, earnings, and
probabilities of drawing a positive …xed cost. In order to gain tractability, we assume that
the pro…le i is independent of the parameters ("i ; i ; ai ). The result is that the joint density
of these parameters, under a linear tax of 0 , can be expressed as a product of two densities:
h0 (z; "; ) g ( i ). We maintain the assumption that the density of earnings is constant over
the interval [z ; z + z ], conditional on " and . Bunching at K1 in period t 2 [1; T1 ] will

50

now be:
B1t

ZZZZ

=

z + z1

h0 ( ; ; ') g ( ) d d d'd
z1

ZZZZ

+
ZZ

=

z1

t
j=1 j

h0 ( ; ; ') g ( ) d d d'd
Z
z1 z 1 ] h0 (z ; ; ')
g( )d
d d'
Z
t
1
z ] h0 (z ; ; ')
j=1 j g ( ) d
1

z

[z +
ZZ
+
[z 1
ZZ
= h0 (z )
[z +
+ 1

z1

z1]

t
j=1 j

E

h0 (z ; ; ')
d d'
h0 (z )
ZZ
h (z ; ; ')
[z 1 z ] 0
d d'
h0 (z )

= h0 (z ) z + E [ z1 ]

E [z 1 ] + 1

= h0 (z ) E [ z1 ]

t
j=1 j

E

d d'

t
j=1 j

E

(E [z 1 ]

(E [z 1 ]

z )
(A.23)

z ) ;

RRR
where now h0 (z ) =
h0 (z ; ; ') g ( ) d d'd . In the second line, we have again made
use of a constant h0 ( ) and also the independence of i . Normalized bunching at K1 in
period t will then be:
bt1 = E [ z1 ] E tj=1 j (E [z 1 ] z ) .
(A.24)
Using similar steps, we can show that bunching in period t > T1 at K2 , when moving
sequentially from K1 , can be written as:
Z Z Z Z z + z2
t
B2 =
h0 ( ; ; ') g ( ) d d d'd
z

+
+

Z Z Z 1Z

z0

t T1
j=1

z + z
Z Z Z Z z1 2

t T1
j=1

1

h0 ( ; ; ') g ( ) d d d'd

j

j

T1
j=1 j

h0 ( ; ; ') g ( ) d d d'd

z

= h0 (z )

1
E

E

t T1
j=1

t T1
j=1

j

j

E [ z2 ] + E
T1
j=1 j

E [z 1 ]

t T1
j=1

E

j
t T1
j=1

E [z0 ]
j

E

t T1
j=1

j

T1
j=1 j

z

:

(A.25)

51

Likewise, normalized bunching at K2 will be:
bt2 =

1

E
E

t T1
j=1 j
t T1
j=1 j

E [ z2 ] + E

t T1
j=1

t T1
j=1

T1
j=1 j

E

j

j

E [z0 ]

E

z :

t T1
j=1

j

T1
j=1 j

E [z 1 ]
(A.26)

The levels of bunching at the kink before and after the transition are now functions of average
behavioral responses, ( z1 ; z2 ), the average thresholds for marginal bunchers, (z 1 ; z0 ), and
t T1
T1
t
average survival probabilities,
j=1 j ; j=1 j
j=1 j . Relative to our baseline dynamic
model in Section 6.3, the number of intermediate parameters to be identi…ed is increasing
T1
in the number of post-transition periods, due to the terms of the form E tj=1T1 j
j=1 j .
A su¢ cient condition that allows us to retain identi…cation while only using two transitions
in kinks is that the expectation of this product simpli…es to a product of expectations:
T1
t T1
T1
E tj=1T1 j
j=1 j = E
j=1 j E
j=1 j . There are two cases of interest that satisfy
1
this condition. First, if j = 0 for some j < T1 , then Tj=1
j = 0, and the condition holds.
This empirically appears to be the case in our context: adjustment takes roughly two years,
while T1 3 in our two main applications. Second, if there is no heterogeneity in across
agents, the condition also holds.
T1
t T1
T1
If we relax the assumption that E tj=1T1 j
j=1 j = E
j=1 j E
j=1 j , we will
require additional transitions in kinks in order to achieve identi…cation. Furthermore, if we
relax the assumption that the pro…le i is independent of ("i ; i ; ai ), identi…cation is more
complicated, as the expectations in the above expressions will then feature weights that vary
with t. In that case, more parametric structure on the joint distribution of ("i ; i ; ai ; i )
is needed to achieve identi…cation. We discuss identi…cation further in section A.4 of the
Appendix.

A.3

Allowing for Frictions in Initial Earnings

In the initial period 0 (prior to the policy change), under a linear tax of 0 , we have assumed
that individuals are located at their frictionless optimum, while we have assumed in subsequent periods adjustment costs may preclude individuals from reaching their exact, interior
optimum. Here, we extend the model to allow for agents to be away from their optimum in
period 0, in a way that is consistent with our model of a …xed adjustment cost.
We now analyze the thought experiment previously discussed in Section 6.2. That is, we
demonstrate this extension in the context of the “comparative static”model. From a linear
tax of 0 in period 0, in period 1 we introduce a kink, K1 , at z , and let the marginal tax
rate increase to 1 for earnings above z . Finally, in period 2 we replace the …rst kink with
a second, smaller kink, K2 , at z , where the marginal tax rate only increases to 2 .
Again, agents are indexed by a. Let za;j be actual earnings for individual a in period when
facing tax schedule Tj (z), and let z~a;j be the optimal level of earnings she would choose in
the absence of adjustment frictions. As in Chetty (2012), assume that earnings are not “too
far”from the frictionless optimum; that is, assume that earnings are within a set such that

52

the utility gain of adjusting to the optimum does not exceed the adjustment cost. Formally:
+
za;j (~
za;0 ) 2 za;j (~
za;0 ) ; za;j
(~
za;0 ) ,

where za;t

and u (~
za;j

z~a;j

Tj (~
za;j ) ; z~a;j ; a)
+
= u za;j

+
za;t

= u za;j

Tj za;j ; za;j ; a

+
+
Tj za;j
; za;j
;a

(A.27)

where Tj ( ) represents a linear tax of 0 in period 0, re‡ects the kink K1 in period 1, and
+
re‡ects the kink K2 in period 2. In words, za;j and za;j
are the lowest and highest level of
earnings, respectively, that would be acceptable before an individual chooses to adjust to their
optimal earnings level. Note that we have de…ned za;j (~
za;0 ) as a function of the optimal level
of earnings for individual a in period 0 for notational convenience. Let the actual earnings,
conditional on optimal earnings in period 0, be distributed according to the cumulative
distribution function Fa;j (za;j j~
za;0 ), with probability density function fa;j (za;j j~
za;0 ). Thus,
individuals are distributed around their frictionless optimum in period 0.
First, consider the level of bunching at K1 . Relative to our baseline model with frictions
(that assumes individuals are initially located at their frictionless optimum), there will be
two di¤erences in who bunches. First, individuals in Figure 6 Panel B area i did not bunch
in the baseline because they were su¢ ciently close to the kink. These are agents for whom
z < z~a;0 < z 1 . Now, with some probability, a fraction of these agents will be su¢ ciently
far from z in period 0 to justify moving to the kink in Period 1— formally, those for whom
+
+
za;0 2 za;1
; za;0
. Their initial earnings are above their interior optimum in period 0, but not
far enough to outweigh the …xed cost of adjustment in Period 0. Now that the optimum in
period 1 has moved to z , the utility gain to readjusting exceeds the …xed cost of adjustment.
These individuals will now bunch under K1 . The second di¤erence in this version of the model
relative to our baseline model is that some individuals who had bunched under K1 in the
baseline model, i.e. areas ii; iii;and iv in Figure 6, may …nd themselves already close enough
to z in period 0 that they do not bunch at z in period 0 (because relocating to z in period
0 does not have su¢ cient bene…t to outweigh the …xed adjustment cost). Formally, these
+
are individuals for whom za;0 < za;1
. These cases are illustrated in Appendix Figure B.3.
De…ne bunching under this modi…ed model as B10 . Bunching under K1 can be expressed
as:
#
+
Z z +4z1 "Z zn;0
B10 =
fa;0 (v j ) dv h0 ( ) d
+
zn;1

z

=

Z

z +4z1

1

z

=

Z

+
Fa;0 za;1
j

z +4z1

Pr za;0

z

h0 ( ) d

+
za;1
j~
za;0 =

h0 ( ) d

where and are dummies of integration.
We now turn to bunching in period 2, under K2 . Note that because this kink is smaller,
anyone su¢ ciently close to z that they did not bunch under K1 will continue not to bunch
under K2 . Thus, the only change in bunching in period 2 will be those who now move away
53

from the kink. Under the baseline model, these were individuals for whom z0
z~a;0
z + 4z1 , i.e. area iv in Figure 6, Panel B. These individuals will still …nd it worthwhile to
move away from the kink, but the di¤erence from the baseline model is that only a subset
of them bunched in period 1. Thus, the decrease in bunching will be related to the share of
people in area v who actually bunched under K1 . What remains are those individuals with
z
z~a;0 z0 who actually bunched in period 1. Formally, bunching in period 2 under K2
can be expressed as follows:
#
+
Z z0 "Z zn;0
~0 =
fa;0 (v j ) dv h0 ( ) d
B
2

+
zn;1

z

=

Z

z0

1

z

=

Z

+
j
Fa;0 za;1

h0 ( ) d

z0

Pr za;0

z

+
za;1
j~
za;0 =

h0 ( ) d

We can rewrite the level of bunching in this setting in terms of bunching amounts derived
above:
Z z +4z1
+
0
Pr za;0 za;1
j~
za;0 =
h( )d
B1 =
z
Z z +4z1
Z z +4z1
h( )
+
Pr za;0 za;1
h( )d
j~
za;0 =
=
d
R z +4z1
h
(
)
d
z
z
z
Z z +4z1
+
Pr za;0 za;1
j~
za;0 =
h ( jz <
z + 4z1 ) d
= B1
z

= B1 E Pr za;0

+
za;1
jz < z~a;0

z + 4z1

R z +4z1
where B1 = z
h0 ( ) d is de…ned in equation (2) when j = 1. This is the bunching
that would occur in a model of no frictions under K1 , i.e. areas i iv in Figure 6, Panel B.
Likewise, we have:
Z z0
0
+
~
B2 =
Pr za;0 za;1
j~
za;0 =
h0 ( ) d
z
h
i
+
~2 + B1 B1 E Pr zn;0 zn;1
jz < z~a;0 z0
= B
~2 is de…ned in equation (6), and B1 is de…ned in equation (4). It follows that
where B
R
~2 + B1 B1 = z0 h0 ( ) d , i.e. areas i iv in Figure 6.
B
z
Without further restrictions on the distribution of optimal earnings under a linear tax,
H0 (z), or distribution of earnings about the frictionless optimum in period 0, Fa;j (za;j j~
za;0 ),
we cannot make further simpli…cations of these expressions. However, if we assume that
the initial actual earnings level is distributed uniformly about optimal earnings in period 0,
following Chetty et al. (2011) or Kleven and Waseem (2013), then we have:
za;0

+
U za;0 ; za;0

54

which implies that:
+
za;1
j~
za;0 =

Pr za;0

= min

+
za;0
( )
+
za;0 ( )

+
za;1
( )
;1
za;0 ( )

+
+
Using our de…nitions above for za;0
( ), za;0 ( ) and za;1
( ) we can calculate this probability
conditional on initial frictionless earnings in period 0, the elasticity " and the adjustment
cost . Note that the uniform distribution of actual earnings is not generally centered at the
optimal earnings level in period 0, since the lower and upper limits of the support in period
+
0, i.e. za;0 ; za;0
, will tend to be di¤erent distances from the frictionless optimum. We can
~2 , conditional on the counterfactual distribution H0 (z) and a
also calculate B1 , B1 , and B
~20 and use
value of " and . We are therefore able to calculate predicted values for B10 and B
these in a modi…ed version of the estimation procedure outlined in Section 6.5.
Although it is not necessary for our estimation procedure, if we further assume that the
optimal earnings density, h0 ( ), is constant over the range [z ; z + 4z1 ], as is common in the
literature (e.g., Chetty et al. 2011 or Kleven and Waseem 2013), then we have the following:
0

+
za;1
jz < z~a;0

B1 = B1 E Pr za;0

= 4z1 h0 (z ) E Pr za;0

z + 4z1

+
za;1
jz < z~a;0

z + 4z1

and likewise:
0

B2 =

h
~2 + B
B
1

= [z0

B1

i

+
zn;1
jz < z~a;0

E Pr zn;0

z ] h0 (z ) E Pr zn;0

+
zn;1
jz < z~a;0

z0
z0

It also follows that bunching normalized by the height of the density at the kink will be:
0

b1 = 4z1 E Pr za;0
0

b2 = [z0

A.4

+
za;1
jz < z~a;0

z ] E Pr zn;0

+
zn;1

z + 4z1

jz < z~a;0

z0

Identi…cation

Our estimator is a minimum distance estimator (MDE); Newey and McFadden (1994) give
conditions for identi…cation, consistency, and asymptotic normality. An MDE is de…ned as:
^ = arg min Q(
^ )
^ ) = [B
Q(

^ [B
m( )]0 W

m( )]

In our case, B is a vector of L estimated bunching amounts from before and after a policy
^ is a weighting matrix. We
change, and m( ) is a vector of predicted bunching amounts. W
consider our comparative static, and dynamic, models, in turn.

55

A.4.1

Comparative Static Model

We focus on the exactly identi…ed case with two bunching moments, which is relevant in our
empirical application of the comparative static model. We have:
~2 ("; ))
m( ) = (B1 ("; ); B
Z z + z1
B1 =
h( )d
~2 =
B

z1
z0

Z

h( )d

z1

~2 refer to bunching before and after the policy change, and
where B1 and B
The upper cuto¤ in B1 is de…ned as
z +

1
1

z1 = z

("; ).

"
0

:

1

A necessary condition for identi…cation is that solutions for z 1 and z0 exist; if they do
not, then no bunching occurs. It is straightforward to show that a solution for z 1 exists if
z

(1

1)

"

1
1

0

((1

1)

"(

0 ))

1

>

(" + 1) :

1

This ensures that the “top”buncher wants to adjust to the kink. A solution for z0 exists as
long as some debunching occurs. It is straightforward to show that this requires that:
#
"
"+1
"+1
(1
(1
2)
1)
> (" + 1) :
z
"
(1
1)
As long as 0 < 2 < 1 , " > 0, and > 0, there exists a range of values of " and for
which these inequalities hold.
Provided that z0 and z 1 exist, identi…cation requires that m( ) = B has a unique solution.
Following previous literature (e.g. Kline and Walters 2016), we establish local uniqueness by
linearizing m ( ) around a solution m( 0 ) = B: Let 0 be a solution to m( ) = B: Linearizing
m ( ) around 0 , we have:
m( )

m( 0 ) + rm( 0 )(

0 ):

It follows that a unique solution requires Jm ( 0 ) to have full rank, where Jm ( 0 ) is the
Jacobian of m ( ) evaluated at 0 :
#
"
Jm ( 0 ) =

@B1
@"
~2
@B
@"

@B1
@
~2
@B
@

:

We calculate the elements of this matrix analytically by di¤erentiating the expressions above

56

~2 , which is straightforward.21 Thus, given ^, z 1 , and z0 , we can calculate the
for B1 and B
Jacobian analytically (although z 1 and z0 must be found numerically).
Jm has full rank only if it has a non-zero determinant. We …nd in all of our bootstrap
iterations that det(Jm ) < 0, demonstrating that the determinant is signi…cantly di¤erent
from zero. We have also shown analytically that the determinant is generically non-zero
(results available upon request).
A.4.2

Dynamic Model

To identify the dynamic model, we need to observe at least as many moments as the number
of parameters we seek to estimate. In our case this means that we must observe bunching
across multiple policy changes, speci…cally the reductions in the bene…t reduction rate above
the exempt amount in 1990 and at age 70. Let l index di¤erent such policy changes (in our
t
case, l 2 f1990; 70g). Let B1;l
be bunching at kink l and period t before the policy change,
t
let B2;l be bunching at kink l and period t after the policy change, let time t measure the
time since the introduction of the …rst kink, K1;l , and let the policy change at kink l take
place at time T1;l . The parameter vector now consists of ("; ; 1 ; 2; :::; 5 ) : We match 12
bunching amounts in our estimates: 1987 to 1992 (pooling 66 to 68 year olds) and ages 67
to 72 (pooling years 1990 to 1999).
Bunching before the policy change is
t
B1;l
=

t
j=1 j

B1;l + (1
R zl + z1;l

t
j=1 j )B1;l

R z + z1;l
h( )d and B1;l = z
h( )d ; and the limits of integration are
where B1;l = z l
l
1;l
de…ned similarly to the static case (but with the additional subscript l to allow for analysis
across multiple policy changes, as in our empirical application of the dynamic model). If
the policy change happens T1;l periods after the kink is initially introduced, then bunching
under the new policy in period t is
t
B2;l
=

t T1;l
j=1

j

~2;l + 1
B

t T1;l
j=1

j

B2;l +

t T1;l
j=1

j

1

T1;l
j=1 j

B1;l

B1;l

R
R
~2;l = z0;l h( )d , B = zl + z2;l h( )d , and the limits of integration again are
where B
2;l
zl
z 1;l
de…ned similarly to the static case but with the additional subscript l.
We calculate the elements of the resulting Jacobian analytically by di¤erentiating the
t
t
expressions above for B1;l
and B2;l
with respect to ", , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 , which is again
^
straightforward. Thus, given , z 1;l and z0;l , we can again calculate the Jacobian analytically.
Identi…cation requires that this Jacobian have full rank. To test for full rank of the
Jacobian, we use the method of Kleibergen and Papp (2006). We use the bootstrap to obtain
an estimate of V ar[Jm (^)]: In each iteration of our bootstrap, we also calculate Jm (^), and
we estimate V ar[Jm (^)] from the bootstrap variance-covariance matrix. The RK test easily
rejects under-identi…cation, with p < 0:001:
21

We can specify functions implicitly de…ning the lower and upper cuto¤s z 1 and z0 ; respectively, as
functions of the other parameters, given our quasilinear and isoelastic case. These enter the expressions for
each element of the Jacobian (more details are available upon request).

57

A.5

Econometric Estimation

We begin by describing our econometric estimation procedure under our basic comparative
static model of Sections 6.1 and 6.2. Let B = (B1 ; B2 ; : : : ; BL ) be a vector of (estimated)
bunching amounts, using the method described in Section 3. Let = ( 1 ; : : : ; L ) be the
tax schedule at each kink. The triplet l = ( 0;l ; 1;l ; 2;l ) denotes the tax rate below the
kink ( 0;l ), above the kink ( 1;l ), and the ex post marginal tax rate above the kink after it has
been reduced ( 2;l ), as in Section 6.2. Let z = (z1 ; : : : ; zL ) be the earnings levels associated
with each kink. In principle, it would be possible to estimate bunching separately for each
age group at a given kink. In practice and for simplicity, we pool across a constant set of
ages to estimate bunching at a given kink— for example, when examining the 1990 policy
change we examine 66-68 year-olds both before and after the change. Thus, the bunching
amounts are not indexed by age.22
n our baseline, we use a non-parametric density for the counterfactual earnings distribution, H0 . Once H0 is known, we use (4) and (6) to obtain predicted bunching from the
model. To recover H0 non-parametrically we take the empirical earnings distribution for
72 year-olds in $800 bins as the counterfactual distribution. 72 year-olds’earnings density
represents a reasonable counterfactual because they no longer face the Earnings Test, no
longer show bunching, and are close in age toP
those aged 70 or 71. Letting zi index the bins,
^
our estimate of the distribution is H0 (zi ) = j i P r(z 2 zj ). This function is only de…ned
at the midpoints of the bins, so we use linear interpolation for other values of z. In a robustness check, we instead assume that the earnings distribution over the range [z ; z + z]
is uniform, a common assumption in the literature (e.g. Chetty et al., 2011, Kleven and
Waseem, 2013). Using the nonparametrically-estimated distribution of earnings from age 72
is helpful because it does not entail distributional assumptions, but relative to assuming a
uniform distribution, using the age-72 distribution comes at the cost of using a di¤erent age
(i.e. 72) to generate the earnings distribution.23
To estimate ("; ), we seek the values of the parameters that make predicted bunching
^ and actual (estimated) bunching B as close as possible on average. Letting B(";
^
B
)
^
^
(B( 1 ; z1 ; "; ); : : : ; B( L ; zL ; "; )), our estimator is:
^"; ^ = argmin(";

)

^
B(";
)

B

0

^
W B(";
)

B ;

(A.28)

where W is a K K identity matrix. This estimation procedure runs parallel to our theoret^ are those predicted by the theory (and the estimated
ical model, as the bunching amounts B
counterparts B are found using the procedure outlined in Section 3).24 When we pool data
22

Analogously, when we examine bunching at each age around 70 when the AET is eliminated, we pool
across calendar years (namely 1990-1999) to estimate bunching, so that we do not also have to index the
bunching amounts by calendar year. We …nd comparable results when we estimate bunching separately at
each age and year.
23
Because we use the age-72 density as our counterfactual density –unlike most bunching papers bunching
that estimate the counterfactual from the same density that is used to estimate bunching – our method is
not subject to the Blomquist and Newey (2017) point that the functional form of preference heterogeneity
cannot be simultaneously estimated with the taxable income elasticity.
24
^ 0 (z ), so that the moments are
Without loss of generality, we use normalized bunching, ^b = B=h
identical to what is reported elsewhere in the text.

58

across multiple time periods, we assume that " and are constant across these time periods.
We obtain our estimates by minimizing (A.28) numerically. Solving this problem requires
^ at each trial guess of ("; ).25 Our estimator assumes a quasilinear utility
evaluating B
z 1+1="
a
function, u(c; z; a) = c 1+1="
, following Saez (2010), Chetty et al. (2011) and
a
Kleven and Waseem (2013). Note that because we have assumed quasilinearity, z1;l =
1

"

1;l
1 and a = z ( ) = (1
)" , where z ( ) are the optimal, interior earnings
zl
1 0;l
under a linear tax of . Typically there is no closed form solution for z 1;l or z0;l . Instead,
given " and , we …nd z 1;l and z0;l numerically as the solution to the relevant indi¤erence
conditions in (5) and (7). For example, z 1;l is de…ned implicitly by:

u((1
|

1;l )zl

+ R1;l ; zl ; z 1;l =(1
{z

utility from adjusting to kink

"
0;l ) )

}

u((1
|

1;l )z 1;l

+ R1;l ; z 1;l ; z 1;l =(1
{z

utility from not adjusting

This equation is continuously di¤erentiable and has a unique solution for z 1;l .26
A.5.1

"
0;l ) )

}

= ;
(A.29)

Dynamic Model

Our estimation method is easily amended to accommodate the dynamic extension of our
model in Section 6.3. As in (8) and (9), the bunching expressions in the dynamic model are
~2 , which are calculated as in Section 6.5, and two measures of
weighted sums of B1 and B
frictionless bunching, B1 and B2 . Frictionless bunching under either kink can be calculated
conditional on H0 and " using (2).
We must also estimate the probability of drawing a positive …xed cost as a function of
the time since the last policy shock, t t .27 For given values of ", , and the vector of
^
t t ’s, we can evaluate (8) and (9). Our vector of predicted bunching, B, will now be a
^
function of these additional parameters, as well as the relevant time indices: B(";
; )
^
^
(B( 1 ; z1 ; t1 ; T1;l ; "; ; ); : : : ; B( L ; zL ; tL ; T1;L ; "; ; )), where tl is the time elapsed since
the …rst kink, K1;l , was introduced, and T1;l is the length of time before the second kink,
K2;l , is introduced. Once again we use the minimum distance estimator (A.28).
Equations (8) and (9) illustrate how we estimate the elasticity and adjustment cost
in this richer setting. We require as many observations of bunching as the parameters,
("; ; 1 ; :::; J ), and these moments must span a change in d .28 Suppose we observe the
pattern of bunching over time around two or more di¤erent policy changes. Loosely speaking,
the ’s are estimated relative to one another from the time pattern of bunching over time:
a delay in adjustment in a given period will generally correspond to a higher probability of
facing the adjustment cost (all else equal). Note that the relationship is linear; the degree of
25

In solving (A.28), we impose that
0. When < 0, every individual adjusts her earnings by at least
some arbitrarily small amount, regardless of the size of . This implies that is not identi…ed if it is less than
zero. Inattention or the di¢ culty of negotiating new contracts should be associated with positive adjustment
costs (which could distinguish this context from the …rm context studied in Garicano et al., 2016).
26
Note that some combinations of l , zl , ", and imply z 1;l > zl + 4z1;l . In this case, the lowest-earning
^l = 0.
adjuster does not adjust to the kink. Whenever this happens, we set B
27
We have also tried using a ‡exible, logistic functional form, j = exp ( +
j) = (1 + exp ( +
j)),
and we found comparable results (available upon request).
28
The number of moments is not itself su¢ cient. We also require non-trivial variation in bunching before
and after the tax change in order to point identify . As in footnote 8, this requires z0 < z + 4z1 .

59

“inertia”in bunching in (for example) period 1 increases linearly in 1 : Meanwhile, a higher
implies a larger amount of inertia in all periods until bunching has fully dissipated (in a
way that depends on the earnings distribution, the elasticity, and the size of the tax change).
Finally, a higher " will correspond to a larger amount of bunching once bunching has had
time to adjust fully to the policy changes. Intuitively, these features of the data help us to
identify the parameters using our dynamic model.

A.6

Policy Simulations

In this Appendix, we describe how we simulate the e¤ect of various policy changes on earnings. These calculations are designed to be illustrative of the attenuation of earnings responses to policy changes that can result from incorporating adjustment frictions in the
analysis. Nonetheless, we highlight that these calculations are done in the context of a
highly stylized model making a number of assumptions, as well as a particular sample of
earners. One key (extreme) assumption is that everyone has the same elasticity and adjustment cost. Moreover, these estimates are speci…c to a particular context, and they are not
intended to be an exhaustive account of the implications of adjustment costs for earnings
responses to taxation. Rather, they are intended simply to illustrate the attenuation of
earnings responses to policy changes that can result from incorporating adjustment frictions
in the analysis in such contexts.
We assume that utility is isoelastic and quasi-linear with elasticity ". Individuals must
pay an adjustment cost to change their earnings. Individuals are heterogeneous in their
ability ni . Individuals are therefore distributed according to their “counterfactual”earnings
z0i that they would have under a linear tax schedule: (Despite the absence of heterogeneity in
the elasticity and adjustment cost, there is still heterogeneity in the gains from re-optimizing
earnings, due to heterogeneity in z0i .) We use the 1989 earnings distribution for 60-61 yearolds (from the MEF data) as the counterfactual earnings distribution, i.e. the earnings
distribution under a linear tax schedule in the region of the exempt amount. We incorporate
the key features of the individual income tax code, including individual federal income taxes,
state income taxes, and FICA (all from Taxsim applied in 1989), and the Earnings Test. Our
estimates of elasticities and adjustment costs apply to a population earning near the exempt
amount; to avoid extrapolating too far out of sample, our simulations examine only those
whose counterfactual earnings is from $10,000 under to $10,000 over the exempt amount (and
is greater than $0). (While the Earnings Test should only a¤ect people whose counterfactual
earnings are over the exempt amount, we also include the group earning up to $10,000 under
the exempt amount in order to illustrate the fact that some individuals could be una¤ected
by a policy change.)
We consider two periods, 1 and 2. In period 1, in the region of the Earnings Test exempt
amount, the mean tax rate below the exempt amount is 27.21 percent, and the mean tax
rate above the exempt amount is 77.21 percent. Note that these tax rates mimic those faced
by 62-64 year-old Social Security claimants.29 In period 2, the tax rate below the exempt
amount remains 27.21 percent, but the tax rate above the exempt amount changes according
29

As we note elsewhere, 62-64 year-olds technically face a notch in the budget constraint at the exempt
amount, as opposed to a kink. However, we …nd no evidence that they behave as if they faced a notch, as
the earnings distribution for this age group 1) does not show bunching just above the exempt amount and
2) does not show a "hole" in the earnings distribution just under the exempt amount.

60

to the policy changes we specify below. (We assume that in the counterfactual individuals
face a linear schedule with a mean tax rate of 27.21 percent.)
For a given counterfactual earnings level z0i , we calculate optimal frictionless earnings
z1i in period 1, and we calculate whether the individual with counterfactual earnings z0i
wishes to adjust her earnings from the frictionless optimum because the gains from doing
so outweigh the adjustment cost. (Optimal “frictionless” earnings refers to the individual’s
optimal earnings in the absence of adjustment costs.) We then determine the individual’s
optimal frictionless earnings z2i under the new tax schedule in period 2. We assess whether
given the adjustment cost, the individual obtains higher utility by staying at her period 1
earnings level, or by paying the adjustment cost and moving to a new earnings level in period
2.
We perform these calculations alternatively under the assumptions that (a) the elasticity
" is 0.35 and the adjustment cost is $280 (our baseline estimates); or (b) the elasticity
" is 0.35 and the adjustment cost is zero. Thus, our simulations illustrate the di¤erence
between incorporating adjustment costs and not incorporating them, holding the elasticity
constant.
Under these alternative assumptions, we can perform a number of experiments to simulate
the e¤ects of changing the e¤ective tax schedule. These calculations are shown in Appendix
Table B.6 below.
We calculate that if the marginal tax rate above the exempt amount were reduced by
17.22 percentage points, so that the tax rate above the exempt amount were reduced from
77.21 percent to 59.99 percent, mean earnings in the population under consideration would
be unchanged at $9,371.9 under our baseline estimates of the elasticity and adjustment cost.
In this case, adjustment is not optimal for anyone when we assume the adjustment cost.
In fact, earnings would be unchanged for any reduction in the marginal tax rate above
the exempt amount up to 17.22 percentage points; 17.22 percentage points is the largest
percentage point marginal tax rate decrease above the exempt amount for which there is no
adjustment. Since the gains are second-order near the kink, even a modest adjustment cost
of $280 prevents adjustment with an 17.22 percentage point (or smaller) cut in marginal tax
rates. By contrast, when assuming "=0.35 and =0, we predict that mean earnings would
rise from $9,340.3 to $10,166.3, an increase of 8.84 percent.
At the same time we calculate that if the 50 percent Earnings Test above the exempt
amount were eliminated, so that the tax rate above the exempt amount were reduced from
77.21 percent to 27.21 percent, mean earnings in the population under consideration would
rise from $9,371.9 to $11,566.7.7, or 23.4 percent, under our baseline estimates of the elasticity
and adjustment cost. When assuming "=0.35 and =0, we predict that mean earnings
would rise from $9,340.3 to $11,639.2, a nearly identical increase of 24.6 percent. The
slight discrepancy between the two estimates arises because there are individuals whose
counterfactual earnings is just above the exempt amount who choose to adjust without
adjustment costs, but for whom the gains from adjustment do not outweigh the adjustment
cost when we assume the friction.
It is worth noting an additional caveat to these results: they apply to those with counterfactual earnings in the range from $10,000 below to $10,000 above the exempt amount. If we
allowed unbounded counterfactual earnings, there would be some individuals with very large
counterfactual earnings for whom the gains from adjustment would outweigh the adjustment
61

cost, even in the presence of adjustment costs. However, this is less relevant to the Earnings
Test because as we have noted, the Social Security bene…t phases out entirely at very high
earnings levels. Moreover, considering such individuals would involve extrapolating the estimates much farther out of sample. Finally, the results are qualitatively robust to considering
other earnings ranges within the range we measure in our study, such as the range of individuals earning from $10,000 below to $30,000 above the exempt amount. In fact, under all of
the other choices we have explored, the results always show that the maximum tax cut that
leads to no earnings change is quite substantial (and larger than the changes in marginal
tax rates envisioned in most tax reform proposals)— including when we use other ages to
specify the counterfactual earnings density; use a di¤erent baseline marginal tax rate; and
use the constrained estimate of the elasticity (0.58) when performing the simulations (which
actually leads to still starker results).
All of these simulations use the static model. If we were to use our estimates of the
dynamic model instead to perform these simulations, we would still …nd that the immediate
reaction even to large taxes changes is greatly attenuated, since the estimates of the dynamic
model still show that most individuals are constrained from adjusting immediately.

62

B

Appendix: Additional Empirical Results
Figure B.1: Inertia in Bunching from 64 to 65

Notes: Using data from 1990 to 1999, Panel A of the …gure shows that when they are age 65, those previously bunching at age
64 tend to either (a) remain near the age 64 exempt amount or (b) move to the age 65 exempt amount. Panel B of the …gure
shows that those bunching at age 65 were usually bunching at age 64 in the previous year, or were near the age 65 exempt
amount in the previous year. Having earnings “near the kink” at a given age is de…ned as having earnings within $1,000 of the
kink at that age. The …rst vertical line at zero shows the age 64 exempt amount, and the second vertical line shows the
average location of the age 65 exempt amount.

63

Figure B.2: Normalized Excess Mass of Claimants, Ages 59 to 73, 1990 to 1999

Note: See notes to Figure 2 Panel B. This …gure di¤ers from Figure 2 Panel B because here the sample in year
of people who have claimed Social Security in year

t consists only

t or before (whereas in Figure 2 Panel B it consists of those who claimed

by age 65).

64

Figure B.3: Bunching Response to a Convex Kink, with Frictions in Initial Earnings

Note: See Section A.3 for an explanation of the …gure.

65

66

3545.4
4036.2
565
881.7
-236.8
[2681.1, 4409.7]*** [2934.2, 5138.2]*** [42, 1088.1]**
[-14.3, 1777.6]* [-890.4, 416.8]
3992.2
3552.3
1203.9
941.4
-231.4
[3386.8, 4597.7]*** [3092.4, 4012.2]*** [929, 1478.9]*** [453, 1429.8]*** [-510.7, 47.8]

b72

power. *** indicates p<0.01; **p<0.05; * p<0.10.

cases 71) when the sample is restricted to those born in January to March. Limiting the sample only to those born in January yields insigni…cant results, with little statistical

born in any month (Row B). The data are pooled over the period from 1983-1999. The table shows that we continue to estimate signi…cant bunching at age 70 (and in some

Notes: The table shows excess normalized bunching and its con…dence interval at each age from 68 to 72 for two samples: those born January to March (Row A), and those

B) Born any month

A) Born January-March

Table B.1: Robustness of normalized bunching to alternative birth month restrictions
b68
b69
b70
b71

67

7

7

$800

$800

5

3

4

4

2

8

4

b69
Panel A: Baseline

b70

b71

462.2
[111.1, 813.2]***
601.4
[48.2, 1154.5]**

923.0
[541.5, 1304.4]***
1210.9
[581.5, 1840.3]***

2170.2
2182.4
[1605.1, 2735.4]*** [1697.1, 2667.7]***
3610.6
2651.3
[2672.5, 4548.6]*** [1972.2, 3330.4]***

202.2
[-126.9, 531.4]
298.1
[-304.8, 901.0]

191.2
[-243.9, 626.2]
1103.3
[229.6, 1977.1]**

Panel D: Robustness to excluded region

3677.2
3267.3
1310.6
993.7
[3117.4, 4237.0]*** [2810.5, 3724.0]*** [853.3, 1767.9]*** [527.8, 1459.6]***
3535.1
2948.0
710.8
1084.3
[2944.7, 4125.6]*** [2529.1, 3366.9]*** [296.3, 1125.2]*** [554.5, 1614.1]***

Panel C: Robustness to degree

3107.8
2606.3
[2653.6, 3561.9]*** [2090.4, 3122.2]***
3047.0
2941.0
[2362.4, 3731.7]*** [2458.5, 3423.5]***

Panel B: Robustness to bin size

3442.3
2868.4
657.9
1068.8
[2763.5, 4121.2]*** [2763.5, 4121.2]*** [195.5, 1120.4]*** [527.2, 1610.4]***

b68

-55.0
[-390.8, 280.8]
579.9
[-161.8, 1321.6]

224.6
[-162.0, 611.2]
82.4
[-393.4, 558.2]

-55.3
[-391.4, 280.7]
241.2
[-363.6, 846.1]

70.1
[-328.5, 468.7]

b72

(approximately) …x the width of the excluded region when changing the bin size, we also change the number of excluded bins. *** indicates p<0.01; **p<0.05; * p<0.10.

bins around the exempt amount. Note that varying the bin size but …xing the number of excluded bins automatically changes the width of the excluded region, so to

Notes: The table shows the estimated bunching amount at each age from 68 to 72, varying the bin size, degree of the polynomial of the smooth density, or number of excluded

8

$800

7

$1,600

6

7

$400

$800

7

$800

Excluded
Binsize Degree Bins

Table B.2: Robustness to alternative empirical choices

Table B.3: Heterogeneity in Estimates of Elasticity and Adjustment Cost across Samples
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
p-value
for " equality

"
Men
Women
High lifetime earnings
Low lifetime earnings
High lifetime earnings variability
Low lifetime earnings variability

for

p-value
equality

0.44
[0.38, 0.52]***
0.42
[0.32, 0.50]***

0.39

$62
[14, 167]***
$489
[165, 720]***

0.00

0.48
[0.41, 0.58]***
0.44
[0.32, 0.51]***

0.05

$24
[2, 90]***
$538
[217, 688]***

0.00

0.39
[0.35, 0.46]***
0.38
[0.33, 0.46]***

0.25

$116
[37, 315]***
$178
[55, 378]***

0.16

Notes: This table implements our “comparative static” method separately in each of several groups shown in each row.
“High/low lifetime earnings” refers to the group of individuals with mean real earnings from 1951 (when the data begin) to
1989 that are above/below the median level in our study population. “High/low lifetime earnings variability” refers to the
group of individuals for whom the standard deviation of real earnings from 1951 to 1989 is above/below the median level in
our study population. Columns 2 and 4 show the

p-values for the two-sided test of equality in the estimates between each set
" and , respectively.

of groups (i.e. men vs. women, high vs. low lifetime earnings, and high vs. low earnings variability), for

We pool data from two policy changes: (a) around the 1989/1990 transition analyzed in Table 2, and (b) around the age
69/70 transition analyzed in Table 3. We pool the transitions because this gives us the maximum power to detect di¤erences
across groups. The results are generally comparable when we investigate each transition separately. See also notes from Tables
2 and 3.

68

Table B.4: Estimates of Elasticity and Adjustment Cost 1990 Policy Change, Assuming
Pre-Period Bunching may not be at Frictionless Optimum
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
"

"j = 0
1990

1989

Baseline

0.28
$187.78
0.43
0.24
[0.25, 0.43]*** [58.97, 1303.68]*** [0.36, 0.54]*** [0.20, 0.28]***
Uniform Density
0.24
$162.26
0.39
0.22
[0.22, 0.39]*** [55.27, 1556.01]*** [0.33, 0.48]*** [0.18, 0.25]***
Bene…t Enhancement
0.40
$86.45
0.59
0.37
[0.36, 0.53]*** [20.31, 561.81]*** [0.49, 0.73]*** [0.30, 0.43]***
Excluding FICA
0.33
$139.03
0.50
0.30
[0.29, 0.41]*** [38.30, 525.91]*** [0.42, 0.62]*** [0.25, 0.35]***
Bandwidth = $400
0.26
$104.10
0.38
0.24
[0.22, 0.33]*** [7.01, 440.80]*** [0.30, 0.50]*** [0.19, 0.30]***

Note: The table examines the 1990 policy change, using data from 1989 and 1990, but assumes that bunching in 1989 may
not be at the frictionless optimum, as described in the text. See also notes to Table 2.

69

Sample

Table B.5: Estimates of Changes in Bunching Around 1990
Old only,
DD, separate
Old only linear trend
DD
linear trend

old x 1990 dummy
old x 1991 dummy
old x 1992 dummy
old x 1993 dummy

Ages
Year FE?
Linear time trend (in year)
Separate linear trend for “old”

28.9
(249.1)
-1728.9
(249.1)***
-1648.8
(249.1)***
-2123.8
(249.1)***

-165.1
(411.0)
-1966.0
(500.6)***
-1928.9
(594.9)***
-2447.1
(692.1)***

-107.3
(306.7)
-1824.5
(306.7)***
-1130.2
(306.7)***
-2131.2
(306.7)***

-69.2
(411.7)
-1777.9
(481.3)***
-1075.1
(558.1)*
-2067.6
(639.7)***

66-68
No
No
No

66-68
No
Yes
No

62-64, 66-68
Yes
No
No

62-64, 66-68
Yes
No
Yes

Notes: The table shows that the estimated change in bunching amounts from before to after 1990 in the age 66-68 age group
are similar under several speci…cations. The dummy variable “old” indicates the older age group (66-68). The sample in
Columns (1) and (2) includes only 66-68 year-olds, and in Columns (3) and (4) it also includes 62-64 year-olds. Additional
controls include a linear time trend (in year) in column (2), year …xed e¤ects in columns (3) and (4), and the linear time trend
interacted with the “old” dummy in column (4). Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Under all the speci…cations, the
coe¢ cient on old x 1990 is insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero: bunching in 1990 is not signi…cantly di¤erent from prior
bunching, indicating that adjustment does not immediately occur. However, the coe¢ cients on old x 1991, old x 1992, old x
1993 are negative and signi…cant, indicating that bunching falls signi…cantly after 1990— i.e. a reduction in bunching does
eventually occur (but not immediately in 1990). The fact that the results are similar under all these various speci…cations
indicates that the results are little changed by controlling for a linear trend (Column 2), comparing 66-68 year-olds to a
reasonable control group of 62-64 year-olds (Column 3), and additionally controlling for a separate linear trend for the older
group (Column 4). In Columns 1 and 3, the standard errors are the same across all of the interaction coe¢ cients shown
because there is only one observation underlying each dummy, and the dummies are exactly identi…ed. See also notes from
Table 2.

70

Table B.6: Policy Simulations
(1)

(2)

Panel A: Eliminate Earnings Test for 62-64 year olds
Period 1 mean earnings
Mean earnings change
Share a¤ected
Share who adjust
Mean change among adjusters
Percent change among adjusters

With adjustment costs

Without adjustment costs

$9,371.9
$2,194.8
50.4
41.9
$5,239.6
42.6

$9,340.1
$2,298.9
50.4
50.4
$4,563.7
37.3

Panel B: Reduce Earnings Test BRR by 17.22 percentage points
Period 1 mean earnings
Mean earnings change
Percent earnings change
Share who adjust
Mean change among adjusters
Percent change among adjusters

With adjustment costs

Without adjustment costs

$9,371.9
$0
50.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

$9,340.3
$826.0
50.4
37.4
$2,207.6
17.7

" = 0:35
= 0: “Mean earnings change” refers

Note: Each panel shows the results of a di¤erent policy simulation. Column 1 shows the results when we assume
and

= $280, and Column 2 shows the results when we assume " = 0:35 and

to the change in mean earnings from Period 1 to Period 2 predicted in the full study population (i.e. the population with
counterfactual earnings between -$10,000 below and $10,000 above the exempt amount). “Percent earnings change” is the
percent change in mean earnings predicted in the full study population. “Share who adjust” refers to the percent of the full
study population whose earnings does not change in response to the policy change. Note that only 50.4 percent of the full
study population has counterfactual earnings above the exempt amount and therefore has incentives that are potentially
a¤ected by the policy change in our model. “Mean change among adjusters” refers to the change in mean earnings predicted
among those who change earnings in response to the policy change. “Percent change among adjusters” refers to the percent
change in mean earnings among those who change earnings in response to the policy change. “BRR” is the bene…t reduction
rate. See Appendix A.6 for further explanation.

71

