                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS AND UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE GREAT RECESSION:
                   THE ROLE OF MACRO EFFECTS

                                      Marcus Hagedorn
                                       Fatih Karahan
                                      Iourii Manovskii
                                        Kurt Mitman

                                     Working Paper 19499
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w19499


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2013


We would like to thank Bob Hall, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl and seminar participants at Census
Bureau, Edinburgh, EIEF, USC, Maryland, Penn State, UPenn, Princeton, Pompeu Fabra,
Toulouse, UCL, UConn, Wisconsin, CUNY Graduate Center, Greater Stockholm Macro Group,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, New York, and Philadelphia, 2013 conference on
Macroeconomics Across Time and Space, 2013 SED, 2013 NBER Summer Institute (EFCE,
EFMB, EFRSW groups), 2013 North American Summer Meeting of Econometric Society, 2013
Minnesota Workshop in Macroeconomic Theory, 15th IZA/CEPR European Summer
Symposium on Labor Economics, Mannheim conference on \Financial Frictions and Real
Economy," 4th Ifo Conference on "Macroeconomics and Survey Data", 2014 ASSA Meetings,
2014 NBER Public Economics Program Meeting and 2014 Cowles Foundation Summer
Conference on \Structural Empirical Microeconomic Models" for their comments. We are
especially grateful to June Shelp, at The Conference Board, for her help with the HWOL data.
The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Support from the National Science
Foundation Grants No. SES-0922406 and SES-1357903 is gratefully acknowledged. The
opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Marcus Hagedorn, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unemployment Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects
Marcus Hagedorn, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman
NBER Working Paper No. 19499
October 2013, Revised May 2016
JEL No. E24,J63,J64,J65

                                        ABSTRACT

Equilibrium labor market theory suggests that unemployment benefit extensions affect
unemployment by impacting both job search decisions by the unemployed and job creation
decisions by employers. The existing empirical literature focused on the former effect only. We
develop a new methodology necessary to incorporate the measurement of the latter effect.
Implementing this methodology in the data, we find that benefit extensions raise equilibrium
wages and lead to a sharp contraction in vacancy creation, employment, and a rise in
unemployment.

Marcus Hagedorn                                Iourii Manovskii
Department of Economics,                       Department of Economics
University of Oslo,                            University of Pennsylvania
Box 1095 Blindern,                             160 McNeil Building
0317 Oslo, Norway                              3718 Locust Walk
marcus.hagedorn@econ.uio.no                    Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                               and NBER
Fatih Karahan                                  manovski@econ.upenn.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street                              Kurt Mitman
New York, NY 10045                             Institute for International Economic Studies
yfkarahan@gmail.com                            Stockholm University
                                               106 91 Stockholm
                                               SWEDEN
                                               kurt.mitman@iies.su.se
1       Introduction
    Unemployment in the U.S. rose dramatically during the Great Recession and remained at
an unusually high level for a long time. The policy response to the initial rise in unemployment
during the financial crisis involved an unprecedented extension of unemployment benefits with
benefit duration rising from the usual 26 weeks to as long as 99 weeks. The motivation for this
policy was to provide “income support for a vulnerable group after they have lost their jobs
through no fault of their own” as well as “needed support for the fragile economy.”1
    The effectiveness of this policy response was questioned by Barro (2010) and Mulligan
(2012), among others. These researchers pointed out that the fact that unemployment benefit
extensions represent an implicit tax on market work may offset some of the stimulative effect
ascribed to such policies and help explain the persistence of high unemployment even after
the end of the Great Recession. Recent careful microeconometric studies have challenged this
argument by documenting only small effects of unemployment benefit extensions on labor sup-
ply. The methodology underlying the existing empirical research, however, does not allow for
a complete evaluation of the effects of unemployment benefit extensions because it excludes
the possibility that this policy could also impact labor demand. We develop a novel measure-
ment methodology required to incorporate this effect and attempt to provide a more complete
empirical assessment of the labor market implications of this policy response.
    The following stylized decomposition helps illustrate the two margins:

                      Job finding rateit    =         sit          ×            f (θ )              (1)
                                                     |{z}                       | {zt}
                                                search intensity       finding rate per unit of s

In other words, the probability that an individual i finds a job at time t depends on how hard
that individual searches and how selective he is in his acceptance decisions, which is captured
by the “search effort” component sit . It also depends on the aggregate labor market conditions
θt that determine how easy it is to locate jobs by expending a unit of search effort. To use an
extreme example, if there are no job vacancies created by employers, f (θt ) = 0, no amount of
search effort by an unemployed worker would yield a positive probability of obtaining a job.
    Changes in unemployment benefit policies affect both the search intensity of unemployed
workers - the micro effect, and the aggregate job finding rate per unit of search effort through
general equilibrium macro effects. Indeed, in the classic equilibrium search framework of
Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), the primary analytical device used by economists to study
the determination of unemployment, the response of unemployment to changes in benefits is
mainly driven by the response of employers’ decisions of whether and how many jobs to create
    1
    “Unemployment Insurance Extensions and Reforms in the American Jobs Act,” the report by the Presi-
dent’s Council of Economic Advisers, the National Economic Council, the Domestic Policy Council, and the
Department of Labor, December 2011.


                                                     1
and not by the impact on workers’ job search and acceptance decisions. The logic of the model
is simple. Everything else equal, extending unemployment benefits exerts an upward pressure
on the equilibrium wage. This lowers the profits employers receive from filled jobs, leading to a
decline in vacancy creation. Lower vacancies imply a lower job finding rate for workers, which
leads to an increase in unemployment.
    Starting with the pioneering work of Millard and Mortensen (1997) and Shi and Wen (1999),
the evidence on the magnitude of these equilibrium effects is predominantly based on the
estimation of structural models based on Mortensen and Pissarides (1994).2 For example, a
structural analysis based on this model in Krause and Uhlig (2012) reveals a large reduction
in unemployment and increase in vacancy creation due to the benefit duration cut (known
as Hartz IV reform) in Germany. The firm’s vacancy creation decision in this model is based
on comparing the cost of creating a job to the profits the firm expects to obtain from hiring
the worker. The profit is defined as the difference between a worker’s productivity and the
wage. Costain and Reiter (2008), Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) and Ljungqvist and Sargent
(2015) have shown that if profits are relatively small, changes in unemployment benefit policies
that affect wages can have a large percentage impact on profits, implying a large response of
vacancies, and, as a consequence, of unemployment. The key parameter determining the size
of profits in the model is the flow utility obtained by unemployed workers. This parameter
is notoriously difficult to measure directly but its value is crucial for the magnitude of policy
effects delivered by the search model. Our objective in this paper is to directly measure the
impact of unemployment benefits on the labor market variables of interest without having to
rely on the estimate of the flow utility of the unemployed and without having to fully specify the
model. The empirical strategy we develop is, however, consistent with a fully specified model.
    Incorporating the measurement of the the macro effect in a policy evaluation requires us to
develop a novel empirical methodology. The primary reason is that the macro effect measures
the impact of policy on firms’ forward looking decisions to create jobs, which, like any investment
decisions, are affected not only by the existing policy but also by the expectation of possible
future policy changes. As a result, the full expected sequence of future benefit durations in
addition to the contemporaneous benefit policy affects current job creation.
    The important role of expectations can be seen directly in the data as illustrated in Figures
1 and 2. The key feature of the U.S. unemployment insurance system is that unemployment
insurance policies are determined at the state level and apply to all locations within a state.
Using our data and sample described below, Panel 1(a) plots the estimated coefficients from
a regression of log state unemployment in quarter t on the log of contemporaneous benefit
   2
     One line of research has studied the effects of unemployment benefits on unemployment using cross-country
regressions. While this literature typically finds much larger effects than those implied by the micro studies, these
estimates are relatively hard to interpret given the endogeneity problems and heterogeneity across countries that
is difficult to control for.


                                                         2
                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                Estimated Coefficient on unemployment at period t
  Estimated coefficient on unemployment at period t
                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                       .8
                                 .6




                                                                                                                                               .6
                          .4




                                                                                                                                        .4
                 .2




                                                                                                                               .2
         0




                                                                                                                       0
-.2




                                                                                                              -.2
                                                       0   1   2       3        4       5         6   7   8                                                         0   1   2       3        4       5         6   7   8
                                                                   Future benefit change in t+k                                                                                 Future benefit change in t+k

                                                                      (a) States                                                                                            (b) Border counties
Figure 1: The Impact of Future Unemployment Benefit Durations on Current Unemployment.

duration and changes in log benefit duration over the next eight quarters (the regression includes
fixed state and time effects). We observe that current unemployment is significantly positively
related to future changes in benefit duration. State-level evidence does not isolate the effect of
expectations, however, because it also reflects the endogeneity of benefits: benefit duration tends
to rise in response to past increases in unemployment at the state level. The same endogeneity
problem implies that one cannot infer the effects of benefit extensions by simply relating benefit
duration to unemployment in a panel of states.
    We show formally below, however, that the endogeneity problem can be overcome by ex-
ploiting a policy discontinuity at state borders and comparing the evolution of unemployment in
counties that border each other but belong to different states.3 Locations separated by a state
border share the same geography, climate, access to transportation, agglomeration benefits,
access to specialized labor and supplies, etc. Indeed, we provide direct evidence that economic
shocks do not stop at the state border but evolve smoothly across borders. The key feature
that sets these locations apart is the difference in policies on the two sides of the border. This
policy discontinuity allows to identify its labor market implications.4
    This insight implies that the effects of expectations can be isolated using a similar regression
but with all variables differenced between bordering counties (unemployment is now measured
at the county level and the regression includes fixed effects for each border county pair). We
observe that eliminating the endogeneity problem plaguing the state-level analysis indeed leads
to a substantial reduction of estimated coefficients plotted in Panel 1(b) relative to Panel 1(a).
Nevertheless, current unemployment at the county level continues to respond significantly to
future state-level benefit changes.
                                           3
     A Map of U.S. state and county borders can be found in Appendix Figure A-3.
                                           4
     A fundamentally similar identification strategy was used, among others, by Holmes (1998) to identify the
impact of right-to-work laws on location of manufacturing industry and by Dube et al. (2010) to identify the
effect of minimum wage laws on earnings and employment of low-wage workers.

                                                                                                              3
    The presence of significant expectation effects implies an empirical analysis which fails to
account for firms’ expectations would measure an uninterpretable mixture of the true policy
effect and of the unknown effect of labor market participants’ expectations of future policies.
To address this problem, we derive a quasi-difference estimator of the effect of unemployment
insurance policies on variables such as vacancies and unemployment that controls for the effect
of expectations (we verify the successful performance of this estimator in data generated by an
estimated equilibrium search model in Section 5, validate the methodology using direct evidence
in Section 4.2 and by applying it to placebo policy changes in Section 4.3). Having isolated the
effect of the current policy, our estimator allows us to generalize our findings and estimate the
effect of temporary or permanent changes in unemployment benefit duration.
    A simple example might be helpful in illustrating why this methodological advancement is
necessary. Consider two otherwise identical states, one which passes a law extending benefits
by 20 weeks for one year, and the other which extends benefits by 10 weeks permanently. Our
estimates imply that in the state with the temporary extension, unemployment would increase
0.5 percentage points, whereas in the state with the permanent extension unemployment would
increase by 0.8 percentage points. The effect is higher in the state with the permanent change
because firms expect that profits at all future dates will be lower because of the extension,
whereas in the state with the temporary change, firms expect profits to be lower for one year
only. A naive difference-in-differences analysis would erroneously suggest a significant negative
impact of unemployment benefits on unemployment. Moreover, if employers anticipated these
policy changes, say a year in advance, virtually all the adjustment of job creation (and of unem-
ployment in a standard search model) would have occurred prior to the actual change in policy.
Indeed, the basic optimality of firms’ decisions implies no discrete jumps in vacancy posting
at the time that expected policy changes are implemented. Thus, an observer may conclude
that unemployment and vacancies are not related to benefits because they change dramatically
when benefits do not and do not change when benefits change. It is only by controlling for the
movements induced by the changes in expectations that the correct magnitude of the macro
effect can be identified.5
    Using the quasi-difference estimator, we can confirm that significant effects of future policies
identified using border county comparisons in Figure 1(b) are indeed due to expectations. Specif-
ically, in Figure 2 we plot estimates from the same regression with the dependent variable being
the difference in quasi-differenced unemployment between border counties. Quasi-differencing
eliminates the effects of expectations and we observe that indeed, when expectations are con-
trolled for, the difference in current unemployment between border counties is independent of
future benefit durations. Note that the flip-side of Figure 2 is that the differences in past quasi-
   5
    Clearly, the empirical strategy based on comparing border counties requires controlling for expectations of
future policy changes not only in the “treated” county but also in the other “control” county.


                                                      4
                            Estimated Coefficient on unemployment at period t
                         -.15       -.1      -.05       0      .05        .1


                                                                                0   1   2       3        4       5         6   7   8
                                                                                            Future benefit change in t+k


     Figure 2: Difference of Quasi-Differenced Unemployment between Border Counties.

differenced unemployment between border counties do not predict changes in current benefit
duration, implying the absence of a pre-existing trend. We can therefore be confident that the
increase in quasi-differenced unemployment is not the continuation of a pretrend (which at the
same time causes the benefit increase) but instead is the causal consequence of the increase in
benefits.
    As a further validation of our methodology we also use future benefits directly to compute
the response of unemployment to changes in unemployment insurance generosity. We find that
both the measurement using direct evidence on future policy changes and our quasi-differenced
estimator which uses current policy only deliver the same answer, implying first, that future
expected policy changes affect current choices and second, that our estimator controls for those
expectations very well.
    While the paper is motivated by specific empirical questions, it seems worth noting that the
methodological advance we propose is applicable much more generally. In particular, a version
of a quasi-differenced estimator that we develop can be used in any empirical analysis where
expectations of future policies affect current decisions. This applies to virtually all investment
decision, including investment in physical capital. As another example, in sticky price New
Keynesian models firms’ pricing decisions depend on the expected path of current and future
marginal costs, potentially affected by future policies. In this environment, Hagedorn et al.
(2015a) show that a quasi-differenced inflation can be used to control for expectations and
measure the impact of fiscal policies on current marginal costs to reveal their stimulative effect.
    Our second methodological innovation provides a more flexible and general model of county
level trends that leads to a more precise estimate of the effects of benefit duration relative to a
fixed effects regression. This extra flexibility is necessitated by the fact that our estimation is
based on a panel of border counties over the period of the Great Recession. Numerous shocks and
policy changes have affected the aggregate economy but their impact was likely heterogeneous
across county pairs. For example, shocks to and changing regulations of the financial system,

                                                                                                      5
while aggregate in nature, might have had a particularly strong impact on the counties on
the border of New York and New Jersey, while the auto industry bailout likely had a larger
impact on counties surrounding the border between Michigan and Indiana or Ohio. Similarly,
the aggregate financial crisis potentially had a different impact on states depending on their
different foreclosure laws. To obtain consistent estimates of the effect of unemployment benefit
extensions despite heterogeneous impacts of the aggregate shocks we follow Bai (2009) and
use a flexible interactive effects model. This approach provides a natural way to control for
the observed and unobserved spatial heterogeneity and allows for a very flexible model of the
county-level trends in variables.
    Following the description in Section 3 of our main data sources, we measure the effects of
unemployment benefit extensions on unemployment in Section 4. We find that unemployment is
significantly higher in the border counties belonging to the states that expanded unemployment
benefit duration as compared to the counties just across the state border. The quantitative
magnitude of this effect is so large that our estimates attribute a prominent role to benefit
extensions in accounting for the persistence of high unemployment following the end of the
Great Recession in 2009. It is important to note that our estimates do not imply that the
large increase in unemployment at the onset of the Great Recession was due to extensions
of unemployment benefits. However, we do find that the extensions of benefits contributed
significantly to the slow decline of unemployment thereafter. For example, assuming perfect
foresight of future benefits, our estimates imply that unemployment in 2011 would have been 2
percentage points lower had benefits not been extended. While our estimates are undoubtedly
large, they are smaller than consensus estimates in the existing empirical literature reviewed
below, although we will argue that the interpretation of the existing estimates is unclear.
    We continue in Section 4.4 by formally describing how our border-county identification strat-
egy overcomes the potential policy endogeneity problem. At the core of our methodology is the
assumption that economic conditions evolve smoothly across state borders while unemployment
benefit policies change discontinuously. The state-level benefit policy is affected by shocks to a
state’s economy, e.g. shocks to state-level productivity or demand. The identifying assumption is
then that these shocks affect the counties on the two sides of the state border similarly. We test
this assumption by assessing whether the differences in productivities between two neighboring
states or differences in state unemployments instrumented with Bartik shocks (Bartik, 1991)
help predict (controlling for the difference in benefits) the difference in unemployment between
two counties that belong to those states and border each other. We find that they do not and
conclude that our empirical methodology overcomes the endogeneity problem because while
state unemployment benefit policy is affected by state-level economic conditions, the difference
in unemployment between two border counties reflects only the difference in policy and not
the difference in state-level economic fundamentals. The fact that the continuity assumption

                                                6
is satisfied in the data also implies that the size of the border counties relative to their state’s
is not a relevant consideration. We show that this test has power by considering an artificial
sample of randomly paired up border counties in which the continuity assumption is violated.
    This endogeneity test also helps address potential concerns regarding the quality of county-
level unemployment data. It is prohibitively expensive to conduct a representative labor force
survey in every county to measure unemployment. The Local Area Unemployment Statistics
(LAUS) Program of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) prepares county-level unemployment
estimates using a variety of local data sources. In Section 4.5 we describe the procedure and
use the underlying data that BLS released to us to undo the steps where state-level totals may
affect the measured county unemployment. We find that doing so does not significantly affect
our estimates. This implies that measured county unemployment does not reflect state-level
conditions that induce changes in benefits. The endogeneity test described above yielded the
same conclusion. Had county unemployment reflected state unemployment driven by shocks
to e.g. productivity of the state, the test would have revealed this. Finally, in Section 4.5 we
also verify that our results based on LAUS data are fully consistent with those based on the
administrative county-level data on the counts of unemployment insurance claims, which are
immune to concerns regarding potential contamination with state-level variables.
    Of course, unemployment insurance is not the only policy discontinuous at the state border
that can have a large impact on unemployment in every county of the state. Taxes, regulations,
other benefit policies, etc. may have similar effects. Permanent differences in such policies
across states during our sample period are picked up by our interactive effects estimator. The
only potential concern is that changes in these policies could be correlated with the changes
of unemployment benefit durations, confounding the estimated coefficient. Consequently, we
proceed to describe and explicitly control for the effects of numerous other state-level policy
changes to ensure that our estimates isolate the effects of unemployment benefit extensions.
    In Section 5 we assess whether the mechanisms embedded in the standard equilibrium labor
market search model can provide a coherent rationalization of the effect of unemployment
benefit extensions on unemployment that we document. Our point of departure is the analysis
in Section 4.7 of the effect of the sudden cut in potential benefit duration by 16 weeks in Missouri
in April 2011. The reform led to an immediate and very large jump in job vacancy creation,
providing direct evidence of an important macro effect. Expanding the scope of this analysis
to all benefit duration changes across U.S. states during our sample period, and applying our
methodology to control for the effects of expectations, we find that, consistent with implications
of the equilibrium search model, relative to the paired border county, wages rise while vacancy
rates and employment fall significantly in counties experiencing larger benefit extensions. The
estimated magnitudes of these changes are also quantitatively consistent with the model.
    An analysis based on a comparison of border counties belonging to states with different

                                                 7
policy regimes must account for the possibility that residents of both counties may direct their
job search efforts to the county with better labor market prospects. In Section 6 we show
that these mobility decisions can be measured in the data from observed labor market flows.
The estimates reported in that section imply that individuals do not systematically change
their location of employment in response to changes in unemployment benefits across states
during the Great Recession. This is perhaps not surprising. Residents of the border counties
face a trade-off between receiving higher wages with lower job finding probability in a county
belonging to the state with higher benefit eligibility and receiving lower wages with higher
job finding probability in the state with lower benefits (note that in the U.S. unemployment
insurance system benefits depend on the state of employment, and not on the state of residence).
Moreover, the difference in the available duration of benefits across border counties is relatively
small and may not justify larger commuting expenses. Thus, while we fully control for the
response of the location of employment to changes in benefits in Section 6, this modification
of the analysis turns out to be inconsequential. This leads us to work with a simpler and more
transparent specification that ignores mobility decisions in the early parts of the paper.
    While our estimate of the effects of unemployment benefit extensions is based on the dif-
ference across border counties, it is also desirable to be able to use the resulting coefficients
to predict the effect of a nation-wide extension. A potential concern is that when some states
extend benefits more than others, economic activity may reallocate to states with, say, lower
benefits. This reallocation would be picked up by our estimates but will be absent when the
policy is changed everywhere. Our results in Sections 5 and 6 (and the formal analysis of
aggregation in this setting in Hagedorn et al., 2015b) alleviate such concerns. First, we find
large negative effect of unemployment benefit extensions on employment in non-tradable sec-
tors which are not subject to reallocation. Second, we find that unemployed workers do not
change the strategy of which county to look for work in response to changes in benefits.
    In the Appendix destined for on-line publication we describe features of the legal framework
underlying the U.S. unemployment insurance system that are relevant for understanding our
empirical finding that unemployment benefit extensions lead to higher equilibrium wages of
incumbent workers who remain in the same job. In addition, we also briefly consider the impli-
cations of our findings for macroeconomic time-series. In particular, we summarize the results
in Mitman and Rabinovich (2013), who introduced unemployment benefit extensions into the
Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) model calibrated to match the effect of unemployment benefit
extensions on unemployment documented in this paper. The model matches nearly perfectly
the dynamics of unemployment over the last 60 years. Moreover, the extensions of unemploy-
ment benefits generate the apparent shift in the Beveridge curve after the Great Recession that
was widely interpreted in the literature as a sign of increased mismatch in the labor market,
see Diamond (2013) for a review.

                                                8
2       Empirical Methodology
2.1 Identification via Border Counties: Controlling for Expectations
   To estimate the macroeconomic effects of unemployment insurance on a variable xt such as
vacancies or unemployment, using the standard labor search model, we first estimate the effect
on labor market tightness, θt , defined as the ratio of vacancies to unemployment, and therefore
look at firms’ job creation decision. The value of a filled job for the firm is:

                                      Jt = πt + β(1 − st )Et Jt+1 ,                                    (2)

where πt is period t profits from the job, β is the discount factor, st is the exogenous probability
that the job ends and Et is the expectation operator using information available at time t. Free
entry into vacancy posting implies that the expected cost of posting a vacancy is equal to the
value of a filled job. The job creation decision is then

                                               q(θt )Jt = c,                                           (3)

where q(θt ) is the probability to fill a vacancy and c is the the cost of maintaining a vacancy.
This approximately yields

                                           log(θt ) = κ̃ log(Jt ).                                     (4)

We now approximate log(Jt ) as a function of log(πt ), log(Jt+1 ) and an expectational error log(ηt )
around the steady state with a constant π = J(1 − β(1 − s)), so that the previous equation
reads
                                 π
                    log(θt ) = κ̃ log(πt ) + κ̃β(1 − st ) log(Jt+1 ) + log(ηt ).                 (5)
                                 J
Using π/J = (1 − β(1 − s)) and the job creation decision (4) for t + 1, yields

                 log(θt ) = κ̃(1 − β(1 − s)) log(πt ) + β(1 − st ) log(θt+1 ) + log(ηt ).              (6)

In quarterly data variables such as unemployment are well approximated by a linear function
of log(θ):6

                                        log(xt ) = λx log(θt ),                                        (7)

so that we obtain the quasi-difference

         x̃t := log(xt ) − β(1 − st ) log(xt+1 ) = κ̃λx (1 − β(1 − s)) log(πt ) + λx log(ηt ).         (8)

    As in the standard Pissarides (2000) model, firms’ period t profits from employing a worker
are given by the difference between workers’ marginal product and the wage. The wage, in turn,
    6
     See, e.g., Hall (2005), Shimer (2007). Below we verify that this approximation also performs well in a
calibrated equilibrium search model with unemployment benefit extensions.



                                                     9
is affected by the generosity of unemployment benefits available to the worker.7 Thus, up to
a log-linear approximation with respect to the two state variables of the model, firms’ profits
from employing a worker are given by:

                                     log(πt ) = γz log(zt ) − γb log(bt ),                                (9)

where zt is workers’ productivity, bt are unemployment benefits, and γz and γb are unknown
coefficients which the standard theory implies should both be positive, although we do not
impose such a restriction. As we discussed in Footnote 7, the two state variables zt and bt affect
firm’s profits through their impact on a number of variables in the model and Equation (9)
refers to their relevant total effect.
    Finally, denote by p the border-county pair. Then, substituting Equation (9) into Equation
(8) and differencing between border counties within a pair yields:

                                         ∆x̃p,t = α∆bp,t + ∆p,t ,                                       (10)

where ∆ the difference operator over counties in the same pair. More specifically, if counties i
and j are in the same border-county pair p, then ∆x̃p,t = x̃p,i,t − x̃p,j,t , and, with a slight abuse
of notation, ∆bp,t = log(bp,i,t ) − log(bp,j,t ).
    After we describe the structure of the error term ∆p,t in Section 2.2, Equation (10) can be
estimated in the data to recover the coefficient of interest α, which equals, using equations (9)
and (8),

                                        −γb λx κ̃(1 − β(1 − s)).                                         (11)

Dividing this coefficient by the measurable factor (1−β(1−s)) yields the permanent percentage
change of a variable x in response to a permanent one percentage change in the policy variable
b, −γb λx κ̃. More generally, the effect of increasing benefit duration from ω1 to ω2 weeks for n
time periods is given by
                                  1 − (β(1 − s))n
                           α̂ ×                   × (log(ω2 ) − log(ω1 )) .                              (12)
                                    1 − β(1 − s)
    Equation (10), which will form the basis of our empirical strategy, differs from the standard
specification in the literature in that the left-hand-side variable is the quasi-difference x̃p,t as
opposed to simply xp,t . This is essential in our application because vacancy posting decisions
by employers are forward looking and are affected by the expectations of future changes in
benefits. Moreover, the expectations of the future path of benefits might depend on the benefit
level today. For example, suppose raising benefit levels leads to a rise in unemployment. If the
benefit level and the duration are increasing in state unemployment, an increase in benefits
   7
     Note that this is the equilibrium wage response to a change in benefits, combining the direct effect of
benefits on wages and various indirect effects which in our empirical analysis we can be deliberately agnostic
about. For the response of vacancy creation it is this equilibrium wage response that matters and consequently
this what we estimate (equation (29)) in Section 5.3.


                                                      10
today makes it then more likely that benefits would be increased further in the future. Since
vacancy creation and, consequently, unemployment respond to this change in expectations, it
is clear that the coefficient α in a regression with xp,t on the left-hand side will be a biased
estimator of the effect of the current benefit structure on the current variable of interest, such
as unemployment.
    To clarify how our estimation strategy controls for expectations, recall that our quasi-
difference is defined as x̃t := log(xt ) − β(1 − st ) log(xt+1 ). This works because market tightness
in period t, θt , depends on expected profits Jt and thus on the whole expected sequence of
future benefit levels in t, t + 1, t + 2, . . . Shifting by one period, market tightness θt+1 depends
on expected profits in period t + 1, Jt+1 , and thus on the expected sequence of benefit levels in
t + 1, t + 2, . . . Since profits in periods t and t + 1 are related by the simple accounting identity,
Jt = πt + β(1 − st )Et Jt+1 , market tightness θt depends on current profits πt (affected by bt ) and
on market tightness θt+1 which is linearly related to Et Jt+1 and depends on the sequence of ben-
efits (bt+1 , bt+2 , . . .). As a result, a change in current benefits bt affects current profits, current
vacancy creation and thus the quasi-differenced market tightness. In contrast, changes in future
benefits, say bt+1 , affect both θt and θt+1 . The effect of bt+1 on θt is discounted by β(1 − st ).
The effect of bt+1 on θt+1 is not discounted, but is multiplied by β(1 − st ) when constructing
the quasi-difference. Thus, the effect of a change in bt+1 cancels out in the quasi-difference. By
the same logic, the quasi-difference eliminates the effect of a change in bt+2 , bt+3 , . . . Thus, our
specification allows us to obtain an unbiased estimate of the coefficient α - the effect of a current
change in benefits on current profits and current market tightness - despite a forward looking
nature of the job creation decision. In order to ascertain the accuracy of our specification,
In Section 5.4 we will compare the predicted permanent effect estimated using the proposed
method to the actual permanent effect in a calibrated Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) model.
We find that our empirical specification is very accurate in model generated data.

2.2     Interactive Effects
    The term ∆p,t in Equation (10) contains the expectation error and the permanent differ-
ences in x̃ across border counties caused by, e.g., permanent differences in tax policies across
states they belong to. Moreover, as we mentioned in the Introduction, various shocks have af-
fected the aggregate economy during the Great Recession. But the same aggregate shocks are
likely to have a heterogeneous impact on different border county pairs. In this case, estimating
the panel regression in Equation (10), perhaps with a set of county pair and time fixed effects,
is problematic for inference.8 Fortunately, Bai (2009) has shown that consistency and proper
   8
    See Andrews (2005) for the discussion of this problem in a cross-sectional regression. Gobillon and Magnac
(2015) establish that the difference-in-differences estimator is generically biased in the panel data context. They
also establish the superior performance of the interactive effects estimator that we use relative to alternatives


                                                        11
inference can be obtained in a panel data context, such as ours, through the use of an interactive
effects estimator. In particular, we decompose the error term in Equation (10) as

                                            ∆p,t = λ0p Ft + νp,t ,                          (13)

where λp (r × 1) is a vector of pair-specific factor loadings and Ft (r × 1) is a vector of time-
specific common factors. Our baseline specification can then be written as

                                       ∆x̃p,t = α∆bp,t + λ0p Ft + νp,t .                     (14)

    As is shown in Bai (2009), this model incorporates additive time and county pair fixed
effects as special cases. It is, however, much more general and allows for a very flexible model
of the heterogeneous time trends at the county pair level. The key to estimating α consistently
is to treat the unobserved factors and factor loadings as parameters to be estimated. Our
implementation is based on an iterative two-stage estimator described in Appendix I.

2.2.1    Estimating the Number of Factors

    To implement this estimator, we need to specify the number of factors. Bai and Ng (2002)
have shown that the number of factors in pure factor models can be consistently estimated
based on the information criterion approach. Bai (2009) shows that their argument can be
adapted to panel data models with interactive fixed effects. Thus, we define our criterion CP
as a function of the number of factors k as:
                                                                        log (N T )
                        CP (k) = σ̂ 2 (k) + σ̂ 2 (k̄) k (N + T ) − k 2
                                                     
                                                                                    ,
                                                                            NT
where k̄ ≥ r is the maximum number of factors, N is the number of pairs, T is the number of
time observations, σ̂ 2 (k) is the mean squared error, defined as
                                         N   T
                                     1 XX                         0
                                                                               2
                       σ̂ 2 (k) =               ∆x̃p,t − a∆bp,t − λi (k) Ft (k) ,
                                    N T i=1 t=1
                   0
and Ft (k) and λi (k) are the estimated factors and their loadings, respectively, when k factors
are estimated. To avoid collinearity, we set k̄ to the minimum of seven and T − 1, one less than
the total number of time observations. Our estimator for the number of factors is then given
by

                                            k̂ = arg min CP (k).
                                                     k≤k̄

2.2.2    Standard Errors

    To properly compute standard errors, we need to take into account potential correlation
in the residuals across counties and over time. There are two possible sources of correlation.
First, the outcomes that we are interested in (unemployment, vacancies, wages, etc.) are highly
methods used in the literature.

                                                      12
serially correlated. This aspect of the data may cause serial correlation in the errors. Second,
the fact that some counties appear in multiple county-pairs results in an almost mechanical
correlation across county pairs. To account for these sources of correlation in the residuals, we
follow Bertrand et al. (2004) and use the block-bootstrap on state border segments to compute
standard errors.


3       Data
    The paper relies on numerous sources of data that are described when they are used. In this
Section we only mention the data sets that play the most significant role in the analysis.
    Data on unemployment among the residents in each county are from the Local Area Unem-
ployment Statistics (LAUS) provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.9 We supplement these
data with the corresponding local-level administrative data on unemployment insurance claims
and final payments from the state unemployment insurance system.
    County-level data on private sector employment (the number of jobs located in a county)
and wages are from the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI).10 QWI is derived from the Local
Employment Dynamics, which is a partnership between state labor market information agencies
and the Census Bureau. QWI supplies data for all counties except those in Massachusetts. Data
availability varies substantially across states until 2004 Q4. Thus, for our main empirical analysis
we will restrict attention to quarters beginning with 2005 Q1.
    For completeness, we also use county-level employment (the number of jobs located in a
county) data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) provided by
the BLS. QCEW and QWI datasets are similar but not identical. QWI is better at tracking
the precise location of each establishment, which is important for our county-based analysis.
If an error in assigning the location of an establishment is discovered, all historical records
are updated for that establishment by QWI. QCEW, in contrast, updates the location of an
establishment upon discovering an error but does not correct the error in the data for preceding
quarters. A disadvantage of QWI is that, to protect confidentially, noise is infused into QWI
estimates resulting in some instances in significantly distorted data.11 Having to exclude any
observations that are flagged as significantly distorted from the analysis, leads to slightly smaller
QWI samples as compared to QCEW.
    We obtain county-level vacancy data from the Help Wanted OnLine (HWOL) dataset pro-
vided by The Conference Board (TCB). This dataset is a monthly series that covers the universe
of unique vacancies advertised on around 16,000 online job boards and online newspaper edi-
tions (with duplicate ads identified and removed by TCB). The HWOL database started in
    9
    ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/time.series/la/
 10
    http://lehd.ces.census.gov/datatools/qwiapp.html
 11
    See ftp://ftp2.census.gov/ces/tp/tp-2006-02.pdf.


                                                   13
May 2005 and replaced the Help-Wanted Advertising Index of print advertising also collected
by TCB.12 For a more detailed description of the data, some of the measurement issues, and a
comparison with the well-known JOLTS data, see Sahin et al. (2014). Importantly, our analysis
is based only on approximately 93% of all online vacancies that are uniquely matched by TCB
to a county of prospective employment. In other words, we do not use approximately 5% of
HWOL vacancies that are coded as “statewide” and 2% that are coded as “nationwide.”
    To identify the role of unemployment benefit extensions on labor market outcomes, we focus
our analysis on a sample of county pairs that are in different states and share a border.13 There
are 1,107 such pairs for which we have complete data.
    Data on unemployment benefit durations in each state is based on trigger reports pro-
vided by the Department of Labor. These reports contain detailed information for each of the
states regarding the eligibility and adoption of the two unemployment insurance programs over
our primary sample period: Extended Benefits program (EB) and Emergency Unemployment
Compensation (EUC08).14
    The EB program allows for 13 or 20 weeks of extra benefits in states with elevated unem-
ployment rates. The EB program is a joint state and federal program. The federal government
pays for half of the cost, and determines a set of “triggers” related to the insured and total
unemployment state rates that the states can adopt to qualify for extended benefits. At the
onset of the recession, many states chose to opt out of the program or only adopt high triggers.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of February 2009 turned this into a federally
funded program. Following this, many states joined the program and several states adopted
lower triggers to qualify for the program.15
    The EUC08 program enacted in June 2008, on the other hand, has been a federal program
since its onset. The program started by allowing for an extra 13 weeks of benefits to all states and
was gradually expanded to have 4 tiers, providing potentially 53 weeks of federally financed
additional benefits. The availability of each tier is dependent on state unemployment rates.
The trigger reports contain the specifics of when each state was eligible and activated the EB
program and different tiers of the EUC08 program. We have constructed the data through
December 2012.
    Prior to the end of 2012, the duration of benefits in a given state varied over time but the
  12
     For detailed information on survey methodology, coverage, and concepts see the Technical Notes at
http://www.conference-board.org/data/helpwantedonline.cfm.
  13
     Data on county pairs are from Dube et al. (2010).
  14
     See http://ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/trigger/ for trigger reports on the EB program and
http://ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/euc trigger/ for reports on the EUC08 program.
  15
     Outside of the extensions induced by the Great Recession, the EB program was triggered on in Louisiana
in the aftermath of hurricane Katrina. It provided 13 extra weeks of benefits to those whose regular 26 weeks of
benefits ran out between October 30, 2005 and February 26, 2006. Excluding this extension form our analysis
leaves our conclusions unaffected.



                                                      14
level of benefits remained constant. In 2013, however, just before the expiration of EB and
EUC08 programs in December of that year, the system went through considerable upheaval
due to the sequestration of the federal budget. The sequester mandated a 10.7% reduction on
spending on EB and EUC08 benefits. However, the implementation of these cuts varied widely
across states with some implementing across the board cuts, others implementing much larger
cuts for new entrants into the programs (and in some cases for individuals starting new EUC
tiers), yet others reducing the number of weeks of benefits available under various EUC tiers but
leaving the benefit levels unchanged. While these 2013 changes provide a source of significant
variation that might help idenify the labor market effect of unemployment benefit levels, we do
not attempt to exploit it in this paper given our focus on the effects of benefit duration.
    There is a substantial heterogeneity in the actual unemployment benefit durations across
time and across the U.S. states. Appendix Figure A-4 presents some snapshots that illustrate
the extent of this variation. Among 1,107 border county pairs used in our analysis, 1,079 have
different benefits for at least one quarter. The median county pair has different benefit durations
for 11 quarters during 2008-2012. The difference in available benefit duration within a county-
pair ranges from 0 to 17 quarters.
    Some of the data series used in the analysis are available at a monthly frequency while others
are quarterly. Therefore, we aggregate all monthly data to obtain quarterly frequency. Logs are
taken after aggregation. When constructing the quasi-differences at the quarterly frequency, we
set β = 0.99 and use the separation rate from JOLTS data.16


4       Unemployment Benefit Extensions and Unemploy-
        ment
4.1       Baseline Empirical Results
   Column (1) of Table 1 contains the results of the estimation of the effect of unemployment
benefit duration on unemployment using the baseline specification in Equation (14). We find
that changes in unemployment benefits have large and statistically significant short-run effect on
unemployment: a 1% rise in benefit duration for only one quarter increases unemployment rate
by 0.049 log points. Equation (12) helps us extrapolate these effects and estimate the effect of a
permanent unanticipated increase in benefit durations. Using the average quarterly separation
rate of 10% in JOLTS data, we find that the effect of permanently (n = ∞) increasing benefits
from ω1 = 26 to ω2 = 99 weeks is quite sizable: The effect on unemployment is 80%, meaning
that such a permanent increase would increase the long-run average unemployment rate from
5% to 9.13%.
 16
      http://www.bls.gov/jlt/


                                                15
                Table 1: Unemployment Benefit Extensions and Unemployment

 VAR.           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)
 Weeks of      0.049     0.049     0.102     0.096        0.047     0.043     0.053     0.047     0.048     0.051
 Benefits     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)      (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)

 State GDP               0.009              -0.075
 per Worker             (0.430)             (0.000)

 N. factors       2        2         3         3            2         2         2        2          2         2
 Obs.          37,177   37,177    37,177    37,177       31,712    37,177    18,588    16,966    26,024    37,177
 R-squared      0.458    0.459     0.633     0.634       0.419      0.478     0.432    0.419      0.465     0.447
 Note - p-values (in parentheses) calculated via bootstrap. Bold indicates p < 0.01.
 Column (1) - Baseline sample,
 Column (2) - Baseline sample controlling for State GDP per worker,
 Column (3) - Scrambled border county pairs sample,
 Column (4) - Scrambled border county pairs sample controlling for State GDP per worker,
 Column (5) - Sample of border counties with < 15% share of state’s employment,
 Column (6) - Baseline sample with LAUS additivity factors removed,
 Column (7) - Sample of border counties with similar industrial composition,
 Column (8) - Sample of border counties with population centers < 30 miles apart,
 Column (9) - Sample of border counties within the same Core Based Statistical Areas,
 Column (10) - Baseline sample with perfect foresight measure of available benefits.


    As we have stresses several times by now, the strength of the effect of unemployment benefit
extensions on labor demand depends on the full expected sequence of future benefit durations
(see the direct evidence in Section 4.2 below). In particular, a permanent increase in benefit
durations has the strongest negative impact on labor demand as firms expect to bargain with
workers entitled to high benefits at all future dates. The benefit extensions enacted following the
onset of the Great Recession, however, were not designed to be permanent and benefit durations
varied over time. Assuming perfect foresight of future benefits, our estimate of 0.049 implies that
if standard durations of unemployment benefits (26 weeks) had prevailed following the Great
Recession, the unemployment rate in 2010 and 2011 would have been 2.7 and 2 percentage
points lower, respectively. Although the duration of benefits was fairly similar in 2010 and
2011, the implied effect on unemployment was substantially larger in 2010. This is because
firms creating jobs in 2011 expected benefit duration to decline in the following year (lowering
the expected wage bill and making it easier to cover the costs of vacancy creation). In contrast,
firms considering creating jobs in 2010 were confronted with an additional year, 2011, of high
benefit durations, which discouraged vacancy creation. This example illustrates an important
general property of the effects of unemployment benefits on unemployment. To the extent that
employers anticipate future changes in benefits, unemployment evolves smoothly over time and
fully responds to future changes in benefits before those changes actually occur. Thus, unless


                                                    16
                                                                             Difference in Quasi-differenced Unemployment
                                                                                                                      .03
               .2
                              Contemporaneous Benefits
                              Lagged Benefits
                        .15
 Difference in Unemployment




                                                                                                        .01    .02
          .05     .1




                                                                                      -.01     0
   0           -.05




                                                                             -.02
                                -.2              0                .2   .4                                                       -.2           0                .2      .4
                                              Difference in Weeks                                                                          Difference in Weeks

(a) Current and Lagged Benefits and Unemployment                                                                            (b) Current Benefits and QD Unemployment

Figure 3: (Quasi-Differenced) Unemployment Differences between Border Counties versus
Differences in Benefit Duration.

expectations are known or controlled for, the relationship between contemporaneous changes in
benefits and unemployment is uninformative of the true labor market impact of unemployment
benefit policies.
    When comparing the magnitude of the effect we find to the experience in the data, it is also
important to keep in mind that it is based on the difference across pairs of border counties.
Thus, the effects of various other shocks or policies that affect these counties symmetrically are
differenced out. For example, the 2% reduction to an employee’s share of Social Security payroll
taxes implemented in all states in 2011 and 2012 might have had a substantial negative impact
on unemployment, counteracting some of the effects of unemployment benefit extensions.

4.1.1                          Under the Hood of the Quasi-Difference

    Our methodology calls for estimating the effect of benefit duration on the quasi-differenced
unemployment, i.e., on ũt := log(ut ) − β(1 − st ) log(ut+1 ). It is instructive to consider the
effects of benefit duration on the two components of the quasi-difference, i.e., on log(ut ) and
log(ut+1 ). To this end, we regress the difference of these variables between border counties on
the difference in the log benefit duration between these counties and fixed effects for each border
county pair. We obtain the coefficient of 0.135 (s.e. 0.008) and 0.095 (s.e. 0.008), respectively.
Thus, higher benefit duration is associated with higher current and future unemployment, so
that both components of the quasi-difference increase in benefit generosity.
    To help visualize these results, in Figure 3(a) we provide a binned scatter plot of the differ-
ence between border counties in the current or next quarter’s unemployment on the difference
in current benefits. In Figure 3(b) we provide a similar plot for the difference between border
counties in quasi-differenced unemployment. These figures suggest an unambiguous increase in
current, future, and quasi-differenced unemployment with benefit duration.


                                                                            17
4.2    The Impact of Expected Future Policy Changes on Current Un-
       employment
    Our key methodological contribution is to develop an estimator which controls for the effects
of future policies on current decisions, resulting in a specification which includes only current
period benefits in the regression. We now extend this methodology to assess more directly the
effects of future benefit durations on current unemployment. To do so, we iterate the benchmark
equation (10) for the quasi-difference x̃t forward (through substitution), which yields the k-
period ahead quasi-difference:
                                                    k
                                                    Y
                          x̃kt   := log(xt ) − (          β(1 − st+m−1 )) log(xt+k ).          (15)
                                                    m=1

   This k-period ahead quasi-difference then depends not only on current benefits bt but on
the full future sequence of benefits until period t + k − 1, implying that the effects of current
and future benefit policies can be directly estimated through the regression
                                             k
                                             X
                                 ∆x̃kp,t =         αm ∆bp,t+m−1 + λ0p Ft + νp,t .              (16)
                                             m=1

    Our benchmark specification is a special case for k = 1. The expanded specification in (16)
allows us to investigate in the data the expectational channel of policy as it includes the future
benefits directly in the regression. Subject to the available panel duration, this specification can
be estimated for an arbitrary k, that is it allows to assess the impact of benefits at an arbitrary
future date on current unemployment. Only benefits after period t + k are not included in the
regression but instead are controlled for by using the k-period ahead quasi-difference.
    Similar to the benchmark, the extended specification also allows to compute the effect of
increasing benefit duration from ω1 to ω2 weeks for n = k time periods (using st = s) as
                                    k
                                    X
                                          αm × (log(ω2 ) − log(ω1 )) ,                         (17)
                                    m=1

and for a permanent change in benefit duration from ω1 to ω2 weeks as
                           Pk
                              m=1 αm
                                         × (log(ω2 ) − log(ω1 )) .                             (18)
                        1 − (β(1 − s))k
   Note that the theory implies that the effect of a permanent increase in benefits calculated in
(18) using α̂m estimates from (16) should be the same for all k ≥ 1. The results of performing this
experiment in the data are presented in Table 2. We find that the estimated effects of benefit
extensions are indeed quite stable across specifications including varying number of leads in
benefits. This result is noteworthy for two reasons. First, it confirms the appropriateness of
our benchmark specification that includes current benefits only. This indicates that a one-


                                                           18
         Table 2: Estimated Permanent Effects Using k-Period ahead Quasi-Difference

                         k      Permanent Effect        Implied Unemployment Rate
                        (1)           (2)                          (3)
                         1              0.60                            9.13
                         2              0.68                            9.82
                         3              0.72                           10.32
                         4              0.72                           10.27
                         5              0.62                            9.28
                         6              0.89                           12.12
                         7              0.78                           10.91
                         8              0.48                            8.06
                      Mean              0.69                           9.93
 Note - Column (2) contains estimated effect of a permanent increase in benefit duration from 26 to 99 weeks
 calculated via (18) using α̂m estimates from specification in (16) for various values of k in Column (1). Column
 (3) contains the implied unemployment rate assuming a 5% equilibrium unemployment when 26 weeks of
 benefits are available. For example, the entry in Column (3) for k = 1 is obtained from log(0.05) + 0.60 =
 log(9.13). The calculation for other values of k is analagous.

period-ahead quasi-difference indeed fully captures the expectations of future policies. Second,
it directly shows that current unemployment responds to expected changes in benefits in future
periods in a way consistent with the basic theory underlying our empirical methodology. 17

4.3     Placebo Test for the Quasi-Difference Estimator
    In the previous section we verified the performance of the quasi-difference estimator in the
data and established the importance of expectations of future policy changes by analyzing the
results from the k-period ahead quasi-difference estimator. We now perform another direct test
that verifies the empirical performance of the estimator (we will also verify its performance in
the model generated data below). Specifically, we apply the estimator to the data from a time
period when there were no benefit extensions with an artificially created placebo measure of
weeks of benefits available based on a hypothetical trigger of benefit extensions.
    Accordingly, we consider data from 1996-2000 when no extended benefits were available
in the US.18 In practice, a state triggers on a benefit extension in a given month if the three
month average of the state seasonally adjusted unemployment rate exceeds a pre-determined
threshold. Consequently, we obtain data on the monthly seasonally adjusted unemployment
  17
     It also corroborates and extends our finding in Section 4.1.1 that the data reject the hypothesis that
quasi-differenced unemployment increase because benefits decrease future unemployment. If this were the case,
then,
Qk since the future period t + k unemployment rate enters the k-period ahead quasi-difference discounted by
  m=1 β(1 − st+m−1 ), the effect of a permanent increase in benefits would decrease the higher is k. Our findings
in this section again reject this hypothesis.
  18
     Except for a brief extension of benefit duration in New Jersey studied by Card and Levine (2000) and
discussed in Section 4.7 below. Eliminating 1996 New Jersey data from the placebo sample has no impact on
the findings.

                                                        19
rate at the state level and specify our placebo extension of 13 weeks in any month when the
preceding three month average of the state seasonally adjusted unemployment rate exceeded 5%
(our substantive conclusions are not sensitive to the choice of this cut-off). We then aggregate
from monthly to quarterly data, take logs and difference across border county pairs replicating
exactly the procedures in our analysis of the actual UI extensions. Finally, we estimate the
main specification of the paper using the interactive effects estimator and compute standard
errors via block-bootstrap.
    Applied to these data, our quasi-differenced estimator correctly recovers a negligible and
statistically insignificant coefficient of 0.007 (p-value of 0.17) measuring the impact of placebo
benefits on unemployment.19

4.4     Testing for Endogeneity
    In this section we formalize the potential endogeneity problem as well as develop and im-
plement a test to detect its presence. We begin, however, by outlining the origin of the problem
informally using an intuitive example that imposes stronger conditions than those actually
required for identification.20
    Imagine a border county pair consisting of county a belonging to state A and county b
belonging to state B. State A also has some geographic area A that excludes county a. We now
consider two cases.

Case 1. Continuous economic conditions at the state border.
Suppose there is a large shock affecting the economy of A. The economic effects of this shock
might spread geographically to reach county a. However, there is no particular reason for these
effects to stop upon reaching the state border. Thus, they will continue spreading and would
affect county b similarly to their effect on county a. If this is the case, there is no endogeneity
problem in our baseline specification (14) as the difference in unemployment between counties
a and b is due solely to the difference in benefit policies, perhaps triggered by the developments
in A. With geographically continuous economic fundamentals, shocks directly to counties a and
b also do not create an endogeneity problem even if either one or both counties are large enough
  19
      It is also interesting to note that extended benefits where available to those unemployed in 2001 through the
extensions triggered in early 2002. The Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation act passed in March
2002 provided extended benefits to anyone who became unemployed after March 2001. In addition, several states
triggered benefit extensions in the first half of 2002 via the Extended Benefits (EB) program, which also applied
to people who became unemployed in 2001. To the extent that these extensions were anticipated (e.g. because
of the collapse in asset prices in the technology sector, the September 11 terrorist attacks, etc.), 2001 data is not
appropriate for a placebo experiment. Nevertheless, implementing the experiment on 1996-2001 data, we find
a small but now marginally statistically significant positive estimate of 0.014 on unemployment. This increase
in the coefficient is expected given our theory and reinforces our other findings on the role of expectations. Its
specific magnitude is not readily interpretable, however, because we do not know the correlation between the
benefit durations assigned through an artificial placebo trigger with the true anticipated durations.
   20
      In Appendix III we discuss additional informal examples.


                                                         20
to trigger a change in policies in the corresponding states.

Case 2. Discontinuous economic conditions at the state border.
The endogeneity problem can arise only if shocks to e.g., productivity, stop when reaching a
state border. In this case, a shock to A may affect, say, productivity in county a and trigger a
change in unemployment benefit policy in state A. In contrast, this shock stops when reaching
the state border so that neither b’s productivity nor B’s benefit policy is affected. In this case,
the difference in unemployment between counties a and b is driven by both the difference in
productivities and the difference in benefits, with the latter at least partially induced by the
difference in productivities. In this case, the estimate of the effect of benefits would be biased
if the difference in state productivities is not controlled for.

    We now turn to a more formal exposition. The identifying assumption of our empirical
strategy is that the error term νp,t in estimation equation (14) is uncorrelated with benefits
∆bp,t . The variable of interest x at the county level is driven by benefits b, the time varying
factors F and county-specific factors such as productivity or demand which are unobserved and
are part of the term νp,t . The assumption that νp,t is not correlated with benefits then means
that the differences in productivity, demand, etc. across border counties are not correlated with
the benefits across the same counties. Since benefits are a function of state level variables, for
this assumption to be valid, the difference in county level productivity, demand, etc. has to be
uncorrelated with the corresponding differences at the state level, i.e.

                                             Corr(νp,t , ∆zp ) = 0,                                           (19)

where z is state level measure of productivity or demand and ∆zp is the difference in this
measure across states. Thus, our identifying assumption does not require border counties to be
identical (conditional on the differences accounted for by the factor model) so that νp,t is pure
measurement error. It is weaker than this as it allows counties to be different in terms of county-
specific factors and only requires that state-level factors affect the two counties symmetrically
so that the difference in state-level shocks does not affect the difference of x across the two
counties.21
    To test this assumption, we can decompose the term νp,t into a part that depends on the
state, ∆zp , and another part that depends on county-specific factors only, ν̃p,t ,

                                            νp,t = χ∆zp + ν̃p,t ,                                             (20)
  21
    In terms of the examples above, an endogeneity problem would not arise even in Case 2 if there are
discontinuous idiosyncratic shocks to counties a or b as long as these shocks do not affect the state average
conditions and do not trigger changes in benefit policy at the state level. This is not a very strong restriction as
the median border county has only one half of one percent of its state’s employment. In addition, in Column (5)
of Table 1 we redo the analysis where we drop counties that have greater than 15% share of state employment
and find our estimates unchanged.


                                                        21
so that we rewrite the empirical specification as

                                  ∆x̃p,t = α∆bp,t + λ0p Ft + χ∆zp + ν̃p,t                     (21)

for a (possibly) nonzero coefficient χ.
    The economics behind this test is clear. Unemployment benefit extensions are determined at
the state level and thus depend on a state’s economic conditions such as state-level productivity
or demand z. Thus, a negative state-level shock to z can cause unemployment to increase in
all the counties in the state and simultaneously lead to an extension of benefits. If state-level
shocks do not affect border counties similarly, i.e., χ 6= 0, the estimated coefficient α would
be biased in our baseline specification in Equation (14). The presence of this bias would be
revealed, however, by implementing specification (21). If the bias is present, we would expect
the coefficient χ on ∆zp to be statistically different from zero and the coefficient α on benefit
duration to change in magnitude and perhaps lose its statistical significance.
    To implement this test in the data, we use two measures of state-level conditions z – the state
productivity and state-level unemployment instrumented with the Bartick shock. We discuss
these two tests in turn.

    Endogeneity test using state productivity.
    Our first implementation of this test in the data uses state productivity defined as real gross
state product per worker. We obtain data on state real GDP at a quarterly frequency from the
Regional Economic Accounts at the Bureau of Economic Analysis.22 We then divide quarterly
state GDP by quarterly state employment. The results are provided in Column (2) of Table 1.
Note that including the difference in state productivity has almost no effect on the estimate of
the effect of benefit duration on unemployment. These results provide clear evidence that our
findings are not driven by a mechanical relationship between the economic conditions at the
state level and the duration of unemployment benefits.
    In Table 3 we also report the results of performing this test in a simpler specification with
pair fixed effects:

                                        ∆x̃p,t = α∆bp,t + λp + ν̃p,t                          (22)

for the baseline, and

                                   ∆x̃p,t = α∆bp,t + λp + χ∆zp + ν̃p,t                        (23)

when state-level productivity is added to test for endogeneity.
    We find that the estimated effects of benefits on unemployment using the factor model and
the simple fixed effects model are quite similar. The coefficients estimated in both specifications
are not changed by adding state level productivity.
 22
      https://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/regional/gdp state/2015/xls/qgsp0915 real.xlsx


                                                     22
                      Table 3: Endogeneity Tests using Fixed Effects Model

      VARIABLES                    (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
                                      Baseline Sample                     Scrambled Sample
      Weeks of                  0.0421     0.0464         0.0442    0.1082      0.0960      -0.0074
      Benefits                  (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.048)   (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.811)
      State GDP                              -0.032                            -0.0821
      per Worker                            (0.098)                             (0.001)
      Instrumented                                        -0.0713                            -1.414
      State Unemployment                                  (0.795)                           (0.000)
      Observations               37,177     37,177        35,205     37,177      37,177     35,205
      R-squared                  0.4581     0.4601         0.565      0.642      0.490       0.642
     Note - p-values (in parentheses) calculated via bootstrap. Bold indicates p < 0.05. Coefficients
     estimated using a model with border county pair fixed effects specifications in Eqs. (22)-(24).
     Column (1) - Baseline sample,
     Column (2) - Baseline sample controlling for state GDP per worker,
     Column (3) - Baseline sample controlling for state unemp. instrumented with Bartik shocks,
     Column (4) - Scrambled border county pairs sample,
     Column (5) - Scrambled border county pairs sample controlling for state GDP per worker,
     Column (6) - Scrambled border county pairs sample controlling for state unemployment instru-
     mented with Bartik shocks.

  Endogeneity test using Bartik shocks and state unemployment.
  Our second implementation of the endogeneity test uses state-level unemployment instru-
mented with Bartik shocks:

                               ∆x̃p,t = α∆bp,t + λp + χ∆t,p ut,s + ν̃p,t ,                              (24)

where ∆t,p ut,s is the difference of the change in unemployment across the states the counties in
the pair belong to instrumented with Bartik shocks. The results of implementing this test in
the data reported in Column (3) of Table 3 indicate that the instrumented difference in state
unemployment is statistically insignificant and including it in the regression does not affect the
coefficient on benefits, consistent with the benchmark estimate being unbiased.
    We instrument state unemployment with Bartik shocks because the endogeneity test must be
based on an exogenous variable reflecting state-level economic conditions. As discussed below,
the empirical literature typically relies on the state-level unemployment rate for this purpose.
This raises the question whether the difference in non-instrumented state-level unemployment
rates can be used directly in place of ∆zp when testing for endogeneity. The answer is no and the
logic is very simple. State unemployment is endogenous to benefits. When benefits are raised in
a state, unemployment increases in every county of the state. Moreover, unemployment is a slow
moving state (in a mathematical sense) variable in response to benefits. Thus, while benefits
change abruptly, county and state unemployment co-move in response to this change. As a con-


                                                     23
sequence, if one regresses county unemployment on benefits and state unemployment, benefits
are not relevant, as all their impact is summarized by state unemployment. In other words,
state unemployment is the only variable that has a predictive power for county unemployment
in such a regression while benefits - that drive both the county and state unemployment -
are completely wiped out. In Appendix II we illustrate this point using data simulated from
the model calibrated in Section 5.4 below. The model imposes exogeneity because the county
and state-level shocks are orthogonal, yet the coefficient of benefits is erroneously estimated to
be zero when non-instrumented state unemployment is included in the regression. Note that
the same logic applies to the evaluation of any state-level policy that affects unemployment
throughout the state. The effect of any such policy change would be entirely (but erroneously)
attributed to state unemployment if it is included in the regression and is not instrumented.
    The fact that the endogeneity tests indicate that economic fundamentals evolve smoothly
across state borders implies that the size of the border counties relative to their state’s is not
a relevant consideration for our analysis. Even if one of the counties is large enough so that a
shock to that county triggers a policy change at the state level, both counties in the pair are
affect similarly by the shock so that the difference between them depends only on the difference
in benefit policies. We can also verify this implication directly. To do so we restrict the sample
to border county pairs such that each county in the pair accounts for no more than 15% of
employment in the state that county belongs to. The results of re-estimating the benchmark
specification on this sample are reported in Column (5) of Table 1. They confirm that the
estimate of the effect of benefit extensions is virtually unaffected.

4.4.1   Scrambled Border County Pairs

    In the previous section we tested for endogeneity and found that including difference in
state productivities or instrumented state unemployments has a negligible effect on the esti-
mated effect of benefit extensions, α, and that the effects of these state-level variables, χ, are
not statistically different from zero. The results lent empirical support to our identification
assumption (19).
    An important remaining question to answer is whether the test based on state-level produc-
tivity or instrumented unemployment has power. To verify that it does, we randomly assign
counties to pairs. That is, instead of pairing neighboring counties from different states, pairs
are formed by randomly matching counties from the original set of the border counties. This
mechanically introduces a discontinuity in economic conditions across the constructed “border”
county pairs, so that Case 2 described in the preceding section applies with the associated en-
dogeneity bias. Consider again the example of county a from state A being matched to county
b from state B. With randomly assigned pairs, however, counties a and b do not border each
other so that shocks to, say productivity of area A of state A affect productivity in county


                                               24
a but not in county b. If these shocks also affect economic conditions in state A, they would
also be correlated with the difference in policies between States A and B. This invalidates our
identification assumption (19).
    Consequently, estimating our benchmark specification (14) on a scrambled border county
sample would yield a biased coefficient of interest α because νp,t is correlated with ∆bp,t since
both are correlated with ∆zp . The empirical results of the estimation are in Column (3) of
Table 1 and show that the estimate of α is indeed substantially upward biased on a sample of
randomly paired counties.
    Next, we add the difference in state-level productivities to this regression as in specification
(21). We expect to find a negative χ because of the endogeneity problem induced by the random
pairing of counties. Adding state level productivity, however, alleviates the endogeneity problem
and diminishes the bias in estimating α. The bias is not expected to fully disappear when we
add state level productivity since we do not control for other state variables, such as state
demand, which are also correlated with νp,t leading to a bias. Results in Column (4) of Table
1 confirm this logic. Importantly, state-level productivity is highly significant in this sample of
scrambled county pairs, illustrating the power of the test based on this variable.
    Similarly, adding the difference in state unemployment instrumented with Bartik shocks
to the regression in (21) estimated on the scrambled sample of “border” counties reveals a
highly significant coefficient of this variable and leads to a substantial change of the coefficient
on benefits. This is consistent with this estimation being biased (as expected) but reveals the
power of the test based on this variable.

4.5    LAUS Data Quality
    A potential concern with any empirical investigation is the quality of the underlying data.
In the case of the analysis in this part of the paper the concern is with the construction of the
county-level unemployment data by LAUS. In particular, if a component of county-level unem-
ployment data was somehow imputed using state-level unemployment, this could give rise to
the endogeneity problem discussed above whereby both benefit duration and measured county
unemployment would be driven by underlying economic conditions in the state, such as pro-
ductivity or demand in the state zp . Fortunately, the endogeneity tests in Section 4.4 revealed
this to not be the case. Indeed, we find that the difference in measured unemployment across
border-county pairs is uncorrelated with the difference in state-level productivity or the differ-
ence in instrumented state unemployment (more precisely, Corr(νp,t , ∆zp ) = 0). This reveals
that county-level unemployment estimated by the BLS does not reflect state-level variables to
an important degree since otherwise this correlation would not be zero reflecting the negative
correlation between state level productivity or demand and state unemployment.
    We now describe the data construction by LAUS and implement modifications to their

                                                25
procedures to provide an alternative check of the appropriateness of the LAUS data for the
analysis in this paper.23

4.5.1    Removing Additivity Factors

    The primary labor force survey used to measure unemployment in the US is the Current
Population Survey (CPS). Unfortunately, this survey is not representative at the county level.
The objective of the LAUS program is then to estimate county level employment and unem-
ployment in a way that would match as closely as possible the estimate that would have been
obtained if a representative labor force survey was conducted in each county. To do so, the
LAUS program draws on a variety of data sources. In addition to the CPS, the LAUS relies
on large scale surveys and quarterly censuses of payroll employment as well as the data form
the universe of jobs covered by the UI laws and data on the universe of UI claims. Using these
data LAUS estimates using the observed relationships in the aggregate (not state-level) data
the number of unemployed workers who left a UI covered job and remain unemployed at a
particular point in time (have not exited the labor force). In addition, it uses the age distri-
bution of the population in a county from the Census Bureau to predict the number of new
entrants (or re-entrants) into the labor market who are not yet covered by the UI system. Taken
together, this represents the estimate of county unemployment. The estimation of county-level
number of new entrants is mainly based on aggregate relationships but it does use the five-
year average state-level estimates of the number of new entrants. Although the use of only the
long-run average of state-level variables in this step minimizes the concern that it may induce
the endogeneity problem, we formally verify that it does not in Section 4.5.2. Prior to doing
so, we assess the last step of the procedure in which current state-level variables may indeed
enter the county-level estimates. In this step, the LAUS multiplies the unemployment estimate
in each county of the state by the same “additivity factor” necessary to ensure that the sum
of unemployment estimates across all counties in a state adds up to the total estimate of state
unemployment.
    Introducing this additivity adjustment may cause a bias in our estimates if the relationship
between LAUS estimate and unmeasured unemployment (the additivity error) varies across the
state. The endogeneity tests performed above indicate the lack of such a bias. In contrast, if the
proportionality assumption is approximately correct, then not applying the additivity factors
may lead to biased estimates when comparing border counties. Fortunately, we can directly
assess the consequences of using the additivity adjustment on our estimates by undoing this
  23
    In Appendix III we perform an alternative test of LAUS data quality as proposed in Hall (2013). Specifically,
Hall (2013) noted that a regression of border county unemployment on unemployment in the state it belongs
to and unemployment in the adjacent out-of-state county in some year with no benefit extensions, yields a
relatively large and significant coefficient on state unemployment. We show that quantitatively similar results
are obtained on administrative data free of data quality issues relevant for our analysis. Moreover, we explain
that such results are expected and present no evidence of an endogeneity problem.

                                                       26
step of the LAUS procedure.24 A direct comparison of the estimates on the data before and
after the additivity adjustment is performed reveals that they are very similar, as can be seen
in Column (6) of Table 1.

4.5.2    Using Administrative Unemployment Claims Data

    To enable an additional independent verification of the quality of LAUS data, the BLS has
agreed to provide us with 2005-2012 administrative data from the unemployment insurance
system. The data include all continuing unemployment claims in the regular state unemploy-
ment insurance benefit program (i.e., during the first 26 weeks of an unemployment spell) by
county.25 In addition, the data include the number of final payments, i.e. the number of unem-
ployed who collected their final unemployment check under the regular state system (the 26th
week). The final payment data are available to us only at the Labor Market Area (LMA) level
as defined by the BLS.26 A Labor Market Area may include a single or multiple counties in one
or more states. As a consequence, we restrict the sample to single county LMAs. This leaves us
with a sample of 278 border county pairs and 8,896 observations. Importantly, these continuing
claims and final payments data are pure counts, and are not subject to any imputation or other
adjustments (in particular, these data contain neither estimation of the number of new entrants
nor any adjustment for additivity - the two steps in LAUS estimation procedure that might in
theory give rise to endogeneity problem).
    These data allow us to measure the job-finding rate of unemployment insurance claimants
in their first 26 weeks of compensated unemployment (details of the procedure are in Appendix
IV). Implementing our estimation procedure using the baseline specification in Equation (14)
to measure the effect of benefit extensions on this job-finding rate, we find that the coefficient
αf = −0.0606, with a p-value of 0.05. The coefficient on benefit duration in the regression
for the job-finding rate multiplied by one minus the unemployment rate should approximately
equal the coefficient in the regression for unemployment, i.e. αf (1 − u) ≈ −αu . Using the value
for the average unemployment rate of 7.01% over the period, we get αu = 0.0564. Using instead
LAUS county unemployment data to re-estimate our baseline specification on unemployment
on this sample we find a nearly identical coefficient on benefit duration of 0.0499, with a p-value
of 0. Thus, the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on unemployment as measured with
administrative claims data is quantitatively consistent with the effect measured with LAUS
county-level unemployment data.27
    In addition to confirming the appropriateness of using LAUS data for our baseline empirical
  24
     We are very grateful to the BLS for releasing the additivity factors underlying LAUS estimates to us.
  25
     Importantly, unemployment benefit recipients must exhaust all state benefits before being eligible for federal
extensions under either EUC or EB programs.
  26
     The LMA directory is available at http://www.bls.gov/lau/lmadir.pdf.
  27
     Note that our results imply that the ratio of county LAUS unemployment over county claimants does not
respond to changes in benefits as it would if county unemployment was imputed using state-level unemployment.

                                                        27
strategy, this result also highlights the quantitative importance of the equilibrium impact of
benefit extensions on job creation. Our baseline analysis using LAUS data measures the effects of
benefit extensions on all of the unemployed, including those who are ineligible to receive benefits.
That measure therefore is a combination of the macro effect (which affects all unemployed) and
the differential micro effect on search behavior of unemployed who are either eligible or ineligible
to receive benefits. Using claims data, however, we exclusively focus on the unemployed who are
eligible. If the micro effect was quantitatively important, the estimated coefficient on the claims
sample should be significantly different from the one on the LAUS sample, since even at the
depths of the recession the fraction of unemployed receiving claims did not exceed half of the
unemployed. Our finding of similar effects of benefit extension on all unemployed in LAUS data
and on benefit recipients in claims data suggests only a small role of micro elasticity, confirming
existing estimates based on the data from the CPS.28

4.6     Sensitivity of Estimates
4.6.1    Border Counties with Similar Industrial Composition

    As pointed out by Holmes (1998), the density of manufacturing industry employment varies
systematically across counties within border pairs that belong to states with different right-to-
work legislation. Manufacturing industries and thus states with a large manufacturing sector
have more cyclical unemployment. They may also have a more cyclical unemployment benefit
policy, potentially giving rise to the endogeneity problem. If this cyclical heterogeneity across
states is sufficiently empirically important, however, our interactive effects estimator picks it
up through assigning a higher loading on the cyclical aggregate factor for more cyclical states.
    As an additional and more general check, we now investigate whether differences in industrial
composition affect our results. To this aim, we repeat the benchmark analysis on a subset of
border counties with similar industrial composition. If the industrial composition affected our
results, we would expect a different result in the subsample than in the full sample. We obtain
data on county employment by industry from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional
Economic Information System.29 Using sample average industry employment shares within
each county, we construct the l2 -distance between border counties within each pair. The results,
presented in Column (7) of Table 1, are based on the sample of 50% of county pairs with the
most similar industrial composition out of all border county pairs. The effect of unemployment
benefit extensions on unemployment on this subsample is similar to the one found in our full
sample.
  28
     This conclusion will be further confirmed in Section 5, where we estimate the effect of unemployment benefit
extensions on the overall job finding rate measured using county-level job vacancy data and find it to be the
same as the effect on the job finding rate of benefit claimants documented in this Section.
  29
     http://www.bea.gov/regional/


                                                       28
4.6.2      Degree of Economic Integration between Border Counties

    The degree of economic integration varies across county border pairs. This is relevant for
the following reason. If two border counties have a fully integrated labor market with perfect
mobility of workers, the residence and employment decisions are separated. In other words, the
decision in which of the two counties to (look for) work is independent of the decision in which of
the counties to live. Thus, in response to a change in benefits, say, in one of the states, residents
of both counties adopt the same strategy of which county to work in. As unemployment is
measured by the place of residence, it will be the same in both counties. Thus, our estimate
of the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on unemployment would be severely biased
toward zero.
    In Section 6 we will present evidence that workers do not change the location of employment
in response to changes in benefits and that labor markets in border counties are well approxi-
mated as closed economies. Here we explore whether the potential bias is large by restricting
attention to a subsets of border counties with different degrees of geographic proximity and
economic integration. In Column (8) of of Table 1 we consider a subset of counties with popula-
tion centers that are at most 30 miles apart (which is the median distance between population
centers in our sample of border county pairs).30 In Column (9) we further restrict the sample to
include only counties with most integrated labor markets. To do so, we repeat the analysis on a
restricted sample of border counties that belong to the same Core Based Statistical Areas (CB-
SAs). CBSAs represent a geographic entity associated with at least one core of 10,000 or more
population, plus adjacent counties that have a high degree of social and economic integration
with the core (see Office of Management and Budget (2010) for detailed criteria). The results
of both experiments imply similar effect of unemployment benefit extensions on unemployment
to the one found in our full sample.

4.6.3      Alternative Benefit Duration Measure

   Our baseline measure of weeks of benefits available corresponds to the number of weeks
a newly unemployed worker can expect to receive if current policies and aggregate conditions
remained in force for the duration of the unemployment spell. An alternative, albeit extreme,
assumption is that individuals have perfect foresight of the future path of benefits.
   To construct the perfect foresight measure of available benefits, for a worker who becomes
unemployed in a given week, we compute the realized maximum number of weeks available to
him during the course of his unemployment spell (this takes into account extensions that are
enacted after the spell begins).
   The following example illustrates the construction of the two measures of benefit duration.
 30
      We are grateful to Bob Hall for sharing the geolocation data on county population centers with us.



                                                       29
Consider October 2009 in California. At the time, up to 26 regular weeks were available, in
addition to 20 weeks in Tier 1 and 13 weeks in Tier 2 of EUC08 and 20 weeks in EB. Thus,
under our baseline specification the measure of weeks available would be 26+20+13+20=79
weeks. In November of 2009, the weeks available were expanded up to 99 total (two additional
tiers were added) and the program continued to be extended at those benefit levels through
September of 2012. So the perfect foresight measure would assign 99 weeks available to a worker
that became unemployed in 2009.
    The results based on the perfect foresight measure of available benefit duration are reported
in Columns (10) of Table 1. Similar to the results based on the baseline measure of benefit
availability, they continue to imply a quantitatively large impact of unemployment benefit
duration on unemployment.

4.6.4      Controlling for Other State-Level Policies

    Clearly, not only the unemployment insurance policies, but all state policies are discontinu-
ous at state borders. Thus, an important question to answer is whether our analysis isolates the
effects of unemployment benefit policies or picks up the effects of changes in some other state
policies that are correlated over the sample period with unemployment and unemployment ben-
efit extensions. While this is an important element of the analysis, due to space constraints, it is
provided in Appendix V. Specifically, we collect data on and control for numerous tax, transfer,
and regulatory policies at the state and county levels. We also control for the effects of stimulus
spending and variation in foreclosure laws. We find that changes in no other state policies were
sufficiently correlated with unemployment benefit extensions to affect our estimates.

4.7       Comparison to Existing Empirical Estimates
    The existing literature measuring the impact of unemployment benefit extensions on unem-
ployment has not yet attempted to measure the joint contribution of micro and macro effects.
Nevertheless, the research design underlying some strands of the literature suggests that their
estimates might be interpreted as suggestive of the magnitude of the total effect. We now review
this literature.
    One key strand in the relevant literature is based on the seminal contributions by Moffitt
(1985), Katz and Meyer (1990), and Meyer (1990).31 These authors used administrative data
on unemployment benefit recipients and exploited the cross-state variation in unemployment
benefit extensions to measure the effect of the extensions on the hazard rate of leaving compen-
sated unemployment. The effects found in this literature are sizable, implying that a one week
increase in potential benefit duration increases the average duration of the unemployment spells
 31
      Krueger and Meyer (2002) provide a survey of other important contributions to this strand of the literature.



                                                        30
of UI recipients by 0.1 to 0.2 weeks.32 These studies were based on a sample of unemployed
workers who collect benefits. To assess the effect of benefit duration on overall unemployment
one also needs to know the impact on those unemployed who do not collect benefits. This was
studied by Hagedorn et al. (2015c) who show that the job finding rate of ineligible workers
responds as much as that of the eligible ones to the specific benefit extensions studied in these
seminal contributions as well as during the Great Recession.
    Consider the implications of these estimates. During the Great Recession unemployment
benefits were extended 73 weeks from 26 to 99 weeks. Thus, these estimates imply an increase
in unemployment duration between 7.3 and 14.6 weeks, i.e. the duration approximately doubles.
But a doubling of duration implies that the exit rate from unemployment falls by a factor of
two. This would then imply roughly a doubling of the unemployment rate, as can be seen
from, e.g., the basic steady state relationship that balances flows in and out of unemployment,
u = s/(s + f ). This is a considerably larger effect than the one we find.
    However, the interpretation of these large consensus estimates is not clear. The literature
was exploiting the variation of benefit duration across US states during the recessions of the
early 1980s to measure the effects of benefit duration on the probability to find a job. As the
regressions were estimated on state-level data, to obtain an unbiased estimate of this effect, one
needs to control for all other aggregate factors affecting the state-level job finding rate. This
can be accomplished by including a state-time dummy in the regression. The effect of benefits
would then be identified from cross sectional variation among unemployed in time until their
benefits run out. While this approach would identify the coefficient properly, the interpretation
is important. The coefficient would only reflect the micro effect, that is the effect of benefits
on individuals’ incentives to search. The macro effect of benefits on labor demand would be
instead subsumed by the state-time dummy alongside all other aggregate shocks.
    Virtually all existing studies, however, include the state unemployment rate instead of a
state-time dummy in the regressions of state-level job finding rates on benefit duration. While
this cannot control for all aggregate factors, the underlying assumption must be that benefits
and unemployment are orthogonal to all other aggregate factors. Note that even if this as-
sumption were correct, the coefficient on benefits would be a convolution of the micro effect
and some part of unknown magnitude and sign of the macro effect. However, this assumption
is clearly erroneous because state unemployment and/or benefits are endogenous. This is easy
to see. Consider some aggregate shock that affects the job finding rate in period t − 1. By
definition, this shock also affects unemployment (at the end of) period t − 1. If the shock is
persistent (and most aggregate shocks are), this shock also affects the job finding rate in period
t. Thus, the right-hand-side variable unemployment is correlated with the error of the regression
in which the job finding rate is the dependent variable. A biased regressor contaminates the
 32
      Many influential studies find even larger effects, e.g. Ham and Rea (1987).


                                                        31
whole regression. Similarly, past shocks to the labor market affect current benefits, rendering
the estimated coefficient on benefits biased as well. Thus, the interpretation of coefficients in
a regression of state-level job finding rate on benefits and state unemployment is very unclear,
especially given that state-level benefits and unemployment are highly correlated.
    Thus, at least in theory, the methodology in this literature can yield an estimate of the micro
effect at the cost of ignoring the effect of benefit extensions on labor demand (by differencing it
out or capturing it together with all other shocks in the state-time dummy). What the literature
lacks is an identification strategy that accounts for the effect of unemployment benefit extensions
on labor demand by forward looking job creators – the macro effect. The development of the
necessary methodology is a contribution of this paper.
    Another strand in the literature that might be suggestive of the magnitude of the total
effect of unemployment benefit extensions is based on a quasi-experimental research design. In a
seminal study following this research strategy, Card and Levine (2000) consider the experience
of New Jersey that awarded 13 extra weeks of benefits to those whose regular 26 weeks of
benefits expired between June and November of 1996. This unemployment benefit extension
was a “side-effect” of a political process and was not driven by underlying economic conditions,
minimizing the need to control for other aggregate shocks and the endogeneity of policy. The
authors estimate that this policy lead to a 16.6% decline in the exit rate from unemployment,
which implies a slightly smaller effect of policy than what is implied by the literature studying
the effects of 1980s extensions discussed above.33 The authors suggest that this might be driven
by the fact that their experiment took place during a relatively prosperous period while earlier
studies considered the effects of benefit extensions in recessions. What might be also important,
however, is that neither of the two literatures has controlled for the effects of expectations
regarding future policy changes. It is plausible that job creators where correctly expecting the
1980’s benefit extensions to be more persistent, explaining a quantitatively larger response.
Taking this into account, the magnitude of the effect found in Card and Levine (2000) is much
larger than what our estimates would imply for such a small and transitory extension.
    The fact that our estimates imply significantly smaller effects of unemployment benefit
extensions relative to most earlier studies might also be consistent with a secular decline in
the responsiveness of the labor market to this policy. Katz (2010) proposes that this might be
due to a declining reliance by firms and industries on using temporary layoffs with recall dates
tailored to benefit durations. We find some indirect support for this hypothesis. Specifically, we
repeated the analysis in this paper using the data on benefit extensions during the earlier 2001
recession (using the 1996-2004 sample). We found the coefficient on benefit duration of 0.058
with a p-value of 0. While this estimate still suggests smaller effects of benefit extensions than
  33
    Specifically, Card and Levine (2000) find that a one week increase in potential benefit duration increases
the average duration of unemployment spells of UI recipients by 0.08 weeks.


                                                     32
Figure 4: The Macro Effect of the Cut in Potential Benefit Duration in Missouri in April 2011.




                                          .2
                          Log Vacancy Unemployment Ratio
                              -.1       0 -.2    .1

                                                            10



                                                                      10



                                                                                 0


                                                                                         11



                                                                                                   11



                                                                                                                11



                                                                                                                           11


                                                                                                                                    12



                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                1


                                                                                       20



                                                                                                  20



                                                                                                            20



                                                                                                                         20
                                                           20



                                                                    20



                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                  20



                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                       b


                                                                                              ay



                                                                                                            g


                                                                                                                     ov
                                                  ay



                                                                    g


                                                                            ov




                                                                                                                                  b


                                                                                                                                         ay
                                                                                     Fe




                                                                                                         Au
                                                                 Au




                                                                                                                                Fe
                                                                                              M




                                                                                                                     N
                                         M




                                                                           N




                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                  Date
 Note - The figure plots the difference in the log vacancy-unemployment ratio between border counties in
 Missouri and adjacent border counties across Missouri state borders. The dashed vertical line indicates the
 date when potential benefit duration was cut by 16 weeks in Missouri. Seasonal effects removed through a
 regression on a full set of month dummies.


found in the earlier literature using the 1908s and 1990s data, it is larger than our estimate of
0.049 using the later data from the Great Recession period.
    A recent quasi-experimental study by Johnston and Mas (2015) assessed the impact of the
sudden and unanticipated cut in potential benefit duration by 16 weeks in Missouri in April
2011. The cut applied only to new claimants while those who claimed benefits prior to the reform
were grandfathered into the old potential benefit duration schedule. Comparing the hazards out
of unemployment for these two samples the authors find a large micro effect, the magnitude
of which is quite surprising given the estimates in the existing literature. Their experiment
is, however, consistent with the presence of a very large macro effect on job creation which
is evident in Figure 4. Specifically, we plot the seasonally adjusted monthly difference in the
log vacancy-unemployment ratio between border counties in Missouri and their paired counties
from bordering states during a year before and a year after the reform. We observe a sharp
and discontinuous 28% rise in the vacancy-unemployment ratio in Missouri at the time of the
reform. As predicted by the standard equilibrium search model, the jump was due to a sharp
increase in job vacancy creation as unemployment declined only very gradually. Note that at
least on impact, the jump in vacancy creation cannot be in response to higher search effort
of new claimants eligible for fewer weeks of benefits following the reform simply because they
represent a tiny fraction of all unemployed (only about a third of all unemployed were claiming
benefits in Missouri at the time of the reform and it took a number of months for the claimants
under the new rules to account for a meaningful share of all claimants).
    While the implied macro effect appears very large, interpreting its magnitude is difficult
for two reasons. First, this simple experiment does not control for job creators’ expectations.

                                                                                              33
Indeed, this experiment is likely to yield a lower bound on the true macro effect if job creators
in Missouri assigned, prior to the reform, some probability to a future cut in benefit duration
but were surprised by the specific timing of when the reform was implemented. Similarly, there
is a downward bias if, upon observing the policy change in Missouri, job creators in neighboring
states assigned a higher probability to similar benefit duration cuts taking place in their states.
Second, it is difficult to draw econometrically sound conclusions robust to the influence of
sampling uncertainty from essentially one data point provided by this reform. Consequently, in
the next section we apply the methodology we developed to control for the effects of expectations
in measuring the macro effects and expand the scope of the analysis to include all changes in
benefit duration in all states in the contiguous US following the Great Recession. This analysis
yields the estimate of the macro effects that is one third smaller than what the estimate based
on the Missouri reform, taken at face value, suggests.

5      The Role of Macro Effects
    In equilibrium labor market search models, the dynamics of unemployment over the business
cycle and the response of unemployment to changes in policies are primarily driven by employ-
ers’ vacancy creation decisions. Consider, for example, an increase in unemployment benefit
duration. Having access to longer spells of benefits improves the outside option of workers and
leads to an increase in the equilibrium wage. This lowers the accounting profits of firms and
reduces vacancy posting to restore the equilibrium relationship between the cost of firm entry
and the expected profits. Lower vacancy creation leads to a decline in labor market tightness,
defined as the ratio of vacancies to unemployment. This lowers the job finding rate of workers
and results in an increase in unemployment.
    In this section, we present evidence on the empirical relevance of these macro effects. In
particular, we document the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on vacancy creation,
employment, and wages in the data. We also compare the magnitude of these empirical findings
to those in a calibrated equilibrium search model.

5.1     Unemployment Benefit Extensions and Vacancy Creation
    We begin by considering the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on vacancy posting
by employers and on labor market tightness using HWOL data and the basic specification in
Equation (14). The results are reported in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4. We find that changes
in unemployment benefits have a large and statistically significant short-run effect on vacancy
creation: a 1% rise in benefit duration for only one quarter lowers the number of vacancies by
0.042 log points and labor market tightness by 0.086 log points.34
  34
    In theory there should be an exact mapping between our results in Tables 1 and 4 for (log) unemployment,
vacancies and tightness, since log(θ) = log(V ) − log(U ). The very minor discrepancy in our estimates arises

                                                     34
                   Table 4: Unemployment Benefit Extensions and Job Creation

         VARIABLES             Vacancies     Tightness     QCEW Emp          QWI Emp          Wages
                                  (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)
         Weeks of Benefits      -0.042        -0.086        -0.0030           -0.0038         0.0099
                                (0.020)       (0.000)        (0.035)           (0.000)        (0.070)
         N. factors                1             1              4                 3              2
         Observations           34,617        34,617         36,971            36,962         36,962
         R-squared               0.104         0.102          0.959             0.930          0.550
         Note - p-values (in parentheses) calculated via bootstrap. Bold indicates p < 0.1.


    In the standard equilibrium search model, the matching function implies a tight relationship
between changes in unemployment, vacancies, and tightness. As we have obtained independent
estimates of the effects of benefit extensions on these variables, it is of interest whether their
magnitudes are mutually consistent. The following calculation establishes that this is indeed
the case.
    Assuming that the matching function is of the commonly used Cobb-Douglas type,

                                            M (u, v) = µv 1−γ uγ ,

allows us to relate the change in tightness to the change in unemployment. Since the job finding
rate is given by

                                                 f = µθ1−γ ,

the implied change in f induced by a change in benefits equals −(1 − γ) × 0.086. Since the
elasticity of the steady-state unemployment rate u with respect to f equals 1 − u, the implied
change in u (due to the change in tightness induced by the change in benefits) equals

                                           (1 − u)(1 − γ) × 0.086.

    Given the best available estimate in Brügemann (2008) of γ = 0.4, and assuming u = 0.05,
the implied change equals 0.049. This value is the same as the actual change in unemployment
reported in Table 1.
    Note that this result also points toward only a small effect of benefit extensions on search
effort and job acceptance decisions by the unemployed. Changes in these decisions by the un-
employed would translate into changes in the parameter µ of the matching function (i.e., a
decline in the job finding rate for a given vacancy-unemployment ratio). We find very lim-
because (1) we have unemployment data for more county pairs than we do for vacancy data so that the estimates
are obtained on slightly different samples, and (2) benefit duration is not the only regressor as we use an
interactive-effects estimator (Bai, 2009) which adds an estimated number of factors to the regression. The
estimation procedure is unlikely to select exactly the same aggregate factors for the three data series (even
simply including time and county-pair fixed effects would not guarantee an exact mapping of the two tables’
results). The coefficients do add up exactly, of course, if we use an OLS on the same samples and with benefits
as the only regressor.



                                                      35
ited evidence of such changes being induced by unemployment benefit extensions given the
conventional estimates of the matching function elasticity.35

5.2     Unemployment Benefit Extensions and Employment
    In Columns (3) and (4) of Table 4 we report the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on
employment using QCEW and QWI data, respectively. We find a large negative effect implying
that a rise in unemployment associated with an extension of unemployment benefits is similar
in magnitude to the decline in employment. This finding challenges the wisdom of relying on
unemployment benefit extensions as a policy to stimulate aggregate demand. The large decline
in employment associated with such policies is likely to substantially dampen any potential
stimulative effects. Note that the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on employment
that we find is quantitatively similar to the one measured in Hagedorn et al. (2015b) who used
a different source of variation for identification and relied on a different empirical methodology.
    A hypothesis often mentioned in the literature following Solon (1979) is that the rise in un-
employment in response to unemployment benefit extensions might be driven by measurement
issues. In particular, workers who collect benefits claim to be actively searching for a job in
response to surveys used to determine the unemployment rate, while in reality they are not. In
other words, had benefits not been extended, these workers would have reported themselves as
being out of the labor force. The decline in the vacancy rates and employment documented here
provides evidence against the quantitative importance this hypothesis. In fact, using Equation
(12), we can compute the effect of permanently extending benefits to 99 weeks on employment:
                              −0.003
                                         × (log(99) − log(26)) = −0.037.
                           1 − β(1 − s)
Thus, the long-run average employment rate would decrease from 95% to 91.3%. This 3.7
percentage point decrease is of a comparable magnitude to the 4.1 percentage point increase in
the unemployment rate found in the corresponding experiment in Section 4.1.
    Assuming perfect foresight of future benefits, in Section 4.1 we found that benefit exten-
sions increased unemployment by 2 percentage points in 2011. The same calculation implies
that employment in 2011 was lower by 2 percentage points due to benefit extensions. Thus,
benefit extensions led to a decline in employment and an increase in unemployment of the same
magnitude.
    Note that our estimate of the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on employment is
  35
     Note that the corollary of this argument, at least in standard empirically relevant models, is that the effect of
unemployment insurance generosity on the unemployment entry rate, conditional on the vacancy-unemployment
ratio, cannot be large either. This is because job acceptance and separation decisions are symmetric: Work if
the surplus is nonnegative and enter/rejoin the unemployment pool otherwise. Thus, if unemployment benefit
extensions do not have a quantitatively large impact on job acceptance decisions, they are also unlikely to have
a significant impact on the (equivalent) quit decisions.



                                                         36
based on the difference across border counties. We then use the resulting coefficient to predict
the effect of a nation-wide extension. A potential concern with such a procedure is that when
some states extend benefits more than others, economic activity and, thus, employment may
reallocate to states with lower benefits. This reallocation is picked up by our estimates but
would be absent if the policy was changed nation-wide. We find no empirical justification for
such a concern. In particular, we apply our empirical methodology to measure the change in em-
ployment in sectors producing output that is plausibly non-tradable across states, such as retail
or food services. If the change in employment is driven to an important degree by reallocation,
we would not expect benefit extensions to have a large effect on these sectors. Instead, we find
that a 1% rise in benefit duration for one quarter leads to a decline of employment by 0.011 and
0.010 log points in retail and food services sectors, respectively. Both effects are statistically
significant at 1%. In addition, Hagedorn et al. (2015a) use the Nielsen Consumer Panel Data to
measure the responsiveness of cross state border shopping to changes in unemployment benefit
generosity. Their results indicate that this effect is negligible.

5.3    Unemployment Benefit Extensions and Wages
    We have established that extensions of unemployment benefits lead to a decline in job
creation by employers. In a standard equilibrium search model such a response is induced by
the fact that longer expected benefit eligibility improves the outside option of workers and
leads to an increase in the equilibrium wage. We now assess whether this equilibrium effect is
consistent with the data.
    Consider the wage of a worker i in county a in pair p which depends on county productivity
z , county market tightness θa , benefits ba and idiosyncratic productivity φi :
  a


             log(wti ) = β0 + βz log(zta ) + βθ log(θta ) + βb log(bat ) + log(φit ) + ηti ,   (25)

where η is a measurement error. Theory predicts that the equilibrium wage, conditional on
county productivity, demand, etc, increases when UI becomes more generous. It is important
to emphasize that we are referring to the response of the equilibrium wage, which is also
negatively affected by a drop in market tightness caused by a negative response of job creation
to the policy change. The fact that the equilibrium wage combines the positive direct effect of
benefit extensions and the negative effect induced by the equilibrium response of job creation,
makes the identification of the net equilibrium effect on wages more demanding on the data.
    The crucial issue in studying the dynamics of wages is selection. The idiosyncratic produc-
tivity of workers moving from non-employment to employment or from job to job depend on
business cycle conditions (Gertler and Trigari (2009), Hagedorn and Manovskii (2013)). Id-
iosyncratic productivity can be decomposed into permanent ability µi , job specific productivity



                                                     37
κi and a stochastic component i :

                                  log(φit ) = log(µit ) + log(κit ) + log(it ).                             (26)

The decision of a non-employed to accept a job depends on zt , µit , the job-specific productivity κ̂
as well as on benefits b. The decision of a worker to switch jobs depends on the worker’s current
job specific productivity κit and the job-specific productivity in the new job κ̂. Productivity κ̂
is a random draw from a distribution F . A worker who has received N offers during a period
accepts the highest draw κ, which is distributed according to F N . Since the F N are ordered
by first-order stochastic dominance, the expected value of κ is increasing in N and is thus
increasing in the number of vacancies. A more generous unemployment insurance system leads
to a drop in vacancy posting and therefore to fewer offers and a lower expected value of κ.
By the Law of Large Numbers, workers starting a new job in a recession or when benefits are
high then have a lower average value of κ than workers starting a job when many offers are
available such as in a boom or when benefits are low. Thus, if we regress wages on benefits
we also pick up the impact of benefits on the average value of κ.36 To deal with this issue, we
follow Hagedorn and Manovskii (2013) and consider job stayers, defined as workers who have
the same job in periods t and t + 1 and thus also the same value of κ. Taking differences across
time for a job stayer yields
                        i
                   log(wt+1 ) − log(wti )
                         a
              = βz (log(zt+1 ) − log(zta )) + βθ (log(θt+1
                                                       a
                                                           ) − log(θta )) + βb (log(bat+1 ) − log(bat ))     (27)
              + log(it+1 ) − log(it ) + ηt+1
                                           i
                                               − ηti ,

that is the terms µi and κi drop out. We therefore consider a group of workers who worked in
                                                                        a                   a
period t and t + 1 for the same employer with average wages wt,t           in period t and wt,t+1  in period
                                                                                   a              a
t + 1. Theory then predicts that regressing the difference in wages log(wt,t+1 ) − log(wt,t ) on the
difference in benefits, log(bat+1 ) − log(bat ), yields a positive coefficient. We again have to control
for the endogeneity of policy and to this end we again invoke assumption (19) and consider the
difference across paired border counties. Taking differences across counties a and b in the same
                a              a                 b             b
pair p of log(wt,t+1 ) − log(wt,t ) and log(wt,t+1   ) − log(wt,t ) yields
                                     a              a              b              b
                               (log(wt,t+1 ) − log(wt,t )) − (log(wt,t+1 ) − log(wt,t ))
                                      a
                          = βθ ((log(θt+1 ) − log(θta )) − (log(θt+1
                                                                 b
                                                                     ) − log(θtb )))                         (28)
                          + βb ((log(bat+1 ) − log(bat )) − (log(bbt+1 ) − log(bbt ))) + ϑt ,

where ϑt collects all error terms and stochastic components unrelated to policy. We then regress
  36
       Benefits may also affect κ by making liquidity constrained workers more selective in the jobs they accept.




                                                          38
this double difference of wages on the double difference in benefits:
                                  a              a              b              b
                            (log(wt,t+1 ) − log(wt,t )) − (log(wt,t+1 ) − log(wt,t ))
                        = β̃b ((log(bat+1 ) − log(bat )) − (log(bbt+1 ) − log(bbt ))) + ϑ̃t .

The coefficient β̃b captures the equilibrium wage response which, using (29), combines the direct
effect of benefits on wages, βb , and the indirect effect of benefits on market tightness θ, βθ βθ,b ,
where βθ,b is the regression coefficient of market tightness on benefits,

                                                 β̃b = β̃b + βθ βθ,b .

We therefore obtain instead of the potentially large direct effect βb the smaller equilibrium
response β̃b which takes into account the benefit induced change in market tightness and its
effect on wages. It is the latter, the equilibrium response, β̃b , which theory predicts to be
positive.
    To implement this procedure, we obtain wage data from the QWI that allows us to measure
wages of job stayers. The QWI provides a measure of full quarter employment - workers who
remained employed at the same firm for the entire quarter - and average wage earnings of full
quarter employees. However, in quarter t the measure of full quarter employment also includes
workers who will separate in t + 1, and in quarter t the measure includes new hires from quarter
t. Thus, to isolate the wages of stayers we difference out the average wages of t + 1 separators
(also available from QWI) from the average wages in t and difference out the average t new hire
wages from the average wages in t + 1. This yields the true average wages of stayers in quarters
t and t + 1.
    Column (5) of Table 4 shows the result. We find that wages statistically significantly increase
in response to an increase in benefits.37 As we explain in Appendix VI, the increase in wages
of job stayers indicates that benefit extensions increase the outside option available to these
workers when they bargain on the job, consistent with the existing US laws and UI system
regulations. Note that the increase in wages that we document provides strong evidence for the
general equilibrium effects. Indeed, if higher unemployment was not caused by unemployment
benefit extensions, one would expect wages to be lower in counties with higher unemployment.

5.4     Validation using Model-Generated Data
   In this Section we evaluate the performance of our empirical method on data generated by
a calibrated equilibrium search model. The model is an extension of Mortensen and Pissarides
(1994) to allow for unemployment benefit expiration.
   To address the border county design, the model features a nested state-county structure. In
  37
     To assess the quantitative magnitude of this estimate consider a typical county pair in the Great Recession.
The estimate implies that a county with 70 weeks of benefits has a 0.33% higher level of wages than a county
with 50 weeks of benefits, everything else equal.


                                                       39
particular, there is a stochastic process for state’s productivity. The unemployment benefit pol-
icy depends on the endogenous unemployment level in the state economy. The county economy
takes the endogenously induced joint stochastic process for state unemployment, productivity
and benefits as exogenous. The assumption is that counties are “small” relative to the state of
which they are apart.
    Preferences, technology and frictions are the same across the state and county economies.
Agents. In any given period, a worker can be either employed (matched with a firm) or
unemployed. Risk-neutral workers maximize expected lifetime utility
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                    U = E0     β t ct ,
                                                   t=0

where E0 is the period-0 expectation operator, β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, ct denotes
consumption in period t. An unemployed worker produces h, which stands for the combined
value of leisure and home production. In addition, unemployed workers may be eligible for
benefits b. Unemployed workers who are eligible for benefits lose eligibility stochastically at
rate et (·), which depends on the state unemployment rate as specified below.
    Firms are risk-neutral and maximize profits. Workers and firms have the same discount
factor β. A firm can be either matched to a worker or vacant. A firm posting a vacancy incurs
a flow cost k.
Matching. The number of new matches in period t is given by M (ut , vt ), where ut is the
number of unemployed in period t, and vt is the number of vacancies. The matching function
is assumed to be constant returns to scale, and strictly increasing and strictly concave in both
arguments. We define θt = vt /ut as the market tightness in period t. We then define the job-
finding probability as f (θt ) = M (ut , vt )/ut = M (1, θt ) and the probability of filling a vacancy
as q(θt ) = M (ut , vt )/vt = M (1/θt , 1). By the assumptions on M made above, the function f (θt )
is increasing in θt and q(θt ) is decreasing in θt . Existing matches are destroyed with exogenous
job separation probability δ.
Production. A matched worker-firm pair produces output zt , which follows a first order
Markov process. Firms pay workers a wage wt , determined through Nash bargaining with work-
ers’ bargaining power ξ. Thus, the period profit of a matched firm is given by πt = zt − wt .

5.4.1   State Economy

     In the state economy the benefit expiration policy depends on the state unemployment rate,
et (uSt ). We assume ineligible workers regain eligibility as soon as they are matched with a firm.
The relevant state variables for the state economy are thus the exogenous state productivity
ztS and the endogenous unemployment rate uSt . Let ΩSt = (ztS , uSt ). The state law of motion for



                                                 40
employment is therefore:

                            LSt+1 (ΩSt ) = (1 − δ)LSt + f (θtS ) 1 − LSt
                                                                           
                                                                                                   (29)

and uSt = 1 − LSt .

Value Functions. The flow value for a firm employing a worker is

                            JtS (ΩSt ) = ztS − wtS + β (1 − δ) EJt+1 (ΩSt+1 )                      (30)

and the flow value of a vacant firm is:

                               VtS (ΩSt ) = −k + βq θtS EJt+1 (ΩSt+1 ),
                                                       
                                                                                                   (31)

where k is the flow cost of maintaining a vacancy. The surplus for a firm employing a worker is
thus JtS − VtS .
   The value functions for workers can be written as:
                                                               S,E
     WtS (ΩSt ) = wtS + β (1 − δ) EWt+1
                                      S
                                          + βδ 1 − et (ΩSt ) EUt+1 (ΩSt+1 )
                                                            

                                 S,I
                   +βδet (ΩSt )EUt+1 (ΩSt+1 ),                                                      (32)

    UtS,E (ΩSt ) = h + b + βf θtS EWt+1  S
                                             (ΩSt+1 ) + β 1 − f θtS                     S,E
                                                                        1 − et (ΩSt ) EUt+1 (ΩSt+1 )
                                                                                  

                                                 S,I
                   +β 1 − f θtS et (ΩSt )EUt+1       (ΩSt+1 ),
                                 
                                                                                                    (33)

    UtS,I (ΩSt ) = h + βf θtS EWt+1 (ΩSt+1 ) + β 1 − f θtS EUt+1      S,I
                                                                          (ΩSt+1 ),
                                                              
                                                                                                    (34)

where WtS s the value of a job for a worker, UtS,E is the value of unemployment for an agent
eligible for benefits and U S,I is the value of unemployment for a non-eligible agent. Define the
surplus of being employed as ∆S,E   t   = WtS − UtS,E . Also define the surplus for an unemployed
worker of being eligible: ΦSt = UtS,E − UtS,I . The laws of motion for these quantities are:

                   ∆S,E     S         S                            S
                                                                        E∆S,E      S
                                                                     
                     t (Ωt ) = wt − h − b + β 1 − δ − f θt                  t+1 (Ωt+1 )

                                    +β 1 − δ − f θtS et (ΩSt )EΦSt+1 (ΩSt+1 ),
                                                      
                                                                                             (35)

                     ΦSt (ΩSt ) = b + β 1 − f θtS       1 − et (ΩSt ) ΦSt+1 (ΩSt+1 ).
                                                                   
                                                                                             (36)

The wage is chosen to maximize:
                                    ξ S S            1−ξ
                          ∆S,E
                           t    Ω S
                                  t      Jt Ωt − VtS ΩSt       .                                   (37)

State Equilibrium Definition. Given a policy (b, et (·)) and an initial condition ΩS0 an
equilibrium is a sequence of ΩSt -measurable
                                   n          functions for wages                                S
                                                                        o wt , market tightness θt , em-
ployment LSt , and value functions WtS , UtS,E , UtS,I , JtS , VtS , ∆St such that:
   1. The value functions satisfy the worker and firm Bellman equations (30), (31), (32), (33),
      (34);
   2. Free entry: The value VtS of a vacant firm is zero for all ΩSt ;

                                                   41
                            Table 5: Internally Calibrated Parameters

            Parameter                       Value     Target                   Data    Model
        h   Value of non-market activity    0.6124    Regression Coefficient   0.049   0.049
        ξ   Bargaining power                0.0982    Mean tightness           0.634   0.634
        γ   Matching function parameter     0.4012    Mean job finding rate    0.139   0.139

   3. Nash bargaining: The wage satisfies equation (37);
   4. Law of motion for employment: The employment process satisfies (29).

5.4.2   County Economy

     The county is assumed to be small with respect to the state of which it is a member. That
is, the county unemployment rate is not assumed to affect the state unemployment rate and
the county productivity process is orthogonal to the state one. The benefit expiration policy for
the county, however, depends on the state unemployment rate. Thus, in addition to exogenous
county productivity, z C , the state productivity and the state unemployment rate will be state
variables (since they are jointly sufficient to forecast benefit policy). Thus, denote the vector of
                                                
states for the county ΩC   t =   zt
                                   C
                                     ; zt
                                         S
                                           , uS
                                              t . All of the equations governing workers and firms are
the same as in the state’s economy with the appropriately adjusted state vector. The definition
of equilibrium is modified to add an additional condition, namely that the joint process for
          
 ztS , uSt is consistent with the state equilibrium. The full equations and definition of the county
equilibrium can be found in Appendix VII.

5.4.3   Calibration

   The calibration strategy we employ is to require the state economy to be consistent with
key labor market statistics and to match the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on
unemployment estimated in Section 4.1. The model period is taken to be one week. We match
the average labor market tightness, the average job finding rate, and the regression coefficient of
quasi-differenced unemployment on benefit duration. The calibrated parameters are summarized
in Table 5. In order to be consistent with the existing EB program, in the calibration we set
benefit expiration policy at 26 weeks when state unemployment is less than 6.5%, 39 weeks when
unemployment is between 6.5% and 8% and 46 weeks when greater than 8%. The remainder of
the parameters are calibrated externally, using the same values and parametric forms for the
matching function as Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008).

5.4.4   Quantitative Evaluation

   The goal of the simulation exercise is to generate synthetic data at the county level com-
parable to the actual data. We simulate two states and one county in each of them. The two


                                                 42
Table 6: Estimated Permanent Effect of a 10 Week Benefit Extension from Regressions Coeffi-
cients in Model Generated Data

                         VARIABLES      Unemp.      Vacancies   Tightness
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)
                         Data            0.146       -0.126      -0.258
                         Model           0.151       -0.135      -0.287

states and the two counties each have the same process for productivity. The counties, consis-
tent with our border county assumption, have the same realized sequence of shocks. The two
states, however, have different realized sequences of productivity shocks. Consequently, the re-
alized endogenous sequences of state unemployment will be different. Thus, the two counties
will have a different time series of unemployment benefits.
    We simulate the two states and the two counties for 100 years and throw out the first
15 years of data as ”burn-in.” We then estimate the same regression (with quasi-differenced
unemployment on the left-hand side) as we do on the data from the Great Recession. Recall that
our calibration strategy ensures that coefficient on the difference in benefits in this regression
is the same in the data and in the simulations of the model. Then, we calculate the effect of
a permanent 10-week increase in benefits on unemployment, vacancies and tightness. We then
compare these true permanent effects from the model to the calculated permanent effects from
the data. The results and relevant comparisons are displayed in Table 6. The model generated
data confirms the empirical validity of our specification, as our model, calibrated to generate
the same regression coefficient on unemployment benefit duration from the data delivers right
permanent effects on unemployment, vacancies and tightness. These effects are induced by
changes of wages in the model that are also of the right magnitude. Replicating the regression
of wages on benefit duration described in Section 5.3 on model generated data yields a coefficient
of 0.0078, similar to its empirical counterpart reported in Table 4.


6    Change in Location of Employment in Response to
     Changes in Benefits
    A potential concern arises from the observation that households may live in different states
than where they work. This would bias our estimates if the households systematically change
their job search behavior in response to changes in unemployment benefits. For example, if
households search in states with less generous benefits to take advantage of a higher job-
finding rate, our estimate of the effect of benefit extensions on unemployment would be biased
downwards, since those households would face a higher job-finding rate, which would translate
into a lower unemployment rate in that county. In this section, we use two different methods to
show that our analysis is not affected by such a bias. First, we develop an imputation procedure

                                               43
that allows to estimate the effects of unemployment benefit extensions while fully accounting for
mobility. Second, we provide direct empirical evidence of job search behavior. Both approaches
confirm that search behavior does not vary systematically with changes in benefits, validating
our use of a simple and transparent specification that ignores mobility decisions.
     Because integrated labor markets generally contain multiple neighboring counties, instead of
focusing on the county pair as the unit of analysis for search behavior we aggregate all counties
on both sides of a border segment and perform the imputation on that “border segment” pair.
To impute what fraction of workers search in the state where they live, consider the following
model. We consider the local economy to consist of a pair of state border segments A, B. The
segments are populated by labor forces of size nA             B
                                                       t and nt (taken as the sum of all the border
county labor forces in each state on the respective side of the border) and populations pA    t and
 B
pt .
     In any given period, a worker can be either employed (matched with a firm), unemployed or
not in the labor force. In period t, firms in state A post vacancies in state A, vtA . An unemployed
worker in state A searches either in state A or in state B. We assume that a fraction ζ of non-
labor force participants (observed in the LAUS data) enter the labor force and search for jobs.
The number of new matches in state A in period t equals

                                             M ũA      A
                                                          
                                                   t , vt ,

where ũAt is the measure of individuals in period t searching in state A. The number of matches
is the same for state B mutatis mutandis. M (·, ·) exhibits constant returns to scale and is
strictly increasing and strictly concave in both arguments. We define
                                                      vtA
                                             θ̃tA =
                                                      ũA
                                                        t
to be the market tightness in state A in period t. We define the job-finding and vacancy-filling
probabilities as in Section 5.4.
   We can thus write for the number of unemployed searching in state A and B, resp.:

                   ũA     A      A    A    A         B    B      B    B
                     t = (ut + ζ(pt − nt ))xt + (1 − xt )(ut + ζ(pt − nt )),                   (38)
                   ũB     B      B    B    B         A    A      A    A
                     t = (ut + ζ(pt − nt ))xt + (1 − xt )(ut + ζ(pt − nt )),                   (39)

where uit is the number of unemployed who live in state i, xit is the fraction of the unemployed
in state i that searches in state i, and δt is the separation probability into unemployment,
calculated from the Current Population Survey (CPS) following Shimer (2007). We follow Hall
(2013) and set ζ to 5/27 to match the ratio of the job-finding rates of non-participants to the
unemployed in the CPS.
    We can measure the probabilities for an unemployed worker from states A and B to find a




                                                44
job, φA      B
      t and φt , in the data:
                                                                  
                                           uA    A         A    A
                                            t − ut+1 + δt nt − ut
                                       φA
                                        t=                          ,                                           (40)
                                                      uA
                                                       t
                                                                  
                                       B   uB    B         B    B
                                            t − ut+1 + δt nt − ut
                                      φt =                          ,                                           (41)
                                                      uB
                                                       t

as all right-hand variables are observed in the data. We can relate the measurable φA
                                                                                    t and φt
                                                                                            B

to the unobservable variables xA     B       A        B
                                t , xt , f (θt ), f (θt ):

                               φA       A      A
                                                   − 1 − xA     B
                                                                
                                 t = xt f θ t              t f θt   ,                    (42)
                               φB       B      B
                                                   − 1 − xB     A
                                                                
                                t = xt f θt                t f θt .                      (43)

The four equations (38), (39), (42) and (43) have 4 unknowns, xA             B       A        B 38
                                                                        t , xt , f (θt ), f (θt ). These
equations are not linearly independent and thus do not allow us to recover these 4 unknowns.
Instead they give us a set of solutions S.
    In order to proceed to identify xA       B
                                        t , xt , we assume that the matching function is Cobb-
Douglas, µuγ v 1−γ . Note, however, that we do not necessarily see the true level of vacancies.
However, if we assume that we see the same fraction, ψ, of total vacancies for both counties
in a pair, we can still estimate the effective matching function given our observed vacancies. If
we observe ṽ = ψv, then the total number of matches is µ̃uγ ṽ 1−γ , where µ̃ = ψ γ−1 µ. Thus, we
propose to identify µ̃ and γ in addition to the x’s.
    We allow µ̃ to change over time, to capture any possible time trends in the adoption of
online vacancies. The algorithm consists of selecting α, {µt , xA    B T
                                                                t , xt }t=1 to minimize the error in
the equations (42), (43) and:
                                                    B α
                                         q(θtA )     θt
                                             B
                                                 =        ,                                         (44)
                                         q(θt )      θtA
where we observe all left hand side variables for all t.39
    We measure the effect of benefits on search behavior by examining the difference between
the imputed fraction of workers searching away from their home states (1 − xA                    B
                                                                                     t ) − (1 − xt ).
Further, we construct imputed tightness by dividing county level vacancies by the imputed mea-
sure of unemployed workers searching in that county (vtA/ũAt ), corrected for the search behavior
along that border segment (we impose the same x’s for all counties within a state for each
border segment). Then, the job finding rate is constructed using the imputed tightness and the
estimated parameters of the matching function. Table 7 Column (1) shows, using the difference-
in-difference estimator, that there is only a very small and statistically insignificant response of
  38
     We do not directly observe xA t , and thus we don’tnew  observe ũA       A
                                                                       t and θt , nor the matching function.
  39                                              v     −v
     The probability to fill a vacancy qt = 1 −     t+1
                                                        vt
                                                           t+1
                                                               , where vt is the stock of vacancies at t and vtnew are
newly posted vacancies at t, so that vt+1 − vt+1 are not filled vacancies from period t. Both vt and vtnew are
                                                new

observable in the data.



                                                         45
              Table 7: Effect of UI Benefits on Imputed Labor Market Variables

       VARIABLES             Out of State Search      Imputed Tightness      Imputed Job-finding
       Weeks of Benefits           0.0002                 -0.1154                 -0.0524
                                   (0.510)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
       Factors                        2                       2                       2
       Observations                29,492                  29,492                  29,492
       R-squared                    0.066                  0.2816                  0.2996
       Note - p-values (in parentheses) calculated via bootstrap. Bold indicates p < 0.01.

search behavior, to changes in benefits, so that mobility does not bias our estimates. Further,
the effect on imputed tightness, which now fully accounts for changes in mobility in response
to changes in benefits, is not statistically significantly different from the baseline estimate.
    Next, we look for direct empirical evidence on where people work relative to where they
live. We use data from the American Community Survey (ACS) from 2005-2013. The ACS
is an annual 1% survey of households in the United States conducted by the Census Bureau.
The survey contains information on the county of residence of households and the state of
employment. The survey is representative at the Public Use Micro Area level - a statistical area
that has roughly 100,000 residents (and thus also for counties with more than 100,000 residents).
We compute the share of households in border counties who work in the neighboring state. We
can then examine how this share of border state workers responds to changes in benefits across
states. We perform our analysis using the same difference-in-difference estimator as with the
imputed search behavior. We find a statistically insignificant coefficient on weeks of benefits
available of .0117 (se .0323). This direct evidence once again implies that worker search behavior
does not respond significantly to changes in unemployment benefits.


7    Conclusion
    We developed an empirical methodology to measure the effect of unemployment benefit ex-
tensions on unemployment that includes the effect of benefit extensions on job creation neglected
in the existing empirical literature. In particular, we exploited the discontinuity of unemploy-
ment insurance policies at state borders to identify their impact. Our estimator controls for the
effect of expectations of future changes in benefits and has a simple economic interpretation. It
is also robust to the heterogeneous impacts of aggregate shocks on local labor markets.
    We found that unemployment benefit extensions have a large effect on total unemployment
and that they can potentially account for a significant share of the persistently high unem-
ployment following the Great Recession. The analysis of administrative claims data reveals
that unemployment benefit extensions have a significant negative impact on labor demand. We
found further support for this conclusion by documenting direct evidence of a significant nega-
tive impact of unemployment benefit extensions on vacancy creation and employment through


                                                    46
their effect on wages. These results indicate the importance of taking the impact of benefit
extension on job creation into account for a more complete evaluation of this policy tool. They
also illustrate the need for the new methodology required to measure the response of forward
looking job creators that we develop.
    One motivation for increasing unemployment benefit durations during the Great Recession,
in addition to helping unemployed workers smooth their consumption, is to increase employment
through its stimulative effect on local demand. Although we cannot do full justice to evaluating
this effect given the methodology on which our analysis relies, our results nevertheless offer some
insights. To the extent that the unemployed spend a significant fraction of their income in their
home counties (in a form of e.g., rent payments or service purchases), the corresponding part
of the stimulative effect is fully captured by our analysis. Indeed, we find that border counties
with longer benefit durations have much higher unemployment, despite the potential beneficial
effects of spending. If, on the other hand, spending by the unemployed was spread uniformly
on goods and services provided in all counties, this aggregate component is not captured, as
it is differenced out by our estimator. We find, however, that an increase in unemployment
due to benefit extensions is similar in magnitude to the decline of employment. Thus, the total
effect on spending is ambiguous as extending benefits increases spending by the unemployed
but at the same time decreases spending as fewer people are employed. The potential offsetting
effect of lower employment due to higher benefits was also recognized by policymakers but it
was believed to be quantitatively very small. Our results of a sizable macro effect leads us to
expect that the stimulative effect of higher spending by the unemployed is largely offset by
the dramatic negative effect on employment from the effect of benefit expansion on vacancy
creation.




                                                47
References
Andrews, D. W. K. (2005): “Cross-Section Regression with Common Shocks,” Econometrica,
 73, 1551–1585.
Bai, J. (2009): “Panel Data Models with Interactive Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, 77, 1229–
 1279.
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2002): “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor
 Models,” Econometrica, 70, 191–221.
Barro, R. (2010): “The Folly of Subsidizing Unemployment,” Wall Street Journal.
Bartik, T. J. (1991): Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?,
 Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004): “How Much Should We Trust
 Differences-In-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 249–275.
Brügemann, B. (2008): “What Elasticity of the Matching Function is Consistent with U.S.
 Aggregate Labor Market Data?” mimeo, Yale University.
Card, D. and P. B. Levine (2000): “Extended Benefits and the Duration of UI Spells:
 Evidence from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program,” Journal of Public Economics,
 78, 107–138.
Cordell, L., L. Geng, L. Goodman, and L. Yang (2013): “The Cost of Delay,” Working
 Paper 13-15, Federal Resrve Bank of Philadelphia.
Costain, J. S. and M. Reiter (2008): “Business Cycles, Unemployment Insurance, and the
 Calibration of Matching Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32, 1120–
 1155.
Diamond, P. A. (2013): “Cyclical Unemployment, Structural Unemployment,” National Bu-
 reau of Economic Research Working Paper 18761.
Dube, A., W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010): “Minimum Wage Effects Across State Borders:
 Estimates Using Contiguous Counties,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92, 945 – 964.
Gertler, M. and A. Trigari (2009): “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
 Bargaining,” Journal of Political Economy, 117, 38–86.
Gobillon, L. and T. Magnac (2015): “Regional Policy Evaluation: Interactive Fixed Effects
 and Synthetic Controls,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
Hagedorn, M., J. Handbury, and I. Manovskii (2015a): “Demand Stimulus and Infla-
 tion: Empirical Evidence,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Hagedorn, M. and I. Manovskii (2008): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unem-
 ployment and Vacancies Revisited,” American Economic Review, 98, 1692–1706.

                                            48
——— (2013): “Job Selection and Wages over the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review,
 103, 771–803.
Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2015b): “The Impact of Unemployment
 Benefit Extensions on Employment: The 2014 Employment Miracle?” National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper 20884.
——— (2015c): “Unemployment Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role
 of Micro Effects,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Hall, R. E. (2005): “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American
 Economic Review, 95, 50–65.
——— (2013): “Some Observations on Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii, and Mitman, “Unem-
 ployment Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects”,”
 mimeo, Nov. 6, Stanford University.
Hall, R. E. and P. Milgrom (2008): “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage
 Bargain,” American Economic Review, 98, 1653–74.
Ham, J. C. and S. A. Rea, Jr (1987): “Unemployment Insurance and Male Unemployment
 Duration in Canada,” Journal of Labor Economics, 5, 325–353.
Herkenhoff, K. F. and L. E. Ohanian (2013): “Foreclosure Delay and U.S. Unemploy-
 ment,” mimeo, UCLA.
Holmes, T. J. (1998): “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evi-
 dence from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 667–705.
Johnston, A. C. and A. Mas (2015): “Potential Unemployment Insurance Duration and La-
  bor Supply: The Individual and Market-Level Response to a Benefit Cut,” mimeo, Princeton
  University.
Katz, L. F. (2010): “Long-Term Unemployment in the Great Recessions,” Testimony for the
 Joint Economic Committee U.S. Congress.
Katz, L. F. and B. D. Meyer (1990): “The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unem-
 ployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment,” Journal of Public Economics, 41,
 45–72.
Kolko, J., D. Neumark, and M. C. Mejia (2013): “What Do Business Climate Indexes
 Teach Us About State Policy And Economic Growth?” Journal of Regional Science, 53,
 220–255.
Krause, M. U. and H. Uhlig (2012): “Transitions in the German Labor Market: Structure
 and Crisis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 64–79.
Krueger, A. and B. Meyer (2002): “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance,” Handbook
 of Public Economics, 4, 2327–2392.

                                           49
Ljungqvist, L. and T. J. Sargent (2015): “The Fundaments Surplus in Matching Models,”
  mimeo, New York University.
Meyer, B. D. (1990): “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells,” Econometrica,
 58, 757–82.
Millard, S. P. and D. T. Mortensen (1997): “The Unemployment and Welfare Effects
 of Labor Market Policy: A Comparison of the U.S. and the U.K,” in Unemployment Policy:
 Government Options for the Labour Market, ed. by D. J. Snower and G. de la Dehesa,
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mitman, K. and S. Rabinovich (2013): “Do Changes in Unemployment Insurance Explain
 the Emergence of Jobless Recoveries?” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Moffitt, R. (1985): “Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of Unemployment
 Spells,” Journal of Econometrics, 28, 85–101.
Mortensen, D. T. and C. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
 Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61, 397–415.
Mulligan, C. B. (2008): “A Depressing Scenario: Mortgage Debt Becomes Unemployment
 Insurance,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14514.
——— (2009): “Means-Tested Mortgage Modification: Homes Saved of Income Destroyed?”
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15281.
——— (2010): “Foreclosures, Enforcement, and Collections under the Federal Mortgage Mod-
 ification Guidlines,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15777.
——— (2012): The Redistribution Recession: How Labor Market Distortions Contracted the
 Economy, Oxford University Press.
Office of Management and Budget (2010): “2010 Standards for Delineating Metropoli-
 tan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas; Notice,” Federal Register, 75, 37245–37252.
Pissarides, C. (2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sahin, A., J. Song, G. Topa, and G. L. Violante (2014): “Mismatch Unemployment,”
  American Economic Review, 104, 3529–64.
Shi, S. and Q. Wen (1999): “Labor Market Search and the Dynamic Effects of Taxes and
  Subsidies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 43, 457–495.
Shimer, R. (2007): “Reassesing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,” mimeo, University of
  Chicago.
Solon, G. (1979): “Labor Supply Effects of Extended Unemployment Benefits,” Journal of
  Human Resources, 14, 247–255.




                                          50
                                             APPENDICES

I        Implementation of Iterative Two-Stage Estimator
    The following is a brief description of the algorithm implementing our iterative two-stage
estimator.
     1. Start with a guess for α, say α1 .
     2. At each iteration ξ, do the following:
         (a) given αξ , for each p, construct υp,t = ∆xp,t − β (1 − st ) ∆xp,t+1 − αj ∆bp,t . Then,
             υp,t = λ0p Ft is a pure factor model and can be estimated consistently using principal
             components.40
         (b) Given the estimates for λp and Ft , estimate equation (14) via OLS and update the
             guess to obtain αξ+1 .

     3. Repeat 2 until αξ converges.41

II       Inadmissibility of Uninstrumented State Unemploy-
         ment Differences in Testing for Endogeneity
    In this section we illustrate why controlling for the difference in state unemployment (with-
out instrumenting with Bartik shocks) does not constitute a valid exogeneity test. To do so,
we simulate data from our calibrated model where we impose exogeneity - i.e. we assume the
productivity processes at the county and state level are independent. In Figure A-1 we plot
the time series for state unemployment, county unemployment and weeks of benefits available.
Notice that both state and county level unemployment are smooth moving variables, whereas
the weeks of benefits jumps when a benefit extension is triggered on. The correlation between
state and county unemployment is significantly higher than between county unemployment and
benefits, and controlling for state unemployment completely takes out the effect of benefits.
However, it is important to note that the only channel through which the state economy affects
the county economy is through the benefit policy (because in this example the productivity
processes are orthogonal). Thus, controlling for state unemployment, which is endogenous to
benefits, is not a valid test for exogeneity.

III       Additional Discussion of Endogeneity
III.1      Some Informal Examples
    The key identification problem that our methodology was designed to overcome is the posi-
tive feedback from state unemployment to benefit extensions. This is guaranteed in our setting
    40
     The exposition of the estimator assumes that there are no missing observations. We use the generalized
procedure described in Bai (2009) and allow for missing observations.
  41
     We have conducted a number of Monte Carlo simulations with sample sizes similar to our sample. The
estimator described here is found to converge to the true parameter. Results are available upon request.

                                                    51
                    Figure A-1: County and State Unemployment: Model.

if shocks that affect state unemployment (and consequently benefits) impact symmetrically the
two counties on the two sides of the state border. In this case, when we difference the vari-
ables between these two counties, the shock is differenced out so the only remaining difference
between counties is the difference in benefits (that was induced by that shock).
    To make things concrete, consider the following stylized (and not necessarily factually cor-
rect) examples. The discovery of hydraulic fracking was a big positive shock to the economy
of Pittsburgh, PA during the Great Recession. This shock raised productivity and lowered un-
employment in Pennsylvania relative to New Jersey. The border counties of Philadelphia, PA
and Camden, NJ benefited equally from the availability of now cheaper natural gas. Faced with
the same negative aggregate shock during the Great Recession, due to the feedback effect from
unemployment to benefits, New Jersey raised unemployment benefits while Pennsylvania did
not. Now consider the difference between Philadelphia and Camden Counties. They are affected
by the same aggregate shock and have the same positive effect from the access to natural gas
from Pittsburgh. These effects cancel out so that the difference in unemployment between them
comes only from the fact that one has higher benefits than the other. Similarly, consider the
effects of Hurricane Sandy that was a much bigger shock for New Jersey than Pennsylvania.
The fact that this makes it more likely that benefits would be changed in NJ is not relevant
because the storm had a similar impact on Philadelphia and Camden. Note that for this argu-
ment it is quite irrelevant whether Philadelphia is large or small relative to Camden or relative
to Pennsylvania.
    Alternatively, imagine a more idiosyncratic shock to counties. Suppose the Interstate High-
way I-95 that is a major route connecting Philadelphia and Camden to other states is temporar-
ily closed down for mechanical reasons. This will be a major shock to both counties. However,
this shock is more likely to trigger benefit extensions in Pennsylvania since Philadelphia is much

                                               52
larger and important to Pennsylvania’s economy than Camden is relative to New Jersey. Does
this present a challenge to our identification strategy? No. The difference between the Philadel-
phia and Camden counties still arises only because of benefits and not because of underlying
economic conditions.
    The identification tests developed in the main body of the paper formally verify that shocks
to economic conditions of the two states indeed have a symmetric impact on the two border
counties, except through their effect on benefits.

III.2    Alternative “Endogeneity Test”
    Hall (2013) proposed trying to detect the presence of contamination on county-level LAUS
unemployment data with state level variable by studying the correlation between the county
unemployment rate measured in LAUS and state unemployment rate (relative to the correlation
with the adjacent county’s unemployment rate). To implement this suggestion, as proposed by
Hall (2013), we use LAUS data and regress county unemployment on state unemployment and
adjacent county unemployment in 2007. The estimated coefficient on the state is 0.908 with a
standard error of 0.039 and the coefficient on the adjacent out-of-state county is 0.350 with a
standard error of 0.023.
    To test whether the large estimate on the state-level variable implies the presence of con-
tamination we perform the same analysis with administrative unemployment insurance claims
data (that are not subject to any imputation). Specifically, we perform the same regression with
continuing claims divided by population. The estimated coefficient on the state is 1.121 with a
standard error of 0.045 and the coefficient on the adjacent out-of-state county is 0.415 with a
standard error of 0.024. Thus, the results of these experiments do not provide support for the
hypothesis that LAUS county-level unemployment contains an imputed state-level component.
    The fact that state unemployment is an important predictor of county unemployment is also
not very surprising and does not indicate shortcomings of our methodology. To see this, consider
a purposefully simplified example that describes an ideal scenario with no endogeneity problem
but where state unemployment is nevertheless a significant predictor. Suppose the shocks to
the state, including the border county in that state and its adjacent out-of-state county have
a common component. Each county is also subject to independent idiosyncratic shocks and
measurement error in local unemployment. When we difference between the two border coun-
ties, the common component of the shock is differenced out implying no endogeneity concern.
But consider now the regression of border county unemployment on unemployment in the state
and adjacent out-of-state county. As a state consists of many counties, idiosyncratic shocks and
measurement error are largely eliminated. Thus, the regression includes two regressors that have
the same informational content for the dependent variable, but one of the regressors (state un-
employment) is measured with little error while the other (out-of-state county unemployment)
with lots of error. Clearly, the regressor measured with little error will be a significant predic-
tor. Thus, such a regression cannot be interpreted as a test of endogeneity. It only provides
evidence of the importance of common components and the distribution of errors at various
levels of aggregation.


                                                53
  Table A-1: County unemployment and employment as a function of pair county and state

                                                        (1)                          (2)
           VARIABLES                           county unemployment           county employment

           other county unemployment                    0.4040
                                                        (0.017)
           state unemployment                           0.4842
                                                        (0.026)
           other county employment                                                  0.3746
                                                                                    (0.019)
           state employment                                                         0.4173
                                                                                    (0.037)

           Observations                          2,356                  2,312
           R-squared                             0.331                  0.239
                 Standard errors in parentheses. Bold font indicates p < 0.01.

    In addition, states differ with respect to many policies, e.g., taxes, regulations, UI and other
benefit policies that apply to all locations within a state. Thus, it is expected that there is
a difference in unemployment between border counties even when benefit durations are the
same in both of them. Our estimation is based on a panel with large variation over time and
these differences are accounted for by controlling for pair fixed effects (the factor model) and
explicitly controlling for changes in these policies.
    Further, since we know that county-level QWI employment data is also not subject to any
imputation using state-level variables, we now repeat the same experiment using 2007 LAUS
unemployment and QWI employment data. In order to make the regressions comparable, we run
them in logs of the level of unemployment and employment, as opposed to rates (because the
calculation of employment rate would involve a potentially imputed county labor force variable
which is only available in LAUS data the quality of which we aim to ascertain). The results of
the regressions are displayed in the Table A-1. Both for county employment and unemployment
we find large, positive significant coefficients on both the other county and on the state-level
variables, and that the coefficient on the state is larger than that of the adjacent county.42 Both
pairs of coefficient estimates have overlapping 95% confidence intervals. This experiment once
again reinforces the conclusion that the large coefficient on the state variables is not evidence of
an imputation problem. Instead, it is likely picking up a relationship between county and state
variables driven by real economic factors and the fact that county-level variables are noisier
than the state-level ones.
    While the results of these test support the conclusion that LAUS county-level unemploy-
ment data are not inappropriately imputed using state-level variables, we find the analysis of
  42
    To understand the relationship between these estimates in levels of unemployment to the estimates in rates
reported above, note that since the level of a state variable is about two orders of magnitude larger than the
county, in logs this would translate into roughly a factor of two difference on the state variable, which is what
we observe.


                                                       54
endogeneity in the main text of the paper to provide a more direct and powerful verification
of the lack of an endogeneity problem in our analysis. Moreover the fact that the results using
county-level LAUS unemployment data are quantitatively consistent with the results based on
independent datasets on vacancies, employment, and unemployment insurance claims strongly
points to the same conclusion. This is comforting not only from the point of view of our re-
search design but also because LAUS estimates are the basis for determining local spending
under many State and Federal programs.

IV         Measuring the Job-finding Rate in Administrative
           State UI Data
    In this section we describe the measurement of the job-finding rates of unemployment benefit
recipients in the regular state UI programs using administrative data on the count of continuing
claims and final payments.
    The counts of continued claims are provided monthly. The claims are a count of the total
number of continued claimants in the reference week of that month (the week including the
12th, as with the CPS). The final payments data are at a weekly frequency and represent the
count of claimants who receive their 26th benefit check, i.e., the final payment from the regular
state UI system. The continued claims data, therefore include the number of final payments
from the reference week of that month. We can write the number of continued claimants in
month t as:
                                             4
                                CC     FP
                                            X         ūFt+k
                                                           P
                               ut = ut,2 +      Qk                ,                         (A1)
                                            k=0   j=0 (1 − ft+j )

where uCC t   is the number of continuing claims at month t, ft is the probability to find a job in
            43 F P
month t, ut,τ is the number of those who received the final payment in week τ of month t,
and ūFt P is the total number of those who received their final payments after the reference week
in month t but not later than the reference week in month t + 1. For example, in a month with
five weeks, the measure would include final payments in weeks 3-5 of that month, and then the
final payments in the first two weeks of the subsequent month, i.e.
                                                   5
                                                   X                   2
                                                                       X
                                      ūFt P   =          uFt,τP   +          uFt+1,τ
                                                                                  P
                                                                                      .
                                                   τ =3                τ =1

       Rearranging Equation (A1) we can express the job-finding rate as
                                                        ūF P
                                       ūFt P + 4k=1 Qk (1−f
                                               P          t+k

                                                      j=1     t+j )
                              ft = 1 −          CC    FP
                                                                    ,                                  (A2)
                                               ut − ut,2
yielding a system of equations with four more unknowns than equations. Setting terminal con-
ditions for the final four measures of the job-finding rate we can solve backwards and calculate
  43
    We assume that during the first 26 weeks that an individual is receiving benefits the only reason why the
claimant stops receiving benefits is because of a transition to employment. Alternatively, the claimant could
stop collecting benefits without finding a job. We do not expect this to be quantitatively important.


                                                            55
                 Table A-2: Controlling for State SNAP and Foreclosure Policies

             VARIABLES                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
             Weeks of Benefits                         0.049     0.0407     0.0463     0.0486
                                                      (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
             SNAP Broad Eligibility                              0.0115
                                                                 (0.000)
             SNAP Spending                                                  0.0069
                                                                            (0.040)
             Foreclosure Policy                                                        0.0007
                                                                                       (0.385)
             Number of Factors                            2         2          2          2
             Observations                              37,177     32636      32636     37,177
             R-squared                                 0.458      0.460      0.458      0.461
             Note - p-values (in parentheses) calculated via bootstrap. Bold indicates p < 0.01.


all of the preceding job-finding rates. We use the national job-finding rate from the CPS for the
first four months of 2013 as our terminal conditions.44 We then perform our analysis through
2012:Q3, dropping the observations with the terminal conditions.

V      Unemployment Benefit Extensions and Unemploy-
       ment: Controlling for Other State-Level Policies
   In this section we control for tax and transfer policies that might be correlated with unem-
ployment and unemployment benefit extensions at the county or state levels.

V.1     Controlling for the Expansion of Food-Stamps Programs
    Mulligan (2012) has argued that in addition to unemployment benefit extensions, the De-
partment of Agriculture’s food-stamp program, now known as the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program, or SNAP, was also expanded considerably following the Great Recession.
It is possible that the expansion of this program at the state level was correlated with un-
employment benefit extensions so that the results reported above combine the effects of these
programs. We now isolate their impacts.
    Food-stamps were originally designed as a means-tested program for the poor. During the
Great Recession the Federal government has allowed states to adopt broad eligibility criteria
that effectively eliminated the asset test and states received waivers from work requirements
for the participants in the program. As a result, the participation in the program increased
dramatically so that by 2010 half of non-elderly households with an unemployed head or spouse
were receiving food stamps, with large variation across states.
    To asses the extent to which the effects of unemployment benefit extensions documented
above are affected by the expansion of food-stamps program eligibility, we obtained USDA’s
  44
    Alternatively, we could back out the job-finding rate from the LAUS unemployment data. Doing so does
not affect our results.



                                                     56
SNAP Policy Database which documents policy choices of each state at monthly frequency.45
We construct a dummy variable equal to one during all periods when states use broad-based
categorical eligibility to increase or eliminate the asset test and/or to increase the gross income
limit for virtually all SNAP applicants. The variable is zero otherwise. We include this variable in
our baseline regression and report the results in Column (2) of Table A-2. The results confirm
the argument in Mulligan (2012) that the expansion of food-stamps eligibility represents a
marginal tax on working and thus leads to an increase in unemployment. It is, however, only
weakly correlated with unemployment benefit extensions and thus does not significantly affect
our estimate of their impact.
   In addition, we control for the actual state-level spending on SNAP benefits that we obtained
from the Regional accounts of the BEA. The results reported in Column (3) of Table A-2 confirm
our findings in Column (2) which were based on statutory rule changes.

V.2       Controlling for Variation in State Foreclosure Policies
    The Great Recession has began with a sharp but heterogeneous across states decline in house
prices. The government has responded by introducing various mortgage modification programs
with the objective of helping underwater mortgagors. Various of these programs were either
asset-tested or designed to write down mortgage principle to ensure that housing costs did not
exceed a certain proportion of household income. In a series of papers, Mulligan (2008, 2009,
2010) has noted that this represents an implicit subsidy to unemployed workers. Moreover,
Herkenhoff and Ohanian (2013) have argued that the duration of the foreclosure process has
been extended considerably following the Great Recession and that unemployed mortgagors
use their ability to skip payments without being foreclosed upon as an implicit loan subsidy
negatively affecting their job search and acceptance decisions.
    Cordell et al. (2013) use proprietary data to measure the heterogeneity in foreclosure delay
following the Great Recession across states. They find that in judicial states, in which state
law requires a court action to foreclose, the delay is much larger than in statutory foreclosure
states that do not require judicial intervention. Our use of the interactive effects estimator was
specifically motivated by the concerns that aggregate shocks, such as shocks to house prices,
may have heterogeneous impacts across border-county pairs depending, in part, on their state
foreclosure law. To verify the performance of the estimator, we define a dummy variable taking
the value of one for border counties belonging to states with judicial foreclosure laws and zero
otherwise. We then include in the benchmark specification the difference of the value of this
dummy between border counties i and j in pair p. The results reported in Column (4) of Table
A-2 indicate that this variable (the difference of the two dummies) is not statistically significant
and does not affect the estimate of the effect of unemployment benefit extensions. This finding
does not imply that foreclosure delay was not an important determinant of unemployment. It
only means that our interactive effects estimator accounted for some of this aspect of hetero-
geneity across states and it did not impart a bias on our estimate of the effect of unemployment
benefit extensions.
 45
      http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/snap-policy-database.aspx


                                                    57
                    Table A-3: Controlling for State Tax and Spending Policies
 VARIABLE         (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)           (6)       (7)       (8)      (9)
 Weeks of        0.049    0.0481    0.0428 0.0441        0.0480        0.0478 0.0487 0.0472 0.0461
 Benefits       (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000) (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)   (0.000) (0.000)    (0.000)
                                    Variable in Levels                       Variable Relative to GDP

 Stimulus                 0.0000                                      -0.0002
 Spending                 (0.595)                                      (0.035)

 Total Tax                          0.0029                                       -0.0032
 Revenue                            (0.000)                                      (0.145)

 Sales Tax                                    0.0019                                       0.0016
 Revenue                                      (0.000)                                      (0.003)

 Income Tax                                              -0.0009                                      -0.0012
 Revenue                                                  (0.000)                                      (0.000)

 # Factors          2        2          2         2         2              2         2          2          2
 Obs.            37,177    37,177    37,177    37,177    37,177         37,177    37,177     37,177     37,177
 R-squared        0.458    0.460      0.461     0.461     0.461          0.461     0.461      0.461      0.461
 Note - p-values (in parentheses) calculated via bootstrap. Bold font indicates p < 0.01. ?-Relative to county
 population

V.3      Controlling for the Effect of Stimulus Spending
    In the specification of Column (2) of Table A-3 we control for the effects of stimulus spend-
ing. We use data on actual county level spending arising from the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA) - commonly referred to as the “stimulus package.” We obtain an
accounting of all stimulus spending at the zip code level under the ARRA.46 We then match
counties to zip codes. We run our specification both in levels and by dividing the spending by
the population in the county, obtained from the Census. We find that that controlling for ARRA
spending does not affect our estimate of the effect of unemployment benefit extensions.47

V.4      Controlling for State Tax Policies
    To control for the variation in state-level tax policies we obtained detailed Census Bureau
data on quarterly tax revenues for each state.48 We consider whether effective total or sales tax
rates have co-moved systematically with unemployment benefit durations. We find no support
for this hypothesis. The results reported in Table A-3 imply that directly controlling for these
effective tax rates has virtually no impact on our estimates of the effect of unemployment benefit
extensions on unemployment.
    Our analysis was based on effective tax rates for two reasons. First, the statutory rates have
  46
     www.recovery.gov.
  47
     The coefficient on spending however has to be interpreted with caution. It is conceivable, in contrast to
unemployment benefits which depend on economic conditions at the state level, that spending at the county
level depends on the economic conditions at the county level. In this case the coefficient on spending will be
biased.
  48
     http://www.census.gov/govs/qtax/

                                                        58
                              Table A-4: Controlling for Other State Policies

                        VARIABLES                (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)
                        Weeks of Benefits      0.0490         0.0489    0.0489    0.0484
                                               (0.000)        (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
                        SBSI                                  -0.0002
                                                              (0.600)
                        SBTCI                                           0.0012
                                                                        (0.455)
                        BHI                                                       0.0007
                                                                                  (0.315)
                        Number of Factors          2             2         2         2
                        Observations            37,177        37,177    37,177    37,177
                        R-squared                0.458        0.461      0.464     0.461
                        Note - p-values (in parentheses) calculated via bootstrap.
                        Bold indicates p < 0.01.


not changed systematically over our sample period. Despite many states having balanced budget
laws, expansions of unemployment benefits have not required changes in tax rates as extensions
were mostly federally financed. Second, there are numerous state programs targeted to attract
businesses that offer tax deductions to individual firms. For competitive reasons details of such
policies are rarely disclosed. We can effectively measure them, however, by focusing on actual
tax receipts.

V.5        Controlling for Other State Policies
    While we found no evidence that the effects of unemployment benefit extensions on unem-
ployment are a proxy for changes in other tax policies, we now consider whether they could be
driven by other state policies, such as changes in regulatory or litigation environment. For this
purpose we obtain data from three prominent indexes of state policies - U.S. State Business Pol-
icy Index (SBSI), State Business Tax Climate Index (SBTCI), and BHI State Competitiveness
Index (BHI).49 The construction of these indexes is based on a well-documented methodology,
the data is available annually over our sample period, and can be made consistent over time.
A description of these indexes, the analysis of their predictive performance for state economic
outcomes, and references to other academic evaluations can be found in Kolko et al. (2013).
    The motivation for using these broad policy indexes was provided in Holmes (1998), who
found that controlling for a similar (but no longer available) index of state policies accounted
for the positive relationship between right-to-work laws and manufacturing employment. This
suggests that the conclusion about the effects of one policy may be misleading without taking
into account other state policies reflected in a broad index. In contrast, the results reported
in Table A-4 imply that controlling for such indexes does not affect the measured impact of
unemployment benefit extensions on unemployment.
 49
      www.sbecouncil.org, www.taxfoundation.org, www.beaconhill.org, respectively.




                                                         59
VI       Additional Comments on the Wage Channel
    It is clear that unemployment benefit extensions directly affect wages of newly hired workers
by raising the value of the outside option of declining a job (there is, of course, the offsetting
equilibrium effect that with lower job availability newly hired workers might be hired into lower
quality jobs). For the incumbent workers this effect might be less clear because to exercise their
outside option they must quit the job and in theory quitters are not eligible for unemployment
benefits. This potentially raises two questions. First, if the wage channel does not operate for
the incumbent workers, is there a need for our methodology based on quasi-differencing the
variables of interest. Second, how to interpret our empirical finding that wages of incumbent
workers respond positively to benefit extensions. We address these questions in this Appendix.
    First, we explain that the issue of whether unemployment benefit extensions affect wages
of incumbent workers is irrelevant for our methodology and findings. We assume that the wage
of a new hire will respond to future determinants, including expected changes in unemploy-
ment benefits, productivity, demand, etc. This assumption is clearly not controversial. It is the
expected productivity, the expected wages and the expected workers’ value of unemployment
which matter for the firm’s decision to post a vacancy. These expected values depend on both
current and future values.
    Consider two neighboring counties A and B with the same unemployment benefits and the
same worker productivity in the current period but where productivity is known to increase in
county A next period and to remain unchanged in county B. Benefits remain unchanged in both
counties. Obviously, the current period incentives to post vacancies (create jobs) are higher in
county A than in county B although current period values of benefits and productivity are
identical. Our quasi-difference estimator accounts for this formation of expectations.
    The same argument applies to benefits. Suppose it is expected that next period productivity
remains the same but UI benefits increase in county A. This future increase in benefits negatively
affects vacancy posting in county A in the current period. This happens because the workers’
value of remaining unemployed increases today. In Hall and Milgrom (2008) this also increases
the (newly hired) worker’s payoff while bargaining.50 This increases the wage and lowers profits
and thus fewer vacancies are posted in county A in the current period. Our quasi-difference
estimator accounts for this effect of expectations.51
    Note that these arguments do not invoke the assumption that an outside option continues to
be available when the incumbent worker bargains on the job. The need for the quasi-difference
estimator is independent of that assumption. The presence of continuous bargaining (where
the outside option remains available) may make the dependence on future values quantitatively
stronger. No matter how strong the expectation effect is, however, it has to be accounted for
by the estimation strategy.
  50
     A worker and a firm who start bargaining but do not reach an agreement in period t, continue bargaining
in period t + 1 and are in a bargaining situation similar to the one of a worker and a firm who meet and start
bargaining in period t + 1.
  51
     To put it differently, dropping the quasi-difference estimator would yield a coefficient which is an uninter-
pretable convolution of the current and future county-differences in UI benefits.



                                                       60
    Furthermore, our findings indicate that wages of job stayers (in the same firm in consecutive
periods) do increase when benefits are extended. This is an empirical fact that the empirical
strategy to estimate the contemporaneous effects of benefits on unemployment, vacancies, tight-
ness and employment should also be consistent with, and our quasi-differenced specification is.
    We now turn to the second question of whether our finding that wages of incumbent work-
ers respond to unemployment benefit extension are consistent with economic theory and its
interpretation.
    The result that unemployment benefit extensions affect wages of incumbent workers is clearly
and firmly rooted in economic theory. Consider, for example, the efficiency wage models that
have been the workhorse model of wage setting for a number of recent decades. The central
element of these models is that the effort of an employee is not fully observable and is not verifi-
able by a court. Thus, if workers are dismissed, they will certainly be entitled to unemployment
benefits. When the outside option of (incumbent) workers improves, they have to be paid more
to exert effort. Thus, any such model has the implication that an increase in the outside option
leads to a wage increase. Whether the employer pays a higher piece rate, a larger bonus or just
increases the wage is irrelevant for our methodology and our results.
    The bargaining models have the same implication. Viewed through the lens of these models,
our empirical finding that wages of stayers respond to benefits implies that the outside option
continues to be available when the worker bargains on the job. This model of wages is certainly
widely accepted as it is used not only in the standard Pissarides (2000) textbook but also in
prominent papers on the subject, e.g., Hall and Milgrom (2008) and even Hall (2005). One
may question the assumption underlying this literature by arguing that to exercise the outside
option, the worker would need to quit, and quitters do not receive UI benefits. However, this
assertion does not fully reflect reality in the U.S. labor market. In particular, it is hard to
tell apart quits and layoffs and the burden of proof is on the employer. We will provide some
examples below, but it is clear that many employers will not be able or willing to contest UI
claims of employees. Contesting is costly even in normal times but especially during the Great
Recession employers’ incentives to engage in providing such evidence have been presumably
negligible when benefit extensions are paid by the federal government. Our empirical findings
suggest that quitters receive, at least with some probability, UI benefits. This conclusion is
supported by our analysis of the legal features of the UI system summarized below.

VI.1     Elements of California Unemployment Insurance Law
   We now discuss some legal details on the eligibility of workers for benefits in the State of
California. UI policies and procedures are state-dependent but the general principles are similar.
Much of the discussion is copied verbatim from the State of California Benefit Determination
Guide, an eight-volume compendium, designed to present definitive discussions on points of
unemployment insurance law for the field office determination interviewer.
   The basic line of argument in this section is as follows.

  1. As a general rule, voluntary quitters are not entitled to benefits. In Section VI.1.1 we
     provide examples illustrating the difficulties in establishing whether a voluntary quit has

                                                61
       occurred.

   2. In Section VI.1.2 we explain that even if the quit is voluntary in the sense that the
      employer had the job available for the worker and had no intention of firing the employee,
      the quit may not be considered voluntary from the point of view of the Unemployment
      Insurance laws and regulations. If employee can argue that he had a good reason for leaving
      the employer, he will be entitled to benefits. We provide a small subset of such reasons
      that illustrate the potential for uncertainty on the part of the employer as to whether
      the separating employee will be able to collect benefits. This is sufficient to explain why
      employers accede to wage demands of incumbent workers when the generosity of the UI
      system increases.

   3. In Section VI.1.3 we argue that an improvement in the generosity of the UI system
      strengthens workers’ hand in bargaining with the employer through an additional chan-
      nel. Instead of the threat of outright quitting, the worker can implicitly threaten the
      employer to induce a firing. While workers fired for misconduct are not eligible for bene-
      fits, establishing misconduct is very difficult, in part due to the necessity of proving that
      misconduct was willful, and the burden of proof is on the employer. It seems likely that
      many employers would have little ability, resources, or economic motivation, to contest
      such cases in the courts. It may well be cheaper to accept workers’ wage demands instead.

VI.1.1     Was the Separation a Quit?
   This is not very straightforward to establish. For example, if separation is due to mutual
agreement or mutual misunderstanding the worker is eligible for benefits. In particular, when
both parties have a reasonable but mistaken belief of the others understanding of the separation,
the claimant is not subject to disqualification. In addition, there may be a separation by mutual
agreement if the employer and the employee have mutually agreed to separate, either at the
time of the termination, or initially, at the time of hire. In such cases the termination is neither
a discharge nor a leaving and thus a disqualification cannot arise under Section 1256.
   The following Precedent Decisions illustrate:52
   In P-B-253, the claimant’s attendance became irregular because of poor health. Her union
contract provided for a leave of absence for a maximum of two years. The claimant was carried
on the employer’s “absent-sick service payroll” from January to March. In March the claimant
contacted her supervisor, saying she was still ill and didn’t know when she would be able to
return. During the course of the interview, she and the employer agreed that the claimant’s
separation “might be the best thing to do.” Neither suggested the leave continue. In its decision,
the Board said:
  52
    Precedent decisions refer to the body of case law that is developed through the adjudicatory process at
the California Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board (CUIAB) and contains the Appeals Board’s definitive
expression on unemployment matters. The Unemployment Insurance Code specifically authorizes CUIAB Board
Members to consider, decide and designate as precedent decisions those cases that contain a significant legal or
policy determination of general application that is likely to recur. CUIAB, its administrative law judges, and
the Employment Development Department Director are controlled by these precedents, except as modified by
judicial review.

                                                      62
         ...[T]he evidence before us justifies a conclusion that the conversation ... re-
     sulted in a mutual agreement between the claimant and her employer that under
     the circumstances no useful purpose would be served by the indefinite extension of
     her then existing leave of absence. Under these facts, we hold that the claimant’s
     abandonment of the employer-employee relationship ... was with good cause... .

    Some separations appear insolvable from the standpoint of a misunderstanding between the
claimant and the employer, in which each thinks the other has been the moving party in the
separation. In cases such as the following, the Board has considered the separation to be neither
a quit nor a discharge.
    In P-B-458, the claimant had been counseled concerning his job performance some five weeks
prior to the separation. On the last day of his employment, he was called to a meeting with
the president and general manager. At the meeting, the claimant remarked that if he were in
charge he would place the blame for slow business upon himself. The president felt the claimant
had not been working to capacity, and the claimant specifically recalled that the president told
him they “should part company.” Shortly after that, the claimant announced that he would be
leaving. The claimant cleaned out his desk and left. The employer interpreted the conversation
and events as a resignation, while the claimant felt he had been discharged. In its decision, the
Board stated:

        The record does not sufficiently reflect that either the claimant or the employer
     was the moving party. We hold that where the claimant and the employer are
     mutually but reasonable mistaken about the other party’s understanding of the
     separation, the claimant is not subject to disqualification under Section 1256 of the
     Code.

Important Caveat. In fairness, we must admit, however, that we could not find a precedent
decision clarifying how a separation upon an exogenous separation shock after 78th round of
Hall-Milgrom bargaining would be treated... Separation by mutual agreement or mutual mis-
understanding?
VI.1.2    Can Voluntary Quitters Be Eligible for Benefits?
   As a general rule, voluntary quitters are not entitled to benefits. There are many exceptions,
though, to which a worker voluntary leaving his or her job may appeal in order to receive
benefits. In this section we mention some of many such reasons. The point of this discussion is
that there is at least a chance, and perhaps a sizable one, that a worker might be able to collect
benefits even in the event of quitting. Even on its own, this is sufficient to explain why a more
generous UI system induces a higher equilibrium wage even for incumbent workers.

  1. Section VQ90 A: Conscientious objection.
     When directly related to working conditions, a conscientious objection is considered to
     be a compelling reason for restricting availability for work or for voluntarily leaving work.
     Conscientious objection means an objection by an individual to performing an act that

                                               63
  individual sincerely believes is wrong. The objection may be based on ethical, moral,
  religious, or philosophical grounds.
  Title 22, Section 1256-6 (b), provides:

           ... If an individual has, or after working a time newly acquires a conscien-
       tious objection to the work condition or assigned work based on religious beliefs
       founded on the tenets or beliefs of a church, sect, denomination, or other reli-
       gious group, or on ethical or philosophical grounds, an individual’s voluntary
       leaving of the most recent work based on religious beliefs or other grounds is
       with good cause...

  The degree to which the claimant’s beliefs are commonly held or considered reasonable
  by others is immaterial.

2. Section 1256, VQ150:
  AA. All Reasonable Transportation Alternatives Exhausted
  The claimant quit your employment because of a lack of transportation. There is no
  adequate public transportation available and the claimant had exhausted all alternatives
  before quitting. Available information shows that the claimant had good cause for leaving
  work.
  BB. Commute Time Excessive
  The claimant quit your employment because of the commute time required. Available
  information shows that the claimant had good cause for leaving work.
  CC. Moved - No Transfer Available
  The claimant quit your employment to move. He/she could not have transferred to a job
  site nearer to the new home. Available information shows that the claimant had good
  cause for leaving work.
  EE. Transportation Costs Too High
  The claimant quit your employment because the transportation costs were too high.
  Available information shows the claimant had good cause for leaving work.

3. Section 1256, VQ 155
  AA. Compelling Domestic Obligations
  The claimant quit your employment because of domestic reasons. Available information
  shows that the claimant had good cause for leaving work.
  BB. Moving After Marriage - Outside Normal Commute Area
  The claimant quit your employment to move with his/her spouse to a place outside the
  normal commute area. Available information shows that the claimant had good cause for
  leaving work.

                                            64
      CC. Moving After Marriage - No Transfer Available
      The claimant quit your employment to move with his/her spouse. He/she was unable to
      transfer to another worksite nearer the new home. Available information shows that the
      claimant had good cause for leaving work.
      DD. Family Illness or Death - No Leave Available
      The claimant quit your employment because of a family illness/death. Available informa-
      tion shows that the claimant had good cause for leaving work
      EE. Unemancipated Minor
      The claimant quit your employment at the insistence of his/her parents. The claimant is
      a minor, subject to parental control. Available information shows that the claimant had
      good cause for leaving work.
      FF. Domestic Violence Abuse - No Reasonable Alternative

  4. Section 1256, VQ235
      AA. Medical Advice to Quit
      The claimant quit your employment on his/her doctor’s advice. A leave of absence was
      not available or would not have resolved the problem. Available information shows that
      the claimant had good cause for leaving work.
      BB. Reasonable Concern for Health or Safety
      The claimant quit your employment because of a reasonable concern for his/her health or
      safety. Available information shows that the claimant had good cause for leaving work.
      CC. Failure to Take Drug Test - Employer Request Unreasonable
      The claimant quit your employment because he/she was asked to take a drug test. The
      claimant had not previously consented to the test and there was no reasonable suspi-
      cion that he/she was under the influence of drugs. Available information shows that the
      claimant had good cause for leaving work.

    There are many, many other reasons the worker can establish that a voluntary leave was
for a good cause, including arguing that the workplace represented an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment as illustrated by the following two Precedent Decisions.
    In P-B-300, the claimant did establish real and compelling cause for her action. The claimant
worked as a bookkeeper for a small insurance firm. She quit that employment because the
employer repeatedly criticized her in a sarcastic manner in front of customers; some of the
criticism was caused by errors made by the claimant in her work, but some criticism concerned
matters not attributable to the claimant and some concerned matters wholly unrelated to the
claimant’s work. Occasionally, the claimant left the employer’s office in tears. Three witnesses
testified on behalf of the claimant. In finding the claimant eligible for benefits, the Board stated:



                                                 65
         ... the record established that the conduct of the claimant’s employer in the
     instant case was abusive and hostile, moreover, this conduct was repeated on nu-
     merous occasions. Under the circumstances this constituted a compelling reason for
     the claimant to leave her employment...

    Thus, if undue embarrassment, or harassment is caused by continual criticism, in contrast
to a single instance of criticism, good cause for leaving does exist. In P-B-475 the Board ruled
that offensive (to the worker) behavior of sexual nature also constitutes a valid reason to leave
employment because of offensive working environment.


VI.1.3   Was the Discharge for Misconduct?
    As a general rule, employees discharged for misconduct are not eligible for benefits. Only
those who were discharged not through the fault of their own are. The question we are interested
in here is whether an employee can implicitly threaten the employer with misconduct during
the wage bargaining. It appears that the answer is at least to some degree affirmative.

What Constitutes Misconduct?
    For an employee to be discharged for misconduct, it has to be proven by the employer
that misconduct was willful. Where the element of willfulness is missing, the claimant’s actions
would generally not be misconduct. For example, according to Section 1256-30(b)(3) of Title
22, misconduct generally does not exist, because willfulness is missing, if the claimant:

   • Has been merely inefficient.

   • Has failed to perform well due to inability or incapacity.

   • Has been inadvertent.

   • Has been ordinarily negligent in isolated instances.

   • Has made good faith errors in judgment or discretion.

   The following sequence of examples illustrates.

  1. Example - Inefficiency 1:
     In P-B-222, the claimant was a pasteurizer for a large creamery. Prior to the claimant’s dis-
     charge, there had been several discussions between the superintendent and the claimant
     in connection with the quality of the claimant’s services. Although the claimant testi-
     fied that his work improved after those discussions, his superintendent believed that the
     claimant had failed to improve sufficiently to warrant keeping the claimant. The principal
     complaint against the claimant appears to be a failure to pasteurize milk on occasions
     at proper temperatures and that the claimant at times held milk in the vats an exces-
     sive time, resulting in the milk acquiring an undesirable flavor. In one instance, about

                                               66
  three hundred gallons of milk were spoiled due to improper pasteurization, resulting in
  a considerable financial loss to the employer. In finding the claimant eligible, the Board
  said:

            A careful review of the entire evidence in the instant matter does not dis-
        close, in our opinion, more than inefficiency or unsatisfactory performance on
        the part of the claimant... The record does not establish that the claimant wil-
        fully or intentionally disregarded the employer’s interest or that the occurrences
        forming the basis for the discharge were deliberate violations of standard good
        behavior...

2. Example - Inefficiency 2:
  In P-B-184, the employer hired the claimant as a production worker after the claimant
  indicated that he had operated drill presses, lathes, punch presses, reamers, and similar
  equipment. He was assigned to work a drill press and found to be unsatisfactory. He was
  next assigned to a lathe and was moved from that job when he incorrectly loaded a part
  and wrecked a fixture which required several hours to rebuild. He was, thereafter, tried
  on several other jobs but failed to meet the employer’s standards on any of them and was
  discharged about three weeks after being hired. The Board found him eligible and stated:

            The record does not establish that the claimant wilfully or intentionally
        disregarded the employer’s interests, or that the occurrences forming the basis
        for the discharge were deliberate violations of standards of good behavior which
        the employer had a right to expect of his employee.

3. Example - Inability to Perform to Employer’s Standard:
  In P-B-224, the claimant was employed for four weeks as a bookkeeper, and let go because
  the employer considered that her work was not “up to par.” The Board found her eligible
  and stated:

            We find that the efficient cause of the claimant’s discharge was her inability
        to satisfy the employer’s standards in relation to the quality of her work ... mere
        ineptitude is not misconduct...

4. Example - Incapable of Meeting Standard:
  The claimant, a tube-bender and assembler for an aircraft manufacturer, was discharged
  after six years’ employment because of his inability to produce an acceptable amount of
  work on a swaging machine. He had been assigned to this new task for only four hours
  when he was given a “correction interview.” At this interview, he was informed that his
  production was 50 percent below standard and that he would be discharged unless he
  showed immediate improvement.
  The employer contended that the claimant had deliberately “stalled” but was unable
  to substantiate such a statement. The claimant had performed satisfactorily on other

                                             67
  operations, had even been graded “excellent” in production on other tasks. When the
  claimant was again assigned to the swaging machine the next workday, he refused the
  assignment as he knew that if he did not make the quota he would be fired. He was
  discharged as a result.
  The claimant complied with the employer’s orders when he was initially assigned to a
  new machine and according to the record he made every effort to become proficient in its
  operation. Because of his age and slight physical stature the claimant could foresee that
  he would not be able to operate the new machine to the satisfaction of the employer and
  felt justified in refusing the assignment.
  In this case the discharge would not be for misconduct. The claimant was unable to
  meet the employer’s standards because of his age and slight physical stature. It should
  also be noted that the employer did not give the claimant a sufficient amount of time
  to meet the standards (only four hours). Likewise, if an employer should fail to provide
  adequate equipment for doing the work or should set quantity standards so high that only
  the exceptional few could meet them, a failure to produce the required quantity of work
  would not be misconduct.

5. Example - Error in Judgment:
  In P-B-195 the claimant, a cab driver, was discharged because of a traffic accident. At the
  time the claimant was hired, he received a course of instructions covering the company’s
  rules and the motor vehicle laws with which he was expected to comply. Shortly after the
  end of the course, the claimant was involved in a minor accident when he backed into a
  parked car. He was warned that he would be discharged if involved in one more accident
  within a year. Several months later, the claimant was en route to pick up a passenger. He
  was driving approximately 40 feet behind another car, when he was hailed by someone
  on the left side of the street and glanced toward the person hailing him. He heard the
  screech of brakes, immediately looked to the front and applied his own brakes when he
  saw that the traffic in front of him had stopped. He was unable to stop before colliding
  with the car in front of him. The collision was observed by two police officers and the
  claimant was cited under Section 22350 of the California Vehicle Code. The Board found
  the claimant eligible and stated:

           In this case, the claimant was cited under Section 22350 of the California
       Vehicle Code. We do not consider the fact of citation controlling in this case, but
       only one of the factors which we must consider in arriving at our conclusion.
       The quoted section of the Vehicle Code is so phrased as to allow the driver
       of a vehicle to exercise judgment in the operation of such vehicle. Assuming
       that the claimant was careless as found by the traffic officers involved, his
       carelessness was, at most, an error of judgment. Admittedly, it was his fault
       that the collision occurred. However, he was following the vehicle preceding
       him at a reasonable distance and erred only when he withdrew his attention
       from the road when he was hailed by a person on the sidewalk. It appears

                                            68
       to us that the claimant’s action could readily be defined as a reflex action in
       response to the call, especially since it was the practice of the taxi drivers to
       seek to identify such a person so that the company could be informed of a
       possible customer.

6. Example - Isolated Incident of Ordinary Negligence 1:
  In Silva v. CUIAB (First Appellate Court, 1973), the claimant was being trained for new
  and unfamiliar work; he became nervous and frustrated and either “blew up” or felt he
  was going to blow up. He left work without permission in midafternoon. The employer was
  aware of some emotional problems the claimant was having. The employer spoke to the
  claimant the next morning about his unauthorized departure. The claimant’s reply was
  sarcastic and, when told if such action was repeated he would be discharged, he responded
  with a vulgar remark. He was told if that was the way he felt, he could leave, whereupon
  he left. He would have been discharged for his attitude and language that morning had
  he not left. The court held:

           Given the tests of fault and wilful or wanton behavior as essential elements
       of ’misconduct’, the single instance of an offensive remark ... uttered in the
       circumstances disclosed falls within the category of a mere mistake or error
       in judgment, a ’minor pecadillo’ and is not misconduct disqualifying appellant
       from unemployment insurance benefits.

7. Example - Isolated Instance of Ordinary Negligence 2:
  The claimant was hired to drive his employer’s new cars from a freight depot to the
  company’s storage warehouse. The automobiles were shipped directly from the factory
  and were serviced as they were unloaded. The employer testified that oral warnings had
  been given all employees to check oil and water levels before driving the cars and that
  any driver who subsequently caused damage to a car would be discharged.
  One of the automobiles the claimant was driving incurred engine damage because the car
  was driven with no oil in it. The claimant denied that he had been warned to check the oil
  and water levels before driving the vehicles. Additionally, there was dispute as to whether
  the oil gage was operating correctly.
  The claimant’s contented that this was an “isolated” incident and that he had acted
  unknowingly and without evil design or intent. Because of the dispute as to the employer’s
  warning to check oil and water levels and the working condition of the oil gage, it cannot
  be shown that there was wilful negligence. The discharge would not be for misconduct.

8. Example - Action Not Willful:
  In Maywood Glass Co. v. Stewart (1959), the claimant was discharged because she packed
  defective glassware on several occasions. The employer testified that she had been warned
  several times she would be discharged if she persisted.


                                           69
     The claimant denied such warnings were given. The claimant stated she packed bad
     glassware because of the rapidity in which they were working. She also had a headache.
     The court held her discharge was not for misconduct and stated:

              Moreover, even if the claimant had been warned, the evidence does not
          compel a finding that she was guilty of ’misconduct’ within the meaning of the
          statute. Although (claimant) admitted packing defective bottles, she denied
          that she had intentionally done so. (Claimant) worked the ’graveyard shift’
          from midnight to 8 o’clock in the morning. She testified that on the night in
          question she was suffering from a headache and that there was a high percentage
          of defective glassware coming down the line. In these circumstances the trier of
          fact could reasonably conclude that her conduct did not constitute ’misconduct’
          within the meaning of the statute...


Burden of Proof and Presumption of Eligibility
   Section 1256 of the UI Code provides in part:

         An individual is presumed to have been discharged for reasons other than mis-
     conduct in connection with his or her work and not to have voluntarily left his or
     her work without good cause unless his or her employer has given written notice
     to the contrary to the department as provided in Section 1327, setting forth facts
     sufficient to overcome the presumption. The presumption provided by this section
     is rebuttable.

   In Perales v. California Department of Human Resources Development (1973), the Appellate
court held that because the presumption in Section 1256 was established to implement the
public policy of prompt payment of benefits to the unemployed so as to reduce the suffering
caused thereby (Section 100 of the UI Code), the presumption affects the burden of proof. To
overcome the presumption the employer and the Department must prove that the claimant
was discharged for misconduct in connection with his or her work by a preponderance of the
evidence.
   This is also the position in the following court decisions:

   • In Maywood Glass Co. v. Stewart (1959), the Court stated that the employer has the
     burden of establishing “misconduct” to protect its reserve fund.

   • In Prescod v. California Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board (1976), the Court held
     that the burden of disqualification is on the employer or the Department, and not the
     claimant.

The punch line: Proving misconduct is costly for the employer. And the employee can proba-
bly make it not worthwhile for many employers by threatening to drag the process out through
multiple appeal procedures involving testimony and provision of documentation and witnesses
by the employer.

                                             70
VII       County Economy, Detailed Specification
   The law of motion for county employment is:
                          LC     C             C       C        C
                                                                  
                           t+1 (Ωt ) = (1 − δ)Lt + f (θt ) 1 − Lt .                             (A3)
and uC        C
     t = 1 − Lt .

Value Functions. The flow value for a firm employing a worker is
                           JtC (ΩC      C    C                     C
                                 t ) = zt − wt + β (1 − δ) EJt+1 (Ωt+1 ),                       (A4)
and the flow value of a vacant firm is:
                              VtC (ΩC               C
                                                       C    C
                                    t ) = −k + βq θt EJt+1 (Ωt+1 ).                             (A5)
The surplus for a firm employing a worker is thus JtC − VtC .
  The value functions for workers can be written as:
                                                              C,E
   WtC (ΩC           C              C                  C          C
                                                         
          t ) = wt + β (1 − δ) EWt+1 + βδ 1 − et (Ωt ) EUt+1 (Ωt+1 )
                               C,I
                 +βδet (ΩC          C
                         t )EUt+1 (Ωt+1 ),                                                   (A6)

   UtC,E (ΩC                  C      C     C                 C
                                                                   1 − et (ΩC       C,E   C
                                                                              
           t ) = h + b + βf θt EWt+1 (Ωt+1 ) + β 1 − f θt                     t ) EUt+1 (Ωt+1 )
                                             C,I
                 +β 1 − f θtC et (ΩC             C
                               
                                      t )EUt+1 (Ωt+1 ),                                      (A7)

   UtC,I (ΩC              C            C                C        C,I
                                                                     (ΩC
                                                         
           t ) = h + βf θt EWt+1 (Ωt+1 ) + β 1 − f θt        EUt+1     t+1 ).                (A8)
Define the surplus of being employed as ∆C,Et     = WtC − UtC,E . Also define the surplus for an
                                              C,E
unemployed worker of being eligible: ΦC
                                      t = Ut      − UtC,I . The laws of motion for these quantities
are:
                ∆C,E    C         C                                C
                                                                        E∆C,E   C
                                                                     
                  t   (Ωt ) =   wt  − h − b +   β   1 −  δ − f   θ t      t+1 (Ωt+1 )

                                +β 1 − δ − f θtC et (ΩC              C    C
                                                      
                                                             t )EΦt+1 (Ωt+1 ),               (A9)

                  ΦC    C                        C
                                                        1 − et (ΩC      C    C
                                                                   
                    t (Ωt ) = b + β 1 − f θt                     t ) Φt+1 (Ωt+1 ).          (A10)
   The wage is chosen to maximize:
                                  ξ C S            1−ξ
                          ∆C,E
                           t   ΩS
                                t      Jt Ωt − VtC ΩSt       .                                 (A11)

County Equilibrium Definition. Taking as given an initial condition ΩC         0 , benefit expira-
tion policy, and the joint stochastic process for state productivity and unemployment, we define
an equilibrium given policy:

Definition Given a policy (b, et (·)) and an initial condition ΩC       0 an equilibrium is a sequence
    C
of Ωt -measurable functions for wages wt , market tightness θt , employment LC
                                                                        C
                                                                                         t , and value
functions
                               n                                      o
                                 WtC , UtC,E , UtC,I , JtC , VtC , ∆C
                                                                    t

such that:


                                                 71
                                                                                                                    Beveridge Curve
                     11                                                                   3.2

                     10                        Model                                       3
                                                                                                               Data
                     9                                                                    2.8
                          Data
 Unemployment Rate




                     8                                                                    2.6




                                                                           Vacancy Rate
                     7                                                                    2.4

                     6                                                                    2.2

                     5                                                                     2           Model

                     4                                                                    1.8

                      3                                                                   1.6
                     1960        1970   1980     1990   2000   2010                          4     5           6           7         8   9   10
                                               Year                                                                Unemployment Rate

             (a) The evolution of the U.S. unemployment rate                              (b) The Beveridge Curve in the Great Recession

Figure A-2: Data and the prediction of the search model with unemployment benefit extensions
in Mitman and Rabinovich (2013).


                1. The value functions satisfy the worker and firm Bellman equations (A4), (A5), (A6), (A7),
                   (A8);
                2. Free entry: The value VtC of a vacant firm is zero for all ΩC
                                                                               t ;

                3. Nash bargaining: The wage satisfies equation (A11);
                4. Law of motion for employment: The employment process satisfies (A3);
                                                  
                5. The joint process for ztS , uSt is consistent with the state equilibrium.


VIII                             Implications for Macro Models
    Throughout the paper our analysis was motivated by equilibrium search models, such as
Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). We found empirical support for the key mechanisms in the
model. In particular, extending unemployment benefits puts an upward pressure on equilib-
rium wages, which induces lower vacancy posting by firms and consequently an increase in
unemployment. Using a simple calibrated version of the model we found that these effects are
quantitatively consistent with the data.
    In this Appendix we briefly comment on the implications of our findings for the business
cycle analysis using this class of models. We draw on Mitman and Rabinovich (2013), who used
a version of the model in Section 5.4, calibrated to match the effect of unemployment benefit
extensions on unemployment documented in this paper. They carefully model the history of
unemployment benefit extensions in the US. In addition to changing unemployment benefit
eligibility over time, the dynamics are driven by fluctuations in aggregate productivity. The
endogenously determined dynamics of the unemployment rate in the model together with its
evolution in the data are plotted in Figure A-2(a).


                                                                      72
    The results indicate that the effect of unemployment benefit extensions on unemployment,
vacancies, and wages documented in this paper is consistent with the effect of business cycle
movements in aggregate productivity on these variables. Interestingly, Mitman and Rabinovich
(2013) find that the automatic and discretionary benefit extensions in the recent recessions
have substantially amplified the response of unemployment and served as the root cause of the
widely documented phenomenon of jobless recoveries (benefit extensions are triggered when
unemployment reached a sufficiently high level so that they effectively kick in after productivity
is already recovering, inducing a delayed recovery of employment). This is evident in Figure
A-2(a).
    An important line of research, reviewed in Diamond (2013), that also aims to explain the
persistently high unemployment following the great recession focused on the behavior of the
Beveridge curve. As the dotted green line in Figure A-2(b) illustrates, the curve appears to have
shifted out following the Great Recession. This was interpreted as implying an increase in the
“structural” or “mismatch” unemployment because of the apparently high level of vacancies
coexisting with high unemployment. As the solid blue line illustrates, this behavior of the
Beveridge curve arises naturally in the productivity-driven equilibrium search model with the
extensions of unemployment benefits as observed in the data during the Great Recession.

IX      Appendix Figures




                  Figure A-3: Map of U.S.A. with state and county outlines.



                                               73
                      (a) June 2008.                                (b) December 2008.




                      (c) June 2009.                                (d) December 2009.




                      (e) June 2010.                                (f) December 2010.




                      (g) June 2011.                                (h) December 2011.




                      (i) June 2012.                                (j) December 2012.

Figure A-4: Unemployment benefit duration across U.S. states during the Great Recession. Selected months.
