NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR MARKET FRICTIONS, FIRM GROWTH, AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Pablo D. Fajgelbaum
Working Paper 19492
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19492

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013, Revised November 2019

A previous version of this paper was a chapter from my Ph.D. dissertation. I am thankful to
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg and Gene Grossman for their guidance and support. I specially thank
Oleg Itskhoki, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Stephen Redding. I also James Tybout for his discussion
of the paper. I am also grateful to Andrew Atkeson, Joaquin Blaum, Francisco Buera, Ariel
Burstein, Kerem Co ar, Arnaud Costinot, Juan Carlos Hallak, Rasmus Lentz, Guido Menzio,
Claudio Michelacci, Maria Jose Prados, Edouard Schaal, Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel, and
Jon Vogel for useful comments. I thank Andreas Gulyas and Brian Pustilnik for excellent
research assistance, as well as Ana Sofía Rojo-Brizuela, Victoria Castillo Videla, and Lucía
Tumini at the Argentine Ministry of Labor for providing the data. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Pablo D. Fajgelbaum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Labor Market Frictions, Firm Growth, and International Trade
Pablo D. Fajgelbaum
NBER Working Paper No. 19492
October 2013, Revised November 2019
JEL No. D92,F16,J62,L11
ABSTRACT
I study the aggregate effects of labor market frictions in a small open economy where firms grow
slowly and make fixed export investments. The model features interactions between dynamic
investments in exporting and search frictions with job-to-job mobility. A calibration to
Argentina's economy matching data on firm growth, worker transitions between firms, and export
dynamics suggests that the real income gains from lowering frictions in job-to-job transitions are
about 7 times larger than comparable reductions in frictions from unemployment. Barriers to
worker mobility across firms matter for the real income gains of trade-cost reductions.

Pablo D. Fajgelbaum
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall 8283
315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
pfajgelbaum@gmail.com

1

Introduction
According to a central view in international trade, the labor allocation and export decisions

across heterogeneous firms are important to shape aggregate outcomes (Melitz, 2003). The switch of
firms into exporting is also seen as a driver of real income gains in developing countries (Atkin et al.,
2017). At the same time, exporting is often described as a discrete decision that can be profitably
undertaken only by producers with sufficient scale. Whereas in Melitz (2003) firms instantaneously
grow to their desired size, empirically the process of entering export markets occurs slowly, often
taking several years before a new firm reaches the scale at which investing in exporting is profitable,
if it ever does.1
In this context, it is important to understand the role of specific forces that slow down firm
growth and therefore may prevent exporting or other fixed revenue-enhancing investments from
taking place. Labor market frictions are one such force, as firms operating in more rigid labor
markets face larger costs and delays when hiring workers.2 It has long been noted that barriers
to labor mobility may deter the gains from international integration from fully materializing,3
and recent studies of trade liberalization assign an important role to frictions in labor reallocations
across sectors (Dix-Carneiro, 2014) or regions (Caliendo et al., 2019). However, less is known about
the effects of labor market frictions in open economies through their impact on firm-level growth
and export investments.4
This paper studies the aggregate impact of labor market frictions in an economy where firms
grow slowly and undertake fixed export investments along their life cycle. I develop an openeconomy model combining firm growth subject to adjustment costs, discrete revenue-enhancing
investments in exporting, and search and matching frictions with on-the-job search. I then match
the model to data from Argentina on firm-level growth, export dynamics, and worker transitions
between firms. The theoretical and quantitative results suggest that frictions in job-to-job transitions have a stronger impact on income per worker, investments and growth of the most productive
firms compared to frictions in hiring from unemployment. While traditionally the concerns in studies of frictional labor markets are placed on understanding the size of the unemployment pool, my
1

See Bernard et al. (2007) for evidence on exporter size premia and Das et al. (2007) for evidence on fixed costs
of exporting and export entry rates.
2
Kugler (2007) summarizes a body of evidence based on reform episodes that affected specific groups of firms in
several countries. As a general finding, a tightening in employment protection reduces net employment adjustments
for the affected firms. Hsieh and Klenow (2014) argue that cross-country differences in growth throughout firms’
life cycle are important for income differences, and suggest that labor market regulations may be one driver of these
differences.
3
E.g., see Matsuyama (1992) for an early theory of labor market rigidities in a Ricardian environment. The view
that labor market barriers are important for the gains from integration was recently stated by Dani Rodrik: “If trade
negotiators got around the table and say “what is it that we can do to increase the global consumption possibilities
frontier?”, they would stop everything that they are doing right now and then go after where the barriers are really
large, because that’s where the biggest gains are going to be, both at the national level and at the global level.(...)
Where the barriers are largest is in labor markets.” Trade Talks (www.piie.com/trade-talks), episode 25, March 1,
2018.
4
The next section reviews recent evidence pointing to a negative relationship between labor market frictions and
firm-level exporting decisions.

1

analysis implies that focusing on determinants of job-to-job transitions is important for income and
productivity.5
The framework articulates canonical components from the trade and labor search literatures.
On the trade side, similarly to Krugman (1980), monopolistically competitive producers can sell
at home and internationally. As in Melitz (2003), firms have innate differences in productivity,
exporting entails a one-off fixed investment, and firms die continuously due to exogenous shocks,
being replaced by entrants to meet zero expected profits. I study a two-country economy, and then
extend the analysis to many destinations. On the labor side, firms match randomly with workers
who learn about job opportunities both when unemployed and on-the-job. As in Cahuc et al.
(2006) and Dey and Flinn (2005), employed workers searching on-the-job use the value of their
next-best alternative as outside option in the bargaining with their best potential employer. As in
the Pissarides (2000), equilibrium matching rates depend on the effective numbers of workers and
firms searching. Finally, in the spirit of Kaas and Kircher (2015), I incorporate a firm-level growth
process: firms contact potential employees slowly, subject to a convex cost of search intensity, and
discount future profits at a positive rate.
The components of the theory give rise to a firm’s life cycle: each new firm starts with no
workers, grows by hiring unemployed and employed workers subject to labor market frictions, and
at some age may invest in exporting. If many export options are available, firms decide the sequence
and timing of entry to each market. In deciding when to export, firms trade off the savings from
delaying the fixed cost payment against the foregone revenues and growth from delaying. I refer to
this opportunity cost of delaying as a stock effect, because it increases with the stock of labor within
the firm. More productive firms invest earlier, and job values increase gradually with age and size
conditional on productivity. Thus, in equilibrium, workers flow from smaller and younger firms
towards larger and older firms who are more productive and more likely to export, and therefore
offer higher-value jobs.
I use the model to characterize and quantify the impact of labor market frictions. Formally,
I study comparative statics with respect to the search and matching efficiencies of employed and
unemployed workers. This question follows a research tradition asking how search and matching
frictions impact income per worker through some form of misallocation.6 The matching efficiency
parameters capture, in reduced form, country characteristics that impact workers’ job-finding rates.
A natural interpretation is that they represent labor market regulations. Labor rigidities vary
widely across countries due to different reasons such as countries’ legal origins or the power of some
types of political parties (Botero et al., 2004), and have been historically high in Latin American
countries (Heckman and Pages-Serra, 2000; Djankov and Ramalho, 2009). Moreover, measurable
5

In their review of the implications of labor market institutions for economic performance, Nickell and Layard
(1999) largely focus on the impact of transitions out of unemployment. Davis and Haltiwanger (2014) have more
recently suggested that slow labor reallocations across firms may be important for growth.
6
Lagos (2006) and Shimer (2005) develop models with a dependence of TFP on search or coordination frictions,
while studies such as Shimer and Smith (2000) and Bagger and Lentz (2014) assess the wage and productivity effects
of mismatch between heterogeneous workers and firms. Acemoglu and Shimer (2000) explore the impact of labor
market frictions on firms’ investment decisions in a directed search framework with single-worker firms.

2

aspects of the employment legislation are visibly correlated with the job-finding rates that I modify
in the counterfactuals.7 Given my focus on job-to-job transitions, it is worth noting that certain
types of employment legislation have a strong impact on job-to-job transitions and job-finding rates
of employed workers.8 To the extent that my counterfactuals are interpreted as changes in labor
market institutions, an important caveat is that they only capture their impacts through workers’
job-finding rates, while abstracting from other channels or potential benefits such as enhanced job
security.
Frictions in hiring from both employment and unemployment have an impact on income per
employed worker through the distributions of export-entry times and growth across heterogeneousproductivity firms. However, I demonstrate that there is an asymmetry in how each type of
friction works. Frictions in hiring from unemployment impact these outcomes only through generalequilibrium adjustments in the value of unemployment or revenue per unit sold. This property is
in keeping with a well-known property of the canonical matching model (Pissarides, 1985), which
is nested within the framework that I study, where increases in firms’ meeting rates due to higher
matching efficiency are offset by entry unless the value of unemployment adjusts. In contrast,
frictions in hiring employed workers impact entry times and firm growth regardless of whether those
general-equilibrium variables adjust. Intuitively, given these general-equilibrium variables, a higher
contact rate from unemployment increases the size of the employment pool without impacting its
composition across firms; the economy adjusts exclusively through firm entry, but the intensive
margins of firm growth and export participation are kept constant. In contrast, a higher contact
rate from employment speeds up worker transitions to more productive firms and exporters, leading
to a speeding up of investment and firm growth.
To further characterize the model properties, I rely on a simpler version without innate differences in firm productivity that yields closed-form solutions. Frictions impact the stock effect,
and therefore firms’ growth and export-entry incentives, through offsetting channels. The stock
effect increases with firms’ equilibrium likelihoods of meeting employed and unemployed workers,
but it falls with stiffer competition in the labor market through either more firms or a higher likelihood of having workers poached away. Under mild parameter restrictions, the encouraging effects
dominate and lower frictions end up raising income per worker through faster firm growth and
export entry. These forces coexist with other channels through which frictions impact income per
employed worker, such as a standard demand externality borne out of monopolistic competition
and a response of the returns to exporting through adjustments in the relative size of the domestic
market.
7
Figure A.1 in the Online Appendix shows negative correlations across countries between standard indexes that
capture different aspects of the labor legislation (the Employment Protection Legislation index from the OECD and
the Rigidity of Employment index from by the World Bank) and contact rates of employed and unemployed workers
estimated by Hobijn and Şahin (2009), Ridder and van den Berg (2003) and Jolivet et al. (2006).
8
Haltiwanger et al. (2014) show that more stringent hiring and firing regulations negatively impact job reallocations within industries. Bassanini and Garnero (2013) and chapter 3 of OECD (2010) suggest that employment
protection against dismissals reduce the rate of job-to-job transitions within an industry, without a significant effect in job-to-unemployment transitions. Blanchard and Portugal (2001) argue that these policies may also impact
unemployment-to-job transitions.

3

To quantify these effects, I match the model to data from Argentina’s economy from 20032007. Being a small open economy with a fairly regulated labor market, Argentina is a natural
environment for the quantification. A natural challenge in the parametrization is to discipline
the degree of frictions in worker transitions. Conveniently, in addition to summary statistics from
the firm size, age, and export distributions, I also observe the rates at which firms with different
export statuses hire workers directly from other firms. These observed rates of job-to-job hiring by
export status discipline the extent of frictions in job-to-job mobility in the model, allowing me to
calibrate the job-finding rates of employed workers. The calibrated model replicates well several key
outcomes from the theory, such as the firm-size distribution and the intensity of hiring job-to-job,
as well as statistics that are not targeted by the calibration, such as export participation over the
firm’s life cycle, the average duration of employment relationships, and measures of wage inequality.
Using the calibrated model, I measure the elasticity of income per employed worker with respect
to labor market frictions. The elasticity of income per employed worker with respect to the efficiency
in job-to-job matching is about 7 times larger than with respect to the efficiency in matching
from unemployment. An increase in the contact rate of unemployed workers that would reduce
unemployment in Argentina by 3 percentage points would raise income per employed worker by
1%, while an increase in the contact rate of employed workers that would raise the share of job-tojob hires by 3 percentage points would raise income per employed worker by 7%. Lowering frictions
from employment also leads to faster growth and export entry of the more productive firms, but
to slower growth and export entry of the less productive firms. However, lowering frictions from
unemployment does not speed up firm growth nor the timing of investment. Instead, it only raises
income per employed worker through the standard demand externality borne out of monopolistic
competition.
These results imply that job-to-job transitions are a key channel through which the gains from
reductions in labor market frictions materialize. A back-of-the-envelope calculation using the results from the calibration suggests that labor market reforms that would push Argentina from the
top third of the World Bank’s rigidity of employment index (where it belonged in the years corresponding to my calibration) to the bottom third would lead to a 5.8% increase in income per
worker. Moreover, 80% of these gains happen through lowering frictions in job-to-job transitions.
Using the elasticity of income to labor market rigidities implied by the calibration, a simple development accounting exercise suggests that, through the forces in my model, differences in labor
market rigidity may generate about 5% of the standard deviation in log income per worker observed
across countries.
The stronger impact of frictions in job-to-job transitions is a robust finding, as it holds uniformly
for small and large reductions in frictions, as well as for a varied range of alternative parametrizations. It also holds in the extension allowing for an arbitrary number of export destinations, in
which firms enter sequentially to several export markets as they grow. Unlike in the baseline model,
where firms experience a once-and-for-all bump to their revenue per worker, in the multi-market extension they experience a progressive increase in revenue per worker over extended periods of their

4

life cycle, consistent with qualitative features of the data. A calibration of this extended model
yields similar real-income gains from lowering frictions in job-to-job mobility as in the baseline
model with 2 countries.
To conclude, I implement an exercise that speaks to the role of micro features in shaping the
macro gains from trade. I find that the real income gains from a given reduction in trade costs are
smaller in a calibration that rules out job-to-job transitions and ignores the share of hires that are
job-to-job as a calibration target. Therefore, accounting for barriers to worker mobility across firms
matters to predict the real income effects of a given reduction in trade costs. The Arkolakis et al.
(2012) formula, saying that in gravity models the elasticity of trade flows to trade costs and the
change in the domestic expenditure share suffice to measure the gains from changes in trade costs,
remains a very good approximation even though my model does not fit in that class of models.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 relates this paper to the existing literature; Section 3 lays out the framework, characterizes the export-entry decision, and establishes the
channels through which frictions impact outcomes; Section 4 studies the simpler model; Section 5
presents the calibration; and Section 6 presents the counterfactuals. Section 7 concludes. Additional
derivations, proofs, tables, figures, and details on data sources are shown in the appendix.

2

Literature Background

Trade, Labor Market Frictions, and Firm Dynamics

Helpman and Itskhoki (2010) and

Cosar et al. (2016) have studied similar questions to this paper. Helpman and Itskhoki (2010)
inspect the impact of labor market frictions on aggregate outcomes and the export decisions of
heterogeneous firms. My analysis focuses on how frictions impact outcomes in an economy with
slow firm growth and dynamic investments in exporting, while theirs is a static setup. Methodologically, my work is also geared towards a measurement using the calibrated model, whereas theirs is
theoretical. Cosar et al. (2016) structurally estimate a small-open economy model with matching
frictions and selection into exporting. Their goal is to measure the impact of trade liberalization
and firing costs on wage inequality and job turnover in an environment with frequent firm-level productivity shocks and size-dependent vacancy costs. I model firm- and cohort-level growth resulting
from sluggish adjustment under convex recruitment costs and linear revenue functions. Relative
to both papers, a distinctive feature of my analysis is the presence of job-to-job transitions. This
force shapes the general-equilibrium structure of my model, partly through an interaction between
export investment and firm growth.9 A conclusion of my analysis is that a large part of the income
gains from more flexible labor markets operate through this margin.
Many studies have embedded labor market imperfections in heterogeneous-firms models in order
to study the impact of trade liberalization on unemployment and the wage distribution. Recent
theoretical studies along these lines include Davidson et al. (2008), Felbermayr et al. (2011), and
9

In my model, frictions in unemployment-to-job transitions partly operate through the endogenous value of
unemployment, which is exogenously pinned down by the value of working in an outside sector in these setups. The
magnitude of this effect turns out to be small in the quantification.

5

Helpman et al. (2010), while recent empirical papers include Amiti and Davis (2012) and Helpman
et al. (2012), among others. The wage distribution is not the focus on my analysis, but I draw
some of my model’s implications for individual wage trajectories arising from the combination of
job-to-job mobility and dynamic investment in exporting, and I contrast some of the calibrated
model’s implications for wage inequality relative to the data. Kambourov (2009) and Cuñat and
Melitz (2012) consider how labor market institutions impact labor reallocations across sectors.
Recent models with firm dynamics and exporting include Atkeson and Burstein (2010) and
Arkolakis (2016), among others. For a review of this literature see Burstein and Melitz (2011).
The driving force underlying firm dynamics here is sluggish adjustment with labor market frictions, while in these papers the dynamics follows from firm-level productivity shocks or innovation.
From an empirical standpoint my approach is distinguished by the specific predictions regarding
the composition of new hires by export status and by the impact of labor market frictions on export
dynamics and aggregate outcomes. I focus on these features throughout the theoretical and quantitative analysis.10 Morales et al. (2014) estimate a model with sequential entry into many export
markets driven by dynamic fixed costs. While the bulk of my analysis is undertaken assuming
a single export destination representing the rest of the world, I also develop and quantitatively
implement a version of the model in which firms enter sequentially to many export destinations as
they grow.
Search with Multi-Worker Firms In terms of tools, this paper is related to the search literature with job-to-job transitions in the spirit of Burdett and Mortensen (1998). As in Postel-Vinay
and Robin (2002), Cahuc et al. (2006), and Dey and Flinn (2005), upon contacting a firm, workers
transit from low- to high value jobs, and the surplus is split between worker and firm according to
linear sharing rules in which workers use the value of the next-best job as outside option. My model
is also related to Lise and Robin (2017), who combine the previous on-the-job search frameworks
with a meeting function as in Pissarides (2000). They further introduce aggregate shocks, while I
only study steady state outcomes. Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2017) emphasize the productivity
effects of job-to-job transitions over the business cycle, whereas Krusell et al. (2017) show that
shocks to job-arrival rates help rationalize gross flows. While I only study steady states, my results
suggest an additional channel through which shocks to job-arrival rates may impact productivity
over the business cycle.
As in other papers analyzing firm dynamics with job-to-job transitions (Garibaldi et al., 2016;
Moscarini and Postel-Vinay, 2013), I assume that firms’ revenues are linear in the number of
workers. Within a directed-search framework, Schaal (2012) studies uncertainty shocks during
the great recession allowing for decreasing returns to scale and job-to-job transitions. Kaas and
Kircher (2015) develop a model with firm-level and aggregate productivity shocks, where multiworker firms operate under decreasing returns to scale and may post vacancies besides controlling
10

My analysis focuses on steady-state comparisons. Some papers studying transitional dynamics arising from labor
market frictions in the aftermath of a trade liberalization include Cosar (2010) in a neoclassical trade environment,
and Helpman and Itskhoki (2015) in a Melitz (2003) type framework.

6

the recruiting intensity. The distinctive feature of my model is the introduction of fixed sequential
investments and a small open-economy setting into a model with on-the-job search and slow firm
growth. In partial equilibrium, given market sizes, the investments can be equivalently interpreted
as entering new markets or upgrading technology. However, in general equilibrium, the open
economy with monopolistic competition implies that the returns to exporting are endogenous.
Because the investments decisions are age-dependent, solving the allocation requires accounting for
patterns of job-to-job mobility across firms with two-dimensional heterogeneity, in terms of both
firm age and innate productivity.11
Labor Market Rigidities and Exports

Some papers have identified a negative relationship

between labor market rigidities and firm-level export decisions. Seker (2012) uses firm-level survey
data across countries to show that firms who report being more size-constrained due to labor market
regulations are less likely to export. This evidence suggest that labor regulations may impact the
decisions to export through firm size. Other studies show that the effect of export demand shocks
on firms’ expansion depends on labor market frictions. Almeida and Poole (2017) show that,
in response to a currency depreciation in Brazil, plants facing stricter enforcement of labor laws
increase employment relatively less than other plants. Wang et al. (2018) show that Chinese firms
who receive a positive export shock after China’s entry to the World Trade Organization expand
their employment by more in regions with more flexible labor markets in terms of the strictness of
regulations allowing workers to move across regions.12 At the country level, Salas (2018) finds a
negative relationship between exports and indexes that capture the rigidity of employment laws in
a panel of OECD countries.13

3

The Model
I develop a small-open economy model where firms expand their workforce slowly by hiring

employed or unemployed workers and can pay a sunk cost to sell in foreign markets. This section
lays out the environment, develops the partial-equilibrium investment problem of a firm who takes
aggregates as given, and establishes properties of the general-equilibrium impact of frictions.

11
Lentz and Mortensen (2012) analyze properties of a model combining labor market frictions with job-to-job
transitions and innovation as in Klette and Kortum (2004). Outside the search literature, Hopenhayn and Rogerson
(1993) and several others have embedded labor market regulations in perfectly competitive labor markets with firm
dynamics to study the role of specific labor market policies.
12
A more indirect type of evidence suggesting that exporters operate in frictional labor markets comes from papers
that consider the wage effects of firm-level export shocks. For example, Frıas et al. (2018) and Garin et al. (2019)
study linked employer-employee datasets in Mexico and Portugal, respectively, and show that positive firm-level
export shocks, in the form of a devaluation or higher demand from markets where a firm is likely to export, translate
into higher wage premia. Their result suggests that, in order to grow and export, firms cannot seamlessly attract
workers at an ongoing market wage.
13
In Section C of the Online Appendix I provide some additional suggestive evidence of a negative relationship
between labor market frictions and exports using different country-level indexes of employment rigidity and standard
country-, industry-, and firm-level datasets.

7

3.1

Preferences and Labor Market Environment

I consider a small open economy populated by a mass of identical workers of measure one. Time
is continuous. Workers have linear utility for consumption of a final non-tradable good that serves
R∞
as numeraire, and they discount the future at rate ρ: 0 e−ρt ct dt. The final good is aggregated
out of differentiated varieties that may be produced domestically or imported from the rest of the
world, as I describe below. I focus on a steady state in which aggregate variables are constant.
Labor markets are subject to standard search frictions whereby workers learn of jobs when
unemployed or employed according to a random process. The Poisson rates at which workers
contact firms are λu for unemployed workers and λe for employed workers. In addition to the
transitions between jobs to be described below, jobs are terminated at an exogenous rate γ. Taking
into account the chance µ of firm exit, this means that employees move into unemployment at rate
δ = γ + µ.14 The steady-state rate of unemployment is readily given by:
u=

δ
.
λu + δ

(1)

To save notation later, I define the normalized contact rate on the job, κe = λe /δ.
The number of job matches taking place per unit of time depends on the number of effective workers and firms searching through a constant-returns-to-scale matching function. As in
Mortensen (2000) unemployed and employed workers are perfect substitutes in the matching process
ei for i = e, u be the efficiency units in the matching
but have different search efficiencies. Letting λ
eu u + λ
ee (1 − u) is
process corresponding to employed and unemployed workers, respectively, then λ
the effective measure of workers searching. In addition, I let s be the average search effort exerted
by firms searching for workers and M be the measure of firms. Then, the rates at which workers
in each employment status contact a potential employer are
ei χ
λi = λ

sM
eu u + λ
ee (1 − u)
λ

!
for i = e, u,

(2)

where χ (·) is an increasing and concave function.15 Given the aggregate search effort of firms,
eu and
conditions (1) and (2) jointly determine λe and λu as function of the matching efficiencies λ
ee .
λ
ee or λ
eu imply a higher number of contacts for the same number of bodies and
Larger values of λ
effective measure of firms searching, leading to a lower unemployment rate or to a higher number
of workers experiencing job-to-job transitions, respectively. As it was previously mentioned in the
introduction, it is possible to interpret these parameters as capturing in reduced-form institutional
14

Firm exit is necessary to induce an invariant distribution of ages. Exogenous separations serve to bound the size
of surviving firms.


15
eu u + λ
ee (1 − u) , and we have defined χ (x) ≡
The total number of matches is the CRS function m sM, λ
m (x, 1). The rates at which each worker meets firms are defined as λi =

ei
λ
e u u+λ
e e (1−u) m
λ


for i = e, u, which yields (2).

eu u + λ
ee (1 − u) .
Unlike in the case with search from unemployment only, labor tightness here is sM/ λ

8

features of the labor market that hinder the incentives of workers to search for jobs. Hence, a more
ee or lower λ
eu .16
rigid labor market is represented by lower λ

3.2

Firm Revenues and Trade Environment

The trade environment shares the central features of Krugman (1980). Monopolistically competitive firms produce varieties of a differentiated good using a constant-returns-to-scale technology
with labor as the only factor of production. These varieties are internationally traded subject to
an iceberg cost, and then aggregated into the final non-tradable good with a constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) σ > 1 across varieties.
Firms enter the market with no workers and grow subject to their contacts in the labor market,
as I describe below. They suffer a shock that forces them to exit at rate µ, and there is continuous
re-entry to replace exiting firms. At birth, firms can only sell domestically, but at any time they
can choose to start exporting subject to a sunk cost. In the spirit of Melitz (2003), firms are
heterogeneous in terms of labor productivity ψ and cost of exporting fX , which are revealed upon
entry.
A known feature of the CES demand structure is that product differentiation leads to downward
sloping demand and concave revenue functions, because consumers derive a progressively lower
marginal utility from a particular variety as firms expand their supply. To incorporate a frictional
labor market with job-to-job mobility, it is convenient to operate with linear revenue functions, as
in Burdett and Mortensen (1998) and Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002). To resolve this tension, I
extend the standard CES structure with a quality choice allowing firms to shift their demand curves
outwards as they grow in size.17 The key feature of this quality choice is that, because workers
can be allocated within the firm to the production of either quality or quantity, the reduction in
marginal utility due to increased supply is compensated by the increase in marginal utility due to
increased quality as the firm expands.
As a result, as shown in Appendix A.1, exporting entails a revenue premium, but revenue per
unit sold is independent from firm size and only depends on firm export status.18 Specifically, the
real revenue of a firm with labor productivity ψ employing n workers is
yj ψn

(3)

16
Some papers with this this interpretation include Helpman and Itskhoki (2010) in a context close to my analysis
and Papageorgiou (2013) in a model of mismatch. An alternative interpretation is that these parameters capture
technologies that impact the efficiency of the matching process, as in Martellini and Menzio (2018), or geographic
aspects of labor markets, as in Heise and Porzio (2019).
17
In a trade model, the assumption that firms can choose the quality of their output is appealing because it leads
to realistic implications for the pricing of exporters. In my case, it leads to the empirically consistent prediction
that exporters set higher prices in larger markets and that exporters to more destinations set higher prices in every
market. These facts and the theoretical implications of quality choices for prices in trade models are summarized by
Manova and Zhang (2012).
18
Recent papers have reached a similar linear revenue structure in an open-economy setting through channels other
than quality choice. For example, Nocke and Yeaple (2014) and McGrattan and Prescott (2009) derive analogous
expressions through diversification of resources across products within a multi-product firm or across investment
destinations within a multinational firm, respectively.

9

where yj for j = D, X denotes the real revenue per unit of output in a domestic producer (i.e.,
non-exporter) and an exporter, respectively. For domestic producers, this average revenue depends
on aggregate real income in the domestic market,
yD = [(1 − u) y]1/σ ,

(4)

where y is income per employed worker in the domestic market. For exporters, average revenue is
higher due to foreign sales,
yX = [(1 − u) y + A]1/σ ,

(5)

where A > 0 is a constant that increases with foreign market size and decreases with foreign
competition and trade costs; the small-open-economy assumption means that A is invariant to
conditions at home.19 Following the terminology in Redding and Venables (2004) I refer to A as
the foreign-market capacity.
This linearization of the revenue function is useful because it preserves a key aspect of monopolistically competitive models of trade, namely the increase in revenue associated with export
activity, without compromising tractability once the frictional labor market with job-to-job transitions is introduced.20
An important object for the analysis is the revenue premium of exporters, defined as the ratio
between a firm’s revenue if it exports and if it only sells domestically,
yX
Γ≡
=
yD


1+

A
(1 − u) y

1/σ
> 1.

(6)

This expression for the exporter revenue premium follows from the CES structure, and holds regardless of my assumptions about quality upgrading. It reflects that exporting firms sell to consumers
with higher willingness to pay. The same revenue advantage holds in Melitz (2003) conditioning
on firm size, but in that model it is instantaneously offset by firms’ labor choice.

3.3

Job Values

The jobs offered by firms differ in value for two reasons. First, job values depend on firm-level
productivity, ψ. Second, revenue per worker may change throughout the life of firms: domestic
Specifically, A ≡ τ −(σ−1) (P ∗ )σ Y ∗ where P ∗ denotes the price index in the rest of the world relative to the domestic price index, Y ∗ is aggregate real income abroad, and τ is the iceberg trade cost. To undertake counterfactuals,
I only need to parametrize A regardless of its decomposition into these variables.
20
This linear revenue structure is also aligned with a well established tradition of firm-dynamics models outside
of the search literature which assumes linear payoffs in the stock of some slowly accumulated factor, such as Klette
and Kortum (2004) or Chatterjee and Rossi-Hansberg (2012). Luttmer (2010) surveys that literature and presents
a canonical model in that spirit. Besides being tractable, these models lead to realistic predictions for the firm-size
distribution. A consequence of the linearization is that the “love for variety” component of welfare is neutralized.
This component could be reintroduced as in Benassy (1998) and Acemoglu et al. (2007). See Appendix A.1 for
details.
19

10

firms with revenue per unit sold yD may intend to upgrade to yX at some point. As a result,
conditioning on ψ, the value of a match depends on the time a firm plans to wait before starting
to export, or whether it has begun to do so. Let x indicate this “time until exporting” for a given
firm. Across the economy, each firm may be in one of three possible export states: x = 0 denotes
firms that have already started to export; x ∈ (0, ∞) denotes firms that will start exporting in x
periods from now if they survive for that long; and x = ∞ denotes firms that will never export no
matter how long they survive.
Let v (x; ψ) represent the value of a job held by a firm with labor productivity ψ whose time until
exporting –if it does not suffer an exit-inducing shock before then– is x. This value includes the
present discounted sum of future expected revenue generated by the job, as well as future expected
value appropriated by the worker in the event of a job-to-job transition. I assume that v (x; ψ)
is shared between workers and firms according to the game posited by Cahuc et al. (2006), who
include wage bargaining on top of Bertrand competition among current and prospective employers
as in Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002).21 An attractive feature of this specification is that, having
introduced a matching function in (2), it is similar to the standard Mortensen-Pissarides model
when job-to-job transitions are shut down (λe = 0). I will refer to this special case when inspecting
the role of frictions in general equilibrium.
When an unemployed worker meets a firm offering jobs of value v, the surplus is divided according to the standard Nash-bargaining solution. The fallback position for the worker is the value
of unemployment, U . On top of that, the worker receives a share β of the match rents, v − U . As
a consequence, the value received by a firm matching with an unemployed worker is
Ju (v) = (1 − β) (v − U ) .

(7)

Let z be the income flow of unemployed workers. Then, the flow-equivalent value of unemployment
is

Z

vmax

(v − U ) dPv (v) ,

ρU = z + λu β

(8)

vmin

where I have defined Pv (v) as the probability that, upon a contact, a worker samples a firm
offering a job of value of v or less. This sampling distribution is determined endogenously in general
equilibrium. Our assumptions will guarantee that it lies in the bounded support [vmin , vmax ].
When an employed worker meets a prospective employer, the firm offering higher value jobs
keeps the worker. Following Cahuc et al. (2006), and letting v1 and v0 be respectively the higherand lower-value jobs offered by the competing firms, the worker receives a share β of the match
rents, v1 − v0 , in addition to the maximum that could be granted by the alternative employer, v0 .
21

In Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002), firms observe the current status of the worker, tender take-it-or-leave-it wage
offers, and commit to the value promised to the worker. The outcome is similar to Bertrand competition: the firm
offering the job of greater total value obtains the worker, offering in exchange a value equal to what the worker could
obtain in the alternative employment. In Cahuc et al. (2006), the worker additionally splits the surplus with the
higher-value firm according to the conventional Nash solution rule, using the total value in the lower-value job as
fallback position. In either case, a worker is hired under a flat wage profile until leaving or triggering a renegotiation.

11

Therefore, the value received by the firm offering the job with higher value is
Je (v0 , v1 ) = (1 − β) (v1 − v0 ) .

(9)

Both Ju (v) and Je (v0 , v1 ) denote present discounted sums of expected profits captured by a firm
at the time the worker enters the firm or contacts a potential employer. After that time, the worker
might leave due to an exogenous shock or contact another firm, triggering a renegotiation or a quit.
As detailed in Appendix A.2, these events are included in the computation of Ju (v) and Je (v0 , v1 ).
The sharing rules described so far suffice to characterize the investment decision of firms, income
per employed worker, and the general-equilibrium impact of frictions without ever specifying the
wage stream received by the worker. Hence, my analysis of these objects is consistent with other
frameworks that posit the linear sharing rules (7) to (9).22 Besides offering a specific microfoundation for these sharing rules, Cahuc et al. (2006) provide a basis to construct the wage function
by assuming flat-wage contracts. I adopt that assumption when contrasting some of the model’s
implications for wages against the data.
Having imposed the sharing rules, I can return to the value of a job held by a firm with labor
productivity ψ whose time until exporting is x ∈ (0, ∞). As shown in Appendix A.2, it is given by
the following differential equation,
Z

vmax

ρv (x; ψ) = ψyD + δ (U − v (x; ψ)) + λe

β (v0 − v (x; ψ)) dPv (v0 ) − v 0 (x; ψ) for x > 0, (10)

v(x;ψ)

with initial condition equal to the value of jobs offered by the firm once it has invested in exporting:
Z

vmax

β (v0 − v (0; ψ)) dPv (v0 ) .

ρv (0; ψ) = ψyX + δ (U − v (0; ψ)) + λe

(11)

v(0;ψ)

For a firm that will never export (x = ∞), the job value is similar to (11), except that revenue per
worker equals ψyD instead of ψyX .23
To understand these expressions, consider first the value of a job in a firm that already sunk
the cost of exporting, (11). The flow value of the job, ρv (0; ψ), includes the revenue flow of the
match and the probability of match dissolution, in which case the worker obtains the value of
being unemployed. In addition, the last term captures worker bargaining power and job-to-job
transitions. At Poisson rate λe , the worker contacts another firm. If the contacted firm offers jobs
of higher value than the current employer, the current job is dissolved and the worker obtains a
fraction β of the rents. The flow value of a job in a firm that has not yet invested, (10), shares a
similar structure but also includes a dynamic component for the change in firm value, v 0 (x; ψ) < 0.
As the firm ages, the time until investment x shrinks and the value of the firm increases by [−v 0 (x)]
22
E.g., see Dey and Flinn (2005). Lentz (2014) discusses possible sharing arrangements arising from the optimal
contract design in the presence of hidden search and relates them to Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002).
23
Expression (10) corresponds to a firm offering jobs whose value is greater than the minimum of the support of
the equilibrium value distribution, v (x; ψ) ≥ vmin . Equation (49) in the appendix shows the complete definition of
the value function including the region of the state space where v (x; ψ) < vmin .

12

until it reaches v (0).
When β = 0 or λe = 0, the equilibrium distribution of jobs from which workers sample, Pv ,
does not impact the value of a job. We will focus on the simpler case λe β = 0 below to characterize
theoretically the impact of frictions. More generally, v (x; ψ) is implicitly defined as a functional
equation that depends on Pv , itself an equilibrium object.

3.4

Value of New Hires

The export decision is made on the basis of the flow of workers obtained in each period and the
valuations attached to each. The total number of matches in the economy is λu u + λe (1 − u), out
of which the number arriving at a firm exerting search effort s is
(λu u + λe (1 − u))

 s 
,
sM

(12)

where s/s is the search effort exerted by the firm relative to average search activity in the economy
s, and M is the measure of firms. I assume that, by virtue of having incurred the cost to enter
the market, firms are endowed with a common and arbitrarily small level of s, ensuring that all
firms are equally likely to be sampled if no additional effort is exerted by any firm. Any additional
search effort entails the cost sζ with ζ > 1, a formulation similar to Bertola and Caballero (1994),
among others.24
For the subsequent analysis, it is useful to define qu as the rate at which firms contact workers
from unemployment:
qu ≡

λu u
.
Ms

(13)

This notation allows us to express the number of workers arriving at a firm in (12) as
qu (1 + κe ) s,

(14)

where qu (1 + κe ) is the probability of a contact per unit of search effort. This expression includes
the qu s workers contacted from the pool of unemployment and the qu κe s workers contacted from
other firms.25 It is worth noting that qu is the standard definition of the vacancy-filling rate in the
Mortensen-Pissarides model (Pissarides, 2000). Without search on the job, qu would be the rate at
which firms contact workers. As in standard models in the style of Burdett and Mortensen (1998),
allowing for on-the-job search expands the total rate of contacts experienced by firms by a factor
of (1 + κe ) per unit of search.
24

This formulation implies that firms may speed up growth by increasing recruitment effort, but not via vacancy
posting. Davis et al. (2013) argue that firms use other instruments in addition to vacancies as they vary the rate of new
hires. While adding vacancies would not qualitatively impact the mechanics of the model, the current assumptions
allow me to tractably represent the investment problem as in (16), so that the export entry decision is separable with
other choices of the firm. Kaas and Kircher (2015) show that including both recruiting effort and vacancy posting
helps to match additional
moments of the cross
section of growth rates.


25
s
s
Specifically, sM
λu u = qu s and sM
λe (1 − u) = κe qu s . This last expression is attained using the definition
of u from (1) and the definition of κe .

13

Of all the workers arriving to a firm in (14), only a subset results in new hires. As long as there
are positive match rents (v > U ), which will be the case for active firms in equilibrium, all the qu s
workers arriving from the pool of unemployment are hired. Each of these workers yields a value
to the firm of Ju (v). Out of the squ κe employed workers who contact the firm, only the fraction
Gv (v) currently employed in firms offering jobs with value v0 < v is hired, each yielding a value
to the firm of Je (v0 , v). As a result, net of search costs, the present discounted value of profits
generated by all workers who are hired by a firm offering jobs of value v is


Z

v

π (v) = max Ju (v) + κe
s≥0


Je (v0 , v) dGv (v0 ) qu s − sζ ,

(15)

vmin

where the term in square brackets is proportional to the expected value of a contact.

3.5

Stock Effect and Timing of Export Entry

As anticipated, firms can choose between the alternative export status yD and yX . Firms enter
the market with no workers and grow subject to their contacts in the labor market while facing the
exit risk. At birth, they are endowed with revenue per unit sold of yD , but they can choose at any
time to make a once-and-for-all investment to start exporting and upgrade revenues to yX = ΓyD .
This investment entails a sunk cost with flow-equivalent value of fX in units of the final good.
Firms have perfect foresight about the evolution of its stock of employees, facing no uncertainty
beyond the exit probability.26 As a result, each firm chooses an age h to start their export activity.
Each firm commits to the timing of exporting when it is born, after having observed its labor
productivity ψ and entry cost fX . Letting ε = (ψ, fX ) summarize the firm type, the value at entry
of a firm who will start exporting at some generic age h is
Z
Π (h; ε) =

h

e

−(ρ+µ)a

π (v (h − a; ψ)) da + e

0

−(ρ+µ)h




π (v (0; ψ)) − fX
.
ρ+µ

(16)

The value of a firm at entry captures the following life cycle: a new firm starts with no workers;
at age a = h − x, the value of jobs held by this firm is v (h − a; ψ) and incoming workers generate
average expected profits with present discounted value of π (v (h − a; ψ)); and after age h the firm
obtains π (v (0; ψ)) from new workers for the rest of its expected life, but must pay the sunk cost
with flow-equivalent value fX . The effective rate of time discount, ρ + µ, takes into account the
probability of firm exit.27
Each firm of type ε chooses the age h to start exporting to maximize Π (h; ε). To understand
this decision, consider a firm that starts to export at age h. If that firm delays export entry, it
gives up revenues by delaying the increase in sales per worker. In addition, it gives up growth by
26
Since I treat the stock of workers in the firm as a continuous set, the individual worker contact and exit rates
equal the fraction of workers in the firm who experience these shocks.
27
Note that π (v (h − a; ψ)) is the present discounted value of the profits generated by the flow of hires at age a
measured at the time of hiring. These values need to be discounted back to age 0 to determine the value of the firm
at entry.

14

reducing the inflow of workers at each age below h. As a result, π (v (h − a; ψ)) in (16) shifts down
for all a. At the same time, by delaying the time of exporting, the firm saves the cost fX . Formally,
this decision is similar to a stopping time in which firms with constant-returns-to-scale technologies
decide the optimal time to switch into a superior technology with high fixed cost and low marginal
cost. Here, the timing of this switch also impacts growth rates before switching through the rate
of job-to-job hiring.28
In a strictly positive solution, adopting the convention that h = ∞ denotes that the optimal
choice is to never invest, the first-order condition for h that maximizes Π (h; ε) can be characterized
as follows:
S (h; ψ) = fX if h < ∞,

(17)

S (h; ψ) ≤ fX if h = ∞,

(18)

where
Z
S (h; ψ) =

h



e(ρ+µ)x π 0 (v (x; ψ)) −v 0 (x; ψ) dx.

(19)

0

I refer to S (h) as the stock effect of a delay in h. It captures the opportunity costs of delaying
the age of entry into exporting in terms of foregone revenues and firm growth. The firm chooses
the h where these opportunity costs equal the savings from delaying export entry, in terms of the
flow-equivalent value of the sunk cost. Since the firm grows over time, the longer it waits, the larger
is the opportunity cost of not exercising the investment in exporting. Furthermore, S (0; ψ) = 0,
i.e., there is no stock effect at entry because there is no initial labor force. Therefore, it must be
that h > 0 unless the sunk cost is zero, in which case exporting occurs at birth.
To assess the impact of labor market frictions it will be necessary to move on to general equilibrium, where competition, captured by the measure of firms M and the distribution of job values
Pv (v) from which workers sample offers upon contact, is determined endogenously. For that, it is
useful to characterize the value of firms at entry. As shown in Appendix A.3, using an envelope
condition and letting h (ε) ≡ arg maxh Π (h; ε) be the optimal export timing of a firm of type ε, the
value of such a firm at entry is
Πe (ε) =

π (v (h (ε) ; ψ))
.
ρ+µ

(20)

As further shown in Section 6.4, the characterization of the optimal timing and value at entry in
conditions (17) to (20) generalizes to the case with multiple sequential investments.

3.6

General Equilibrium

The development so far pertains to an individual firm given the sampling and employment
functions Pv (v) and Gv (v), the number of firms M , the average search intensity of other firms s̄,
28

Formally, the problem is related to the structure in Burdett and Menzio (2017), who characterize the optimal
stopping time of a firm that must decide when to change its price in the presence of fixed menu costs and search
frictions in product markets.

15

and income per employed worker, y. Each firm of type ε = (ψ, fX ) solves the problem discussed in
Section 3.5, optimizing over the investment time h and the search effort s taking these objects as
given.
In general equilibrium, the measure of firms is determined through free entry. Firms face an
entry cost with flow-equivalent value of fD units of the final good, and learn their type ε after
incurring this cost. The free-entry condition implies that a potential entrant must be indifferent
about entering,
Eε [max {Πe (ε) , 0}] =

fD
,
ρ+µ

(21)

where Eε denotes the expectation with respect to the distribution of firm types, ε. The max operator
inside the expectation denotes that, upon observing its type, firms may choose to exit immediately
without hiring. This defines a region in the space of ε for firms that decide to continue after having
entered. While there is no additional overhead cost after entry, the value of unemployment entering
in (7) implies that some types may exit if the surplus from the jobs they create is too low relative
to the value of unemployment.
In addition, the sampling distribution Pv (v) must be consistent with the optimal search effort
exerted by firms along the age and firm-type distributions, and Gv (v) must be consistent with
the transition patterns induced by Pv (v). I define each of these objects in Appendix A.4. After
imposing the free-entry and consistency of the sampling and employment distributions, it is possible
to compute the key outcome of interest, real income per employed worker y (see (22) below). The
steady-state consumption level is obtained residually from market clearing in the final good.
Now it is possible to define the equilibrium.
Definition 1. The general equilibrium consists of contact and unemployment rates {λe , λu , u},
revenues per unit of exporters and domestic producers {yD , yX }, unemployment value U , value
functions v (x; ψ), investment times h (ε), a measure of firms M , employment and sampling distributions {Gv (v) , Pv (v)}, income per employed worker y, and consumption c such that
a) contact and unemployment rates are given by (1) and (2);
b) revenues per unit sold are given by (4) and (5).
c) the value of unemployment is given by (8);
d) the value functions solve (10)-(11);
e) the investment times are given by the first-order conditions from the firm problem, (17)-(18);
f) the number of firms M adjusts to satisfy free entry, i.e. (21) holds;
g) the sampling and employment distributions are consistent with firms decisions; i.e., they are
given by (56) and (58);
h) output per employed worker is given by (22); and
i) the goods market clears.

3.7

General-Equilibrium Channels

I discuss here the channels through which frictions impact income per employed worker in the
full model, and the next section relies on a simpler environment to characterize the direction of the
comparative statics. Letting Ia≥h(ε) be an indicator for whether a type-ε firm is old enough to be
16

an exporter, income per employed worker is


 σ
1
y = (1 − u) σ−1 Eε,a ψ 1 + (Γ − 1) Ia≥h(ε) n (a; ε) σ−1

(22)

where n (a, ε) is the density of workers employed by a type-ε firm at age a, resulting from the
firm-level growth process specified in (59) to (61) in Appendix A.4.
A cursory inspection of (22) points to the determinants of income per employed worker. The first
term, including the unemployment rate, is a standard demand externality borne out of monopolistic
competition. This term holds regardless of the presence of firm growth or fixed investments, and
is therefore orthogonal to the misallocation forces I focus on.29 Instead, the margins I focus on
manifest themselves through the distribution of employment by firm type and age, n (a; ε), and the
timing of investments, h (ε). The following result establishes the role of frictions in shaping these
outcomes.
Proposition 1. Given λe , changes in the contact rate from unemployment λu impact the employment allocation and the timing of investments {n (a; ε) , h (ε)} only through general-equilibrium
adjustments in revenue per unit sold {yD , yX } or in the value of unemployment, U . Given λu ,
changes in the contact rate from employment λe generically impact these outcomes regardless of
whether {yD , yX , U } may adjust.
The focus on {λe , λu } is without loss of generality, since any
change in {λe , λu } can
n equilibrium
o
˜
˜
be implemented by a set of changes in the matching efficiencies λe , λu . Therefore, the proposition
applies to changes in the fundamental matching efficiencies as well.30
The proposition implies that, if {U, yX , yD } are exogenously given, then λu has no impact on
firm growth or the timing of investments, while λe does. The value of unemployment U is not
an active margin if it is pinned down by an outside sector instead of being determined by (8), as
in Helpman and Itskhoki (2010), or if workers have no bargaining power (β = 0), as in PostelVinay and Robin (2002). In turn, {yD , yX } are exogenously given in the absence of monopolistic
competition (σ → ∞) if we reinterpret the investment decision as productivity upgrading instead
of exporting. While these cases may be extreme, they highlight that the extent of the response of
firm growth and investments to λu is bounded by how elastic {U, yX , yD } are, while the same is
not generically true for λe .
The fact that λu does not directly impact the employment density n (a; ε) while λe does is
intuitive. Because workers transit to high-value jobs, a higher rate of contact on the job speeds
29

The same term appears in theories combining unemployment with monopolistic competition in the MortensenPissarides model; e.g., see Schaal and Taschereau-Dumouchel (2016) for a recent example. Blanchard and Kiyotaki
(1987) is an early analysis of the role of monopolistic competition in leading to demand externalities.
30
This is trivially the case if the contact rates λe and λu are exogenous, as in Postel-Vinay and Robin
(2002). Under endogenous contact rates, note that, from (2),
(λ0e , λ0u ) with λ0u 6= 0
 0any 0set
 of counterfactual
0
0
0
can be implemented with the counterfactual fundamentals λ˜e , λ˜u
such that λ˜e /λ˜u = λ0e /λ0u and λ˜u =


−1
e0u u0 + λ
e0e (1 − u0 )
λ0u χ (sM )0 / λ
, where u0 and (sM )0 are the outcomes corresponding to (λ0e , λ0u ). In the quan

titative section I perform the counterfactuals with respect to the fundamentals λ˜e , λ˜u and endogenously solve for
(λe , λu ).

17

up transitions, skewing the employment distribution towards more productive or older firms; in
contrast, λu scales the size of the employment pool, but it does not alter its composition.
Conditioning on {U, yD , yX }, λu does not directly impact h (ε) because it scales up both the
stock effect and firm value at entry in the same proportion, by making it easier to hire both from
employment (through a larger employment pool) and from unemployment (through a higher jobfinding rate of the unemployed) for every productivity and age.31 Because firm entry (higher M )
scales down the stock effect and the expected value of firms at entry in the same proportion, higher
λu leads to more firms but leaves the equilibrium meeting rate qu and the stock effect unchanged,
unless other general-equilibrium variables adjust.
In short, the model inherits a well-known property from the Mortensen-Pissarides model: given
the value of unemployment U , the rate at which firms meet unemployed workers, qu , is pinned down
by free entry, so that changes in the matching efficiency do not affect qu . This comparison with
the Mortensen-Pissarides model is more explicit in the simpler model of the next section. This role
of λu also echoes features of the static monopolistic competition trade models. In the symmetric
Melitz (2003) model, an increase in the size of the labor force leads to a proportional adjustment
in the measure of firms without affecting export thresholds.32
In contrast, the impact of λe on firm growth is back-loaded: λe slows down net worker flows in
young potential exporters (whose employees are more likely to be poached away) and speeds them
up in older potential exporters (offering higher-value jobs). As a result, the effects of λe on the
stock effect are unevenly distributed over the life cycle of potential exporters, instead of raising the
stock effect proportionally for all ages. In equilibrium, firm’s meeting rate with employed workers,
qu κe , is not offset by firm entry, therefore impacting the investment time h (ε) regardless of whether
{U, yX , yD } adjusts.

4

Impact of Frictions in a Simpler Model
I will use the model developed so far to quantify the impact of labor-market frictions on income

per employed worker. The goal of this section is to establish the comparative statics with respect
to frictions. To sharpen the role of key forces, in Section 4.1 I sequentially impose simplifying
assumptions on the full model which yield closed-form solutions for most outcomes. After imposing
each assumption, I describe the key part of the model that it simplifies, allowing me to characterize
31

This property follows from the fact that qu enters proportionally in the number of workers contacting a firm
in (14), which in turn results from the definition of the measure of contacts in (12) and the steady-state rate of
unemployment, (1). These ingredients are all in keeping with standard equilibrium search models with random
search and job-to-job transitions.
32
This property follows from the CES demand structure with constant markups, whereby changes in the size of
the labor force are associated with changes in the extensive margin (number firms) but not the intensive margin
(firm size). As shown by Zhelobodko et al. (2012), both the extensive and intensive margins respond to market
size under deviations from CES. The fact that frictions in hiring from unemployment impact export participation
through market sizes is also consistent with features of Helpman and Itskhoki (2010). In a model combining a Melitz
framework with symmetric countries and frictions in hiring from unemployment, Felbermayr et al. (2011) show that
labor market tightness does not impact export participation.

18

equilibrium properties. The simplified model is the basis upon which I discuss comparative statics
in Section 4.2.

4.1

Closed-Form Solutions

I start by imposing that λe β = 0. This means that the economy features either no job-to-job
transitions (λe = 0) or no worker bargaining power (β = 0). Thanks to this assumption, the value
of a new job in a firm who is x ≥ 0 periods away from investing presented in (10) admits a simple
closed-form expression. Imposing λe β = 0 in (10) and solving for the value function gives

yD + (yX − yD ) e−(ρ+δ)x ψ + δU
v (x; ψ) =
.
ρ+δ


(23)

This expression holds regardless of other general-equilibrium objects; it simply states that the value
of a job consists of the expected revenues generated by the worker throughout the duration of the
match, plus the value of unemployment obtained by the worker when the match is dissolved.
Second, I assume that the search effort s is common to all firms and normalized to one. As
a result, a worker who hears of an opening has the same probability of being matched with any
firm, and differences in the rate at which firms hire workers arise solely from the ability to attract
workers away from other firms (formally, this is attained by assuming that exerting search effort is
infinitely costly, ζ → ∞). Using the expression for the value of a new job in (23), I can explicitly
compute the integrand of stock effect defined in (19) and introduce it into the first-order condition
(17) determining the optimal timing of investment:
Z
S (h (ε) ; ψ) =
0

h(ε)

qu (1 − β) [1 + κe Gv (v (x; ψ))] (Γ − 1) yD ψe−γx dx = fX .
|
{z
}|
{z
}
New Hires

(24)

Revenue

This condition shows the channels that determine the timing of investment in partial equilibrium. The larger the number of new hires and the expected discounted revenue that each generates,
the larger the opportunity cost of delaying export entry. A higher probability of contacting unemployed workers, qu , or employed workers, qu κe , speeds up the number of new hires and accelerates
the investment, whereas a first-order shift in the employment distribution Gv towards high-value
jobs reduces the share of meetings that translate into new hires, slowing down growth and delaying
the investment. Naturally, a larger return to exporting Γ speeds up investment, higher worker
bargaining power β slows it down, and firms with higher productivity to cost ratio ψ/fX invest
earlier.
Third, as in Krugman (1980), I impose that firms have no innate differences productivity or in
fixed costs across firms. However, as in Melitz (2003) exporting still entails the fixed cost fX . As a
result, firms are now heterogeneous in only one dimension, their age, and there is a common timing
for the investment across firms, H. This common timing determines the fraction of employment in

19

exporters and, through it, income per employed worker. The free entry condition (21) becomes:

yD + e−(ρ+δ)H (yX − yD ) ψ − ρU
π (v (H; ψ)) = qu (1 − β)
= fD .
ρ+δ


(25)

Given {U, yD , yX }, conditions (24) and (25) jointly determine firms’ probability of contacting unemployed workers and the investment time, {qu , H}.
It is now possible to grasp some of the mechanics of Proposition 1 by drawing an explicit comparison with the canonical equilibrium matching model of unemployment without heterogeneous
match productivities (Pissarides, 1985, 2000). When h → ∞ or yX = yD , so that my model does
not feature upgrading over the firm life cycle, condition (25) pins down firm’s meeting rates qu
in the same way as the standard equilibrium unemployment model, regardless of the presence of
job-to-job transitions.33 Because the stock effect S (H; ψ) in (17) is also proportional to qu , changes
in λu are compensated by entry or exit through M , leaving {qu , H} unchanged given {yD , yX , U }.
In contrast, conditioning on {yD , yX , U }, λe impacts income per worker both directly, by speeding
up transitions to exporters (the component κe in the stock effect), and indirectly, through the
endogenous timing of investment H.

4.2

Comparative Statics

I now inspect comparative statics with respect to the equilibrium contact rates {λu , λe }; as
mentioned above, anyn change
o in {λe , λu } can always be implemented by a set of changes in the
matching efficiencies λ˜e , λ˜u . The following result establishes the impact of each type of friction
on the timing of entry into exporting, the exporter employment share, and income per employed
worker.
Proposition 2. Assume λe β = 0, constant search effort s across firms and ex-ante homogeneous
firms. Then, given (λe , λu ), there is a unique general equilibrium. Firms never invest at entry
unless fX = 0, but eventually invest if and only if fX is below a finite threshold. Given Γ:
i) if β > 0 and λe = 0 then lower matching frictions from unemployment (higher λu ) lead
to faster export entry, a higher employment share in exporters, and higher income per employed
worker if z < ψyD ; and
ii) if β = 0 and λe > 0 then lower matching frictions from employment (higher λe ) also lead to
these outcomes if σ is sufficiently large or if z = by for some positive constant b < ψ yyD .
The proof first establishes uniqueness based on whether each firm’s incentive to export increases
when other firms delay export entry. A larger H shifts the distribution of employment Gv (v (x))
towards firms that are further away from exporting. From our preceding discussion, this shift
33
More precisely, in the notation of Chapter 2 of Pissarides (2000), the free-entry condition stating that the value
of a new vacancy equals the cost of creating it is J = (1 − β) p−rU
= pc
, where pc is the cost of a vacancy per unit of
r+λ
q
time, r is the discount rate, λ is the job-termination rate, q is the job-filling rate, β is the worker bargaining power,
and U is the value of unemployment. When yX = yD or h → ∞, this condition is the same as (25) properly adjusting
notation (i.e., relabeling q as qu , pc as fD , p as yD , r as ρ, and λ as δ).

20

strengthens the stock effect and speeds up investment. At the same time, the longer it takes firms
to invest, the smaller their value at entry, reducing entry and also strengthening the stock effect.
As a result, there is a unique interior solution for the common timing of investment, H.34 As for
whether the unique equilibrium features export entry, immediate exporting cannot be an outcome
if fX > 0 because there is no stock effect at firm birth. An alternative candidate for an equilibrium
is that firms never export. Since the stock effect is bounded, firms invest if and only if the cost of
investing fX /fD is below the threshold fX /fD defined in (83) in the appendix.
For simplicity, the comparative statics assume a constant exporter revenue premium Γ, which
is consistent with the simplifying assumption in Melitz (2003) that the world economy consists
of symmetric countries.35 Consider first the case in which job-to-job transitions are not allowed,
λe = 0 and β > 0. Proposition 1 implies that the contact rate from unemployment λu impacts
the timing of investment through the value of unemployment U and the domestic market size. A
higher λu leads to a higher value of unemployment, reducing the value of the firm at entry. As a
result, to maintain zero profits, the extent to which the measure of firms grows must be less than in
the case with U constant. But qu is invariant to frictions in that case, so that qu must now increase
with λu , as it would in the Mortensen-Pissarides model. Using the first order condition (24), we
conclude that the higher contact rate qu speeds up the investment.
As for the role of λe , it also impacts outcomes through a higher value of unemployment. In
addition, it changes the stock effect in different proportions for different types of firms. Specifically,
a lower λe benefits older and larger firms relatively more. It only strengthens the growth margin in
(17) through the higher entry rate of workers from other jobs, so that variation in the number of
firms cannot absorb this effect as with λu . Therefore, conditioning on U , the adjustment to lower
λe occurs partly through the number of firms and partly through the common age of switching.
Both when λu and when λe increase, a determinant of the comparative statics is whether the value
of unemployment U increases relative to market size. In the case of higher λu , this is necessarily
the case if z < ψyD . For λe , this is the case under the additional restrictions in the proposition.
With the quantitative application in mind, it is worth discussing two qualifications of these
results. First, I have taken Γ as given. In general equilibrium, when Γ adjusts, shocks increasing
domestic market size lower the exporter revenue premium Γ. As a result, the potential gains
from lower frictions are partially offset by the reduction in the exporter premium. Second, I have
conditioned the discussion on the case with no innate productivity differences across firms. In
the quantitative model, which allows for these differences, it is not necessarily the case that every
firm speeds up investment when frictions are reduced. To the contrary, it is possible that low34

There is one offsetting effect: as long as workers have bargaining power (β > 0) a larger value of H also lowers
the value of unemployment, increasing the value of firms and leading to firm entry, weakening the stock effect. This
effect is dominated by the other forces.
35
In the current case, Γ is readily given by parameters. With K + 1 symmetric countries, interpreting fX as the

1/σ
cost of starting to export to all countries simultaneously, then Γ = 1 + Kτ −(σ−1)
. In Section 6.4 I implement
an extension with K countries where firms enter export destinations sequentially. A constant Γ is also consistent with
the assumption that foreign market size A adjusts to compensate the domestic market size or with a closed-economy
environment, where the investment is interpreted as a productivity upgrade.

21

productivity firms delay investment due to higher chances of having workers poached away. In fact,
the calibrated model implies that low-productivity firms slow down growth and investment relative
to high-productivity firms due to faster labor reallocation towards higher-productivity firms.
The model also has implications for how international trade frictions, captured by the iceberg
trade costs in the definition of foreign-market capacity A, interact with labor market frictions.
Foreign market capacity has a direct effect on real income, via Γ, as well as an indirect effect
via reallocations to exporters. In Krugman (1980), where all firms are identical, an increase in
the size of an economy is met with an increase in every firm’s exports to that country. Here, in
addition, it leads to an extensive export-entry margin through H. As in Melitz (2003), this margin
involves firms switching export status. However, unlike in that paper, export participation increases
with lower trade frictions across firms with different age and size but identical productivity. The
magnitude of the indirect effect through reallocations is mediated by labor market frictions, as λe
and λu impact the response of the exporter employment share to lower trade frictions.36 Section
6.5 illustrates this interaction using the calibrated model.

5

Calibration

5.1

Preliminaries

To proceed, I must specify the distribution of innate differences in productivity ψ and export
fixed costs fX across firms. In quantifications of trade models with heterogeneous firms such as
Melitz (2003) it is common to assume a Pareto distribution of productivities because it leads to
empirically consistent predictions for the right tail of the firm-size distribution. In my context, for
the derivation of the theoretical results it has been convenient to assume a bounded productivity
distribution. This assumption also facilitates the numerical implementation. Therefore, I assume
that productivity is distributed according to a bounded Pareto distribution.37 The probability that
a firm draws a productivity level below x upon entry is parametrized as follows:
"

−η #
1
x
Pr (ψ < x) =
1−
,
p
ψmin

36

(26)

Atkeson and Burstein (2010) show that, to a first order approximation, allowing for process innovation or for
selection into exporting as in Melitz (2003) does not impact the size of the indirect component of the welfare gains
from a reductions in trade costs, because the gains from process innovation or selection into exporting are offset
in general equilibrium by changes in product variety. They analyze a world general equilibrium with 2 symmetric
countries. In my case, because of the small-open economy nature of the model (implying a fixed number of imported
varieties) and the linearization of the revenue function (implying a neutralization of gains from product variety, as I
explain in Appendix A.1), the indirect component of the gains from trade only includes the reallocation into exporters
and is not offset by product innovation.
37
In the multi-country extension of my model from Section 6.4, the upper bound rationalizes that not every
potential export market is accessed. Helpman et al. (2008) quantifies a multi-country version of the Melitz model
assuming truncated Pareto distributions to help rationalize zeros in bilateral trade flows. For a recent international
trade model inspecting the gains from trade assuming the bounded Pareto distribution see Feenstra (2014).

22

with support ψ ∈ [ψmin , ψmax ] , where ψmax ≡ ψmin (1 − p)−1/η . As p → 1, this distribution
converges to the unbounded Pareto, whereas p < 1 corresponds to a truncated Pareto with upper
bound equal to the pth percentile of the unbounded distribution. For the benchmark calibration I
use p = 0.99. By choosing units I normalize the mean of the productivity distribution to 1 through
ψmin . The ensuing distribution is indexed by a single parameter, η, which controls the dispersion
of the productivity distribution without affecting its mean.
I assume that the fixed cost of exporting fX is independent from ψ. I allow for two levels of
fixed costs: potential exporters (with finite fX ) and never exporters (with arbitrarily large fX ).
This binomial distribution gives the model additional flexibility to approximate key targets of the
theory, such as the fraction of non-exporters and the average age of exporters and non-exporters.
I must also take a stand on the matching function in (2). Following Cosar et al. (2016), I assume
that the job-finding rate for workers depends on the CES matching function,
−1/θ

χ (x) = 1 + x−θ
,

(27)

and in robustness checks I also allow for a Cobb-Douglas matching function.

5.2

Data

I match the model to summary statistics from official tax records of the manufacturing sector of
Argentina from 2003 to 2007. I use data on the number of firms in the manufacturing sector by cells
of employment size, age, and export status. Importantly, the data also includes information about
worker transitions between firms. In particular, it includes the share of new hires who enter directly
from other jobs rather than from non-employment in firms with different export statuses. The data
also includes additional statistics, such as average wages, which are used to check some of the
model’s predictions. These statistics were extracted from confidential micro data from Argentina’s
Ministry of Labor, including the universe of formal employment in manufacturing in Argentina for
the period 2003 to 2007. Appendix C.1 describes in more detail the underlying dataset.
The years 2003 to 2007 chosen for the calibration feature rapid economic growth after a recession.
During these years, Argentina featured a fairly regulated labor market by international standards.38
Despite the contrast in the macro outlook between this phase and the preceding years, Table 6 in
Appendix C.1 shows that the summary statistics matched in the calibration are quite stable over
the 5-year period 2003 − 2007 relative to 1998 − 2002.39
I must determine the value of the following 15 parameters: preferences {ρ, σ}, firm and job exit
38
In 2001 and 2004, Argentina enacted new employment laws that partially offset labor market policies from the
1990’s. These laws included an strengthening of employment protection through higher costs of layoffs and severance
pay. According to the rigidity of employment index from the World Bank, in 2005 Argentina had stricter laws
regulating the flexibility of hours, hiring, and firing than 74%, 67% and 67% of the 153 countries for which the index
is available. Overall, the summary index of rigidity of employment placed Argentina in the top third of countries
with more heavily regulated labor markets in the world.
39
One difference between the two 5-year periods is the somewhat lower average share of job-to-job hires in total
hires among exporters from 1998-2002. This feature is consistent with evidence on the fall in job-to-job hiring by
larger firms during the recessions; e.g., see Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2016).

23

rates {µ, γ}, flow income to unemployed workers z, worker bargaining power β, convexity in the
search effort ζ, the shape of the productivity distribution η, the fraction of never-exporters, the
elasticity of the matching function θ, entry and export costs n
{fD , fXo}, foreign market size A, and
eu , λ
ee .
efficiency of matching from unemployment and employment, λ
n
o
eu , λ
ee only through
The cross-sectional predictions depend on the matching efficiencies λ
{λe , λu }, and on the exogenous market capacity A only through the exporter revenue premium
Γ. In the calibration I treat λe , λu and n
Γ as parameters.
Having calibrated their equilibrium
o
e
e
values, I then back out the fundamentals λu , λe , A . In the counterfactuals these fundamental
parameters are kept constant, while {λe , λu , Γ} are allowed to change.

5.3

Parameters Set Without Solving the Model

Table 1 lists 10 parameters set without solving the model. The first 5 rows list parameters
whose values are set following the literature, and the last 5 rows list parameters that are set to
match empirical counterparts from my data.
Within the first group, the elasticity of the matching function is set to θ = 1.83 following Cosar
et al. (2016), and the elasticity of demand σ is set equal to 2.98 following Eaton et al. (2011). I
assume that the adjustment cost is quadratic, ζ = 2.40 In robustness checks, I verify the sensitivity
of the results with respect to these parameters.
I allow for different values of worker bargaining power β. Within French manufacturing, Cahuc
et al. (2006) estimate values of β between 0 and 0.35, whereas within Colombian manufacturing
Cosar et al. (2016) estimate β = 0.44. Therefore I undertake the benchmark analysis for β =
{0, 0.44}, which spans the estimates in these two papers.
There is no direct empirical counterpart to the flow value of unemployment z, as it includes
both transfers to the unemployed and unobserved non-monetary components. I choose z such that,
in the calibrated model,

z
y

matches the estimate of Cosar et al. (2016); in my case this implies

z = 0.3y.41 I undertake robustness checks with respect to the value of this coefficient.
Within the group of parameters matching empirical counterparts, µ = 0.075 fits the density of the firm age distribution; γ = 0.15 matches the probability in the data that workers
employed in non-exiting firms move into the unemployment pool; and ρ matches the reference
average monthly rate on deposits in domestic currency from the Argentine Central Bank. From
(1), λu =

1−u
u

(µ + γ), where the unemployment rate u equals 10% on average as reported by the

Argentine institute of statistics.
The remaining parameter matching a moment from the data is the exporter revenue premium,
40

Cooper et al. (2007) assume either quadratic or linear costs of posting vacancies in an estimation of a labor
search model to match employment changes at the establishment level in U.S. data. Since my revenue function has
constant returns to scale, I need curvature in the cost of searching to bound firm size. If the cost function included
a scale parameter such that the cost of exerting search effort s was ζ0 sζ , the constant ζ0 would not be separately
identified from the domestic entry cost fD ; therefore, I normalize ζ0 = 1.
41
These authors measure z to be 40% of the labor income in the service sector in Colombia. According to data
from the Argentine Ministry of Labor, income per worker in the service sector in Argentina is 75% of manufacturing.
Hence, z = 0.4 ∗ 0.75 ∗ y in my model.

24

Parameter
Elasticity of substitution
Elasticity of the matching function
Convexity in hiring cost
Worker bargaining power
Income flow of the unemployed
Firm exit rate
Job separation rate
Time discount
Contact rate from unemployment
Exporter Revenue Premium

Notation

Value

Source/Target

σ
θ
ζ
β

2.98
1.83
2
∈ {0, 0.44}
0.3
0.075
0.15
0.0058
2.025
1.12

Eaton et al. (2011)
Cosar et al. (2016)
Quadratic Adjustment
See text
Cosar et al. (2016)
Firm age distribution
Probability of E-U transition
Interest Rate
Unemployment rate
Export share of exporters

z
y

µ
γ
ρ
λu
Γ

Table 1: Parameters Set Without Solving the Model
Γ. As implied by (38) in Appendix A.1, the CES structure I have imposed yields an export share
of revenues within any exporting firm equal to 1 − Γ−σ . I choose Γ such that the model matches
the average export revenue share of 28% across manufacturing firms that I computed from the
World Bank’s 2007 Enterprise Survey for Argentina. Given the value assumed for σ, this implies
Γ = (1 − 0.28)−1/σ = 1.12. This calibrated value is close to Cosar et al. (2016), who estimate an
exporter revenue premium of 1.09 in Colombian data using firm-level revenue data and a controlfunction approach.42

5.4

Parameters Set Solving the Model

The remaining 5 parameters, listed in Table 2, are chosen to minimize the sum of square residuals
between the model prediction and the empirical values of 6 targets: 2 statistics that reflect export
participation and relative size of exporters (share of exporting firms and share of employment in
exporting firms), 3 from the firm-size distribution (average firm size, share of firms with 14 workers
or less, and share of firms with more than 14 workers and less then 99), and the simple average
across firms of the share of job-to-job transitions in the total number of hires.
To gain some intuition for how the parameters are determined, it is possible to see that some
parameters have a more direct impact on specific moments. The export cost relative to the domestic
cost fX /fD and the fraction of never exporters affect the share of exporters and their relative
size, whereas a common increase in both fD and fX raises average firm size through the freeentry condition without impacting export participation. Naturally, the shape of the productivity
distribution η has a direct impact on dispersion in firm sizes. The share of job-to-job transitions
in new hires is key to determining the job-finding rate of employed workers, λe .
Table 2 shows the 5 calibrated parameters for each value of β. To facilitate the interpretation,
42
In their notation, the term defined here as Γ is exp (dF ) and their Table 1 reports dF = 0.09. An alternative
approach would be to recover Γ from a regression of unit values on an export dummy; specifically, the model implies
that the price at which an exporter sells domestically relative to the price at which a non-exporter sells domestically
is exactly Γ. Through this lens, in the Colombian data, the exporter dummy in Table 2 of Kugler and Verhoogen
(2012) would imply a revenue premium of 1.1 that is also close to my calibration.

25

Parameter

Notation

Domestic Cost (relative to pc. income)
Export Cost (relative to pc. income)
Relative Contact Rate from Employment
Fraction of Never Exporters
Coeff. of variation of productivity distribution

fD
(1−u)y
fX
(1−u)y
λe
λu

-

Calibrated Value
β=0
β = 0.44
7.28
5.04
0.16
0.15
0.35

4.81
1.83
0.11
0.00
0.60

Table 2: Calibrated Parameters
I report the costs fD and fX relative to income per capita. From 2003-2007, income per worker
in Argentina was on average $8,542 constant 2010 US dollars.43 Hence, the calibration implies,
approximately, flow-values for the domestic entry costs of between $41,000 and $62,000 and export
fixed costs of between $16,000 and $43,000, depending on worker bargaining power. Higher worker
bargaining power leads to lower profit margins, implying smaller calibrated fixed costs in order to
match the observed average firm size. The order of magnitude of these costs is similar to results
from structural estimations based on firm-level data in other Latin-American countries, such as
Cosar et al. (2016) for Colombia and Dickstein and Morales (2018) for Chile, with the export costs
closer to the lower bound of these estimates.44
Importantly, the calibration yields a reasonable job-finding rate of employed workers. Relative
to the job-finding rate of unemployed workers, it implies λe /λu between 11% and 16%. This ratio
is comparable to results from structural estimations that use micro data such as Bontemps et al.
(2000) and Jolivet et al. (2006). The latter estimate values of λe /λu between 6% and 19% across
a group of OECD countries.
The last two rows report the fraction of firms that are never exporters and the coefficient of
variation of the bounded-Pareto distribution implied by the calibrated η. The ex-ante dispersion
in productivities implied by the calibration is larger under β = 0.44, in which case the calibrated
parameter η = 2.06 implies a coefficient of variation of the productivity distribution equal to 0.6,
with productivity range [ψmin , ψmax ] = [0.57, 5.13]. The fraction of never exporters is relatively
small, equal to 15% when β = 0 and close to zero for positive β.
Table 3 shows the empirical value and the model prediction for the 6 targeted moments and
for additional statistics that are not targeted by the calibration but relate closely to the variables
from the theory. The targeted moments, marked with a

43

 in the table, are well approximated.

Average income per capita is computed from data.worldbank.org. Normalizing relative to income per worker in
manufacturing rather than income per capita in the economy would yield similar results.
44
These structural estimations fit a broad set of moments from micro data, and they include additional forces
such as high-frequency productivity shocks and uncertainty that are not present in my analysis. Cosar et al. (2016)
find domestic fixed cost of $27,000, entry costs of $54,000, and export fixed costs of $390,000 for Colombia, whereas
Dickstein and Morales (2016) estimates export fixed costs in Chile of between $60,000 and $100,000.

26

5.5

Statistics not Targeted by the Calibration

I discuss the implications for key outcomes discussed in the theory, export entry times and firm
growth. I do not observe these outcomes in the data, but they underlie the computation of the
observed non-targeted statistics I discuss below. Panel (a) of Figure A.3 in the Online Appendix
shows the time of export entry over the firm productivity distribution. I report figures corresponding
to the calibrated model with β = 0 in Table 2, but results are similar in the calibration with β =
0.44. Among potential exporters, only firms above a threshold of productivity eventually export.
The highest-productivity firm invests quickly, whereas lower-productivity firms take considerably
longer; e.g., firms in the 90th percentile of the productivity distribution take almost 4 years to
start exporting, whereas the average-productivity firm never reaches the size at which exporting is
profitable. These export entry times have a correlate in the fraction of exporters within productivity
type shown in Panel (b). Consistent with well-known empirical evidence (Eaton et al., 2011),
exporters and non-exporters coexist over the productivity distribution.
Panel (c) shows growth for different firms within a cohort. Each dashed-dotted line corresponds
to a productivity level ψ. The figure includes both potential and never exporters. The red segments
correspond to productivity-export cost-age combinations that currently export, whereas the black
ones are non-exporters. As firms age, higher-productivity firms grow faster both because of higher
search effort s and higher job-to-job hiring. As a result, consistent with evidence in Arkolakis
(2016) and others, dispersion in firm sizes grows within a cohort over time. Panel (d) shows the
average firm size by export status for potential and never exporters. Being able to export leads to
a size premium for identical firms.
I do not observe the firm-level outcomes in Figure A.3, but I can verify the predictions for
statistics that aggregate these outcomes. These statistics are reported in Table 3. As noted, the
model matches the export revenue share within exporting firms observed in the World Bank’s
Enterprise Survey. Economy-wide, it leads to a somewhat larger export revenue share (22.4% in
the model versus 15.6% in that survey).45 It also does a reasonable job in terms of the fraction
of firms in different bins of firm size. For non-exporters, the model predicts an average fraction of
job-to-job hiring and an average age that are close to the data, although in the model exporters
are somewhat younger and hire too often from other jobs relative to the data.
The last two sets of statistics assess the model implications for job duration and wages. To
compute wages, I follow Cahuc et al. (2006) and assume that firms offer flat-wage contracts. Unlike
in Cahuc et al. (2006), the model does not yield closed form expressions for the wage or job duration
distributions due to the dynamic component and the multi-dimensional state of the value function
(age, productivity, and fixed cost). Therefore, I obtain the distributions of wages and of job duration
by simulating labor trajectories in the calibrated model.46
45
The World Bank Survey is focused on a subset of manufacturing sectors. From 2003-2007, the average export
share of GDP in the Argentine economy was 22%, according to data.worldbank.org.
46
I compute the transition function χ (a0 , ε0 , a1 , ε1 ) ∈ {0, 1} indicating whether the value of a job is larger in
firm ε1 at age a1 than in firm (ε0 , a0 ), and the wage function w (a0 , ε0 , a1 , ε1 ) for workers employed in (ε1 , a1 ) whose
next-best alternative in the last wage renegotiation was (ε0 , a0 ), for all combinations of (ε0 , a0 ) and (ε1 , a1 ), as well

27

Data

Model Prediction
β=0
β = 0.44

10.9%
52.8%
15.6%

10.5%
57.2%
20.7%

10.9%
51.2%
22.4%

21.7
75.5%
21.0%
2.0%
0.9%

21.8
73.8%
21.9%
2.7%
1.3%

19.5
72.6%
24.5%
2.1%
0.8%

17.3%
15.7%
30.3%

17.6%
14.5%
45.0%

16.7%
13.9%
40.1%

Average Firm Age (years)
Non-exporters
Exporters

11.7
20.8

13.0
16.4

13.0
15.9

Unemployment and Employment Spells (months)
Average duration of employment spells
Average duration of unemployment spells

40.7
14.4

33.7
5.9

36.7
5.9

Wages
Gini coefficient
Export wage premium*
Slope of log firm wage on log firm size**

0.44
1.71
0.18

0.43
1.54
0.11

0.41
3.21
0.51

Statistic

Target

Aggregate Export Shares
Fraction of exporting firms
Employment share of exporters
Revenue share of exports




Firm Size Distribution
Average Firm Size
Share of firms with 0-14 workers
Share of firms with 15-99 workers
Share of firms 100-199 workers
Share of firms 200-399 workers





Job-to-job Hiring
Average share of job-to-job hires, all firms
Average share of job-to-job hires, non-exporters
Average share of job-to-job hires, exporters



Table 3: Model Implications for Targeted and Non-Targeted Statistics
Note: The table shows statistics that are targeted () and not targeted by the calibration.
*: Average wage in exporters over average wage in importers. In the model, this corresponds to
Eε,a [w̄ (ε; a) |a ≥ h (ε)] /Eε,a [w̄ (ε; a) |a < h (ε)], where w̄ (ε; a) is the average wage in a type-ε firm at age a.
**: β from log (wageq ) = α + β log (sizeq ) where wageq and sizeq are average firm wage and average firm
size of quantile q of the firm-size distribution, respectively.

The model yields a reasonable prediction for average job duration, 34-37 months versus 41
as the wage function wU (a1 , ε1 ) for workers hired directly from unemployment. Constructing the wage function
requires first constructing the worker value function W (w, a, ε) for being employed in firm (a, ε) at wage w defined
in (43), and then implicitly finding w (a0 , ε0 , a1 , ε1 ) and wU (a1 , ε1 ) as the solutions to W (w (a0 , ε0 , a1 , ε1 ) , a1 , ε1 ) =
(1 − β) V (a0 , ε0 ) + βV (a1 , ε1 ) for all χ (a0 , ε0 , a1 , ε1 ) = 1 and W (wU (a1 , ε1 ) , a1 , ε1 ) = (1 − β) U + βV (a1 , ε1 ),
respectively. The wage, value and duration distributions are then computed by simulating five-hundred thousand
employment spells, each potentially spanning multiple jobs, using these transition rules and wage and value functions,
the equilibrium contact rates (λu , λe ), and the job termination probability δ.

28

months in the data.47 In the model, jobs are terminated either exogenously at rate δ or endogenously
due to job-to-job transitions. Without job-to-job transitions, the average job duration would be
1/δ = 53 months. The lower average job duration implied by the calibrated model is closer to the
data, reflecting endogenous job termination due to job-to-job mobility. In turn, the duration of
unemployment spells is 1/λu . Since λu was chosen to exactly match the steady-state unemployment
rate, the model yields unemployment spells of about 6 months, which are shorter than in the data.
In terms of the wage distribution, the model yields a Gini coefficient of around 0.4. Inequality
is considerable due to a large mass of low-wage workers entering directly from unemployment and
to the backloading of wages inherent to the job-ladder model.48 Similarly to Helpman et al. (2012)
and Cosar (2010), among others, an exporter wage premium arises because of rent sharing, selection
of high-productivity firms into exporting, and the fact that exporting increases revenue per unit
sold. Thanks to the linearity of the revenue function, the model also yields a positive relationship
between wages and average size.49 In the absence of worker bargaining power, the model underpredicts the exporter wage premium and the elasticity of wages to firm size, whereas with high
worker bargaining power it over-predicts both measures.
I now discuss some of the implications for wage dynamics. Panel (a) of Figure A.4 in the Online
Appendix shows the relationship between the individual wage and months spent in employment over
simulated labor trajectories. The dashed red line limits the model-generated data to trajectories
spent in potential exporters (with finite export costs) and the solid blue line limits the data to
trajectories spent entirely in never exporters (with infinite export costs). Panel (b) restricts the
model-generated data to “lucky” trajectories, corresponding to spells entirely spent in the top 1% of
the productivity distribution. Wages increase over a spell thanks to on-the-job renegotiations upon
a contact. The relationship is steeper for workers employed in potential exporters, and even more so
in high-productivity ones. Hence, the model suggests a potential explanation for fast wage growth
within exporters which is complementary to explanations based on human capital accumulation.50
Panels (c) and (d) plot the worker value instead. Like wages, values increase during the duration
of a match. The increase in value over time is not as steep as the increase in wages, reflecting the
47

The average duration of employment and unemployment spells as well as the wage distribution statistics reported
in Table 3 were computed by the Argentine Ministry of Labor using the same micro data from which the summary
statistics that I use were extracted.
48
Excluding workers whose wage was determined after being hired from unemployment, the Gini falls to 0.28.
Hornstein et al. (2011) discuss the limitations of models with frictional labor markets to generate sizable wage
inequality across ex-ante homogeneous workers, and suggests that job-ladder models in the spirit of Dey and Flinn
(2005) and Cahuc et al. (2006) may lead to plausible wage dispersion. Papp (2013) demonstrates that calibrated
versions of these models generate empirically plausible wage dispersion.
49
Under decreasing returns to scale in production and convex search costs, a positive correlation between wages
and firm sizes is not guaranteed. See Kaas and Kircher (2015) for a discussion of conditions leading to positive
wage-size relationship in a frictional labor market with these characteristics.
50
Dix-Carneiro (2014) estimates the impact of trade liberalization on wages taking into account human capital
accumulation in export-oriented and import-competing sectors in Brazil, whereas Molina and Muendler (2013) document selection of high-human capital workers, with past experience in exporting firms, into potential exporters.
Quantifying the magnitude of this effect is outside the scope of this paper, as doing so would require a different
data and incorporating human capital accumulation in my model. Due to the lack of human capital accumulation,
some of the model’s implications do not fit empirical patterns; e.g., worker’s wages here are fully reset upon fall into
unemployment regardless of experience.

29

value option of future wage increases upon labor market entry.
To conclude this discussion, Figure A.5 in the Online Appendix contrasts additional modelimplied outcomes against the data. Panel (a) shows the firm-size distribution implied by the model
under each assumed value of β (the broken red lines) as well as the empirical one (the black solid
line). The model provides a good fit, although it does not predict as many extremely large firms
as in the data. Although firm-level growth leads to dispersion in firm sizes, including ex-ante firm
heterogeneity is key to obtain sufficient dispersion in sizes. Panel (b) shows the growth of export
participation over a representative cohort’s age. The model captures well the slope for relatively
younger firms, although it predicts that export participation plateaus at around 15% after a few
decades. Panels (c) and (d) show the pattern of employment growth by age for all firms and for
current exporters in the model and in the data. These outcomes correspond to averaging the firmlevel trajectories from panel (c) of the online appendix Figure A.3. For all firms, the model captures
the average growth taking place until around age 30, whereas for exporters it does so until about
age 40. Firms grow relatively faster in the model than in the data when they are young, and then
slow down. The limitation of the model to predict long-run growth within a cohort should not be
surprising, as it lacks other sources of firm growth such as knowledge or capital accumulation.

6

Counterfactuals

6.1

Impact of Labor Market Frictions

The main goal of the counterfactuals is to obtain the elasticity of income per employed worker
y to labor market rigidities. For that, I simulate reductions in frictions from unemployment only,
from employment only, and from both. In the model, this corresponds to increasing the efficiency
in the matching functions (only λ˜u , only λ˜e , or both).
Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 1 show the change in income per employed worker when these
parameters are increased from their calibrated values to 50% above these values starting from the
benchmark calibration with β = 0 (left panel) and β = 0.44 (right panel). Income per employed
worker increases due to lower frictions from both unemployment and employment. The increase
is faster when frictions from employment are reduced. The combined effect of the two frictions
is slightly more than additive, suggesting a small complementarity from reducing both frictions
simultaneously.
Table 4 reports the average elasticity of y with respect to frictions across the range of counterfactuals reported in panels (a) and (b) of Figure 1. The elasticity of income per employed worker
with respect to the efficiency of job-to-job matching is about 7 times higher than with respect to
matching from unemployment.

30

Reduction in Frictions

β=0

β = 0.44

From Unemployment Only (λ˜u )
Job-to-job Only (λ˜e )
Both

0.019
0.131
0.156

0.021
0.145
0.173

Table 4: Elasticity of Income Per Employed Worker (y) with respect to Frictions
Note: This table reports the average elasticity of y with respect to λ˜e , λ˜u , and a shift in both across the range of
counterfactuals displayed in panels (a) and (b) of Figure 1.

To better grasp these magnitudes and to relate the counterfactuals to cross-country differences,
we can inspect labor-market outcomes commonly associated with the rigidity of labor market institutions, such as unemployment or job finding rates. Consider first a 50% increase in the matching
efficiency from unemployment. Panels (c)-(d) imply that, according to the model, labor market
policies that would reduce the unemployment rate in Argentina by 3.2 percentage points, would
also raise income per employed worker by about 1%. Cross-country differences in unemployment
are often within the 3%-10% range, but only a fraction of these differences may be attributed to
differences in labor market policies (Nickell, 1997).
In the same spirit, consider a 50% increase in the matching efficiency from employment. Panels
(e)-(f) imply that, according to the model, labor market policies that would raise the average
fraction of job-to-job hires by between 2 and 3 percentage points, would raise income per employed
worker by about 7%. By comparison, in the U.S. the fraction of all new hires entering firms directly
from other jobs near the period of my study is 12 percentage points larger than in Argentina.51
In terms of job-finding probabilities, this counterfactual corresponds to moving from the average
value of

λe
λu

estimated across 11 countries in Jolivet et al. (2006) to close to the maximum estimate

across the 11 countries in their sample.
Panels (c)-(d) imply that the unemployment rate increases under lower frictions in job-to-job
mobility, an implication of employed workers crowding out unemployed workers in the matching
function as matching from employment becomes more efficient. However, as implied by panels
(g) and (h), the income per capita gains from higher λe are only partially offset by the higher
unemployment rate.
Next, I inspect the implications for firm growth and for the timing of export entry. Consider
the 50% reduction in frictions from employment only or from unemployment only. Panels (a)
and (b) of Figure 2 show firm size by age for seven potential exporters uniformly distributed over
the productivity distribution, ranging from the lowest productivity firm (the lightest-blue lines)
to the highest-productivity firm (the darkest-red line). Solid lines correspond to the benchmark
calibration, and dashed lines correspond to lower frictions from employment only (panel (a)) or
from unemployment only (panel (b)). Panel (c) shows the percentage change in average firm size
51
The rate of new hires entering firms directly from other jobs in the U.S. since 1994 is 36% (Fallick and Fleischman, 2004). In the U.S. I do not observe the simple average of the fraction of new hires across firms. Instead, this fraction is the average ratio between aggregate employment-to-employment flows and the sum of aggregate unemployment-to-employment and non-employment-to-employment flows in the U.S. using data from from
http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/researchdata/feds200434.html.

31

Figure 1: Impact of Lowering Frictions
(a) Income Per Employed Worker (β = 0)

(b) Income Per Employed Worker (β = 0.44)

(c) Unemployment Rate (β = 0)

(d) Unemployment Rate (β = 0.44)

(e) Share of Job-to-job hires (β = 0)

(f) Share of Job-to-job hires (β = 0.44)

(g) Income Per Capita (β = 0)

(h) Income Per Capita (β = 0.44)

Note: the figures show interpolated values using the counterfactual results over an equally spaced grid with 10 values
32
of the matching rates.

across the full productivity distribution when each type of frictions is reduced, and panel (d) shows
the percentage change in the entry time into exporting.
Figure 2: Impact of 50% Reduction in Frictions on Firm Growth and Timing of Entry
(a) Firm Size by Age (Only E-E)

(b) Firm Size by Age (Only U-E)

(c) % Change in Firm Size

(d) % Change in Age of Export Entry

Note: the figures show the changes in outcomes under a 50% increase in matching efficiency from employment only
(E-E), or unemployment only (U-E) relative to the baseline calibration with β = 0.

Under easier job-to-job hiring, more productive firms grow faster and start to export earlier,
while less productive firms grow more slowly and delay export entry.52 As a result, labor shares
52

Appendix C shows a negative correlation between the export share of exporting firms and country-level employment rigidity using the World Bank Enterprise Survey and the World Bank Doing Business index of labor market
rigidity, controlling for industry, time, and country fixed effects. The interaction term between rigidity and firm size
is negative, suggesting that the positive relationship between flexibility and exports is weaker among small exporters.

33

are reallocated to high-productivity firms. In contrast, under lower frictions in transitions out of
unemployment, firm growth and average firm size slightly fall, while the timing of export entry
slows down across the productivity distribution. Therefore, frictions in job-to-job mobility are a
quantitatively relevant driver of firm growth and the timing of investment. In addition, the fact
that neither reallocation to the most productive firms nor faster export entry take place under
lower frictions from unemployment implies that the gains in income per employed worker in that
case result from the standard demand externality discussed in Section 3.7.
To see why there is a slow down in the timing of export entry under lower frictions from
unemployment, Panels (a) and (b) in Figure A.6 in the Online Appendix show that the export
revenue premium Γ falls in response to lower frictions. As we have discussed, this follows from the
definition of Γ in (6). This force dominates the impact on the timing of export entry across the
entire firm-productivity distribution in the case of lower frictions from unemployment. As shown
in panels (c) and (d) of Figure A.6, under higher λ˜e the faster growth and export entry of highproductivity firms leads to an increase in the exporter employment share, whereas under higher λ˜u
the exporter employment share falls. Finally, panels (e) and (f) show that the fraction of exporting
firms falls with reductions in frictions. In the case of higher λ˜e , this simply results from the fact
that, on average, there are fewer high-productivity firms speeding up investment than there are
low-productivity firms slowing it down.

6.2

Implications for Country Income Differences

It is possible to give some approximate sense of how labor market reforms would map to changes
in income per worker through the forces included in the analysis. While admittedly “back-of-the
envelope” and relying on strong assumptions, the calculations in this section help to give a sense
of the importance of the mechanisms in my model for cross-country income differences.
First, a simple calculation can be done to translate the counterfactual changes in contact rates
into counterfactual changes in labor market institutions. The bottom right panel of Figure A.1 in
the Online Appendix plots estimates of λu and λe from Jolivet et al. (2006) against the rigidity of
employment index from the Doing Business report by the World Bank.53 Within the years of my
data, a labor market reform equivalent to a one standard deviation decline of the rigidity index
distribution across countries would have pushed Argentina from the position 58 to the position 111
of the rigidity ranking (out of 153 countries), or a 41% reduction in the rigidity index.54 Using
53

The index, first introduced by Botero et al. (2004), assigns a number from 0 to 100 to policies that regulate
the rigidity of hiring, firing, and hours and then averages these values. The top panels of the figure show contact
rates estimated by Hobijn and Şahin (2009) and Ridder and van den Berg (2003), and the bottom left panel shows
the estimates of Jolivet et al. (2006) against an alternative rigidity measure, the employment protection legislation
(EPL) index by the OECD. The elasticities of contact rates with respect to the World Bank and OECD employment
protection indexes are different due to the different policies captured by each index and the set of countries included.
Argentina does not appear in these figures because none of these papers include it in the computation of the contact
rates. The analysis in this section uses the World Bank index because the EPL from OECD is not available for
Argentina.
54
Given how the index is constructed, this decline in rigidity would be equivalent to the following policy package:
an increase in the maximum duration of fixed term contracts from 3 years to 5 years or more; a 20% reduction in the

34

the elasticities of λu and λe with respect to rigidity in the bottom right panel of Figure A.1 in the
Online Appendix, and under the (strong) assumption that labor market rigidities are uncorrelated
with other drivers of contact rates, this fall in rigidity would be equivalent to a 25% increase in λu
and a 30% increase in λe .55
Simulating these simultaneous changes in matching efficiencies yields a 5.8% increase in income
per worker; however, the increase is only 0.9% if only λu is increased by 25%, and 4.7% if only λe is
increased by 30%. Hence, about 80% of the real income gains from relaxing all frictions materialize
through relaxing job-to-job transitions. This labor-market reform also implies a 9% increase in
exports, and a 7% increase if only frictions in job-to-job transitions are relaxed.56 In addition, it
leads to a shift in the firm-size distribution, raising by 17% the fraction of very large firms (with at
least 400 workers). As pointed out by Hsieh and Klenow (2014) and Bento and Restuccia (2018),
higher-income countries are characterized by a higher prevalence of relatively larger firms.
Next, we can also ask how far labor market institutions may go, through the specific channels
in the model, in generating differences in income across countries. The previous calculations yield
an elasticity of income per worker to the rigidity index of 5.8%/40% = 0.145. Assuming that this
elasticity would apply to other countries besides Argentina, a simple developing accounting exercise
in the spirit of Caselli (2005) would suggest that, through the forces in the model, differences in
labor market rigidity may generate a standard deviation in log income per worker across countries
equivalent to 5.2% of what is observed.57
A final simple calculation can be done to gauge how much of the observed relationship between
labor market frictions and income may be captured by the model. As shown in Figure A.2 in the
Online Appendix, in 2005 the unconditional elasticity of real income per worker to the rigidity of
employment index across countries was −0.736 (standard error of 0.197). Of course, this correlation
may be driven by many spurious forces and reverse causality. Under the strong assumption that
other determinants of income are uncorrelated with labor rigidities, the forces in the model can be
said to generate about 0.145/0.736 ≈ 1/5 of this unconditional correlation.

ratio of minimum wage to the average value added per worker; a 10% increase in the length of the workweek from 5
days to 5.5 or more; a 50% increase in the length of the workday (going from 8 to 12 hours); and a 25% reduction in
the cost of dismissal induced by redundancy as fair ground for dismissal.
55
Specifically, a one standard deviation change in the index implies a 41% reduction in the rigidity index for
Argentina, and the estimates from Jolivet et al. (2006) imply an elasticity of the contact rates with respect to
the rigidity index of 0.60 for λu and 0.74 for λe . I use the indexes from Jolivet et al. (2006) because they have
the advantage of being simultaneously available for contact rates on the job and from unemployment. Using these
estimates yields the most conservative magnitudes for the shock, as using the estimates from Hobijn and Şahin (2009)
would imply a 70% increase in λu , and using the estimates from Ridder and van den Berg (2003) would imply a 110%
increase in λe . However, the latter would only be based on a cross-section of only 5 countries.
56
Using a panel of countries in Appendix Section C, the elasticity of real exports to the rigidity index after
controlling for country and time fixed effects is 4.2%.
57
In 2005, the standard deviation of log real income per capita yi from the World Development Indicators was
sd (ln yi ) = 1.53, while the standard deviation implied by our calculations is sd(0.145*ln REi ) = 0.08, where REi
stands for the employment rigidity index.

35

6.3

Robustness

Columns (1) to (6) of Table A.1 in the Online Appendix report additional calibrations used for
robustness checks. I re-calibrate the model under alternative values of the parameters σ, ζ, and z
which in the benchmark calibration were set to existing values from the literature. I allow for for
σ = {4.5, 6.7}, corresponding to the average estimate of the elasticity of substitution in the gravity
literature reported by Head et al. (2013) and to the estimate in Cosar (2010), respectively. I also
allow for ζ = {1.75, 1.5}, broadly accounting for the fact that my model does not include scale
effects like other parametrizations of recruitment costs such as Merz and Yashiv (2007), which tend
to reduce the marginal cost of posting vacancies for larger firms.
I also perform two alternative calibrations with different income flows in unemployment, z.
First, I assume that z only includes observable monetary transfers to the unemployed, and set z to
match the share of unemployment benefits in GDP of 0.56% according to data from the Argentine
Ministry of Labor, leading to a flow value of unemployment relative to income per employee of
z
y

= 5%.58 Second, I set z such that

z
y

= 0.7, which corresponds to the mid-range of values

estimated by Karabarbounis et al. (2015) accounting both for unemployment transfers and the
value of home production or leisure.
Table A.2 in the Online Appendix reports, for the benchmark as well as each of these parametrizations, the change in income per employed worker, unemployment rate and rate of job-to-job hiring
corresponding to a 25% increase in the matching efficiencies from unemployment only, job to job, or
both. This shock lies at the middle range of the counterfactuals reported in Figure 1. In addition, I
also undertake the counterfactuals assuming that

z
y

is fixed at its calibrated value, instead of fixing

z as in all the other counterfactuals, and imposing a Cobb-Douglas matching function with equal
weights on firms and workers instead of the CES matching function in (27).
The result from the benchmark calibration goes through in all of these cases. The magnitude of
the gains in income per worker is stable across specifications. Reductions in both types of frictions
increase income per employed worker, but the effect is stronger for frictions in matching from
employment.

6.4

Multiple Investments

I extend the model to allow for multiple export destinations. I assume that firms may access a
sequence of export markets j = 1, .., K. Analyzing this extension is feasible under the assumption
that λe β = 0 because, in this case, the value of the firm in (10) is independent from the sampling
distribution. The value of a new job held by a firm with productivity ψ and times until entry into

58
This is the average spending in unemployment insurance and re-employment programs as share of GDP over 2003uz
2007. In the model, the share of unemployment transfers in GDP is (1−u)y
, which implies yz = 0.0056 ∗ 1−u
= 5.04%.
u
The analogue coefficient computed by Karabarbounis et al. (2015) for the U.S. is 6%.

36

each market x ≡ {x1 , x2 , .., xK } retains the same structure as (23) in the simplified model:
K

ψy0 + δU X e−(ρ+δ)xk (ψyk − ψyk−1 )
v (x; ψ) =
+
,
ρ+δ
ρ+δ

(28)

k=1

where, from (35), yk =

P

k
j=0 Aj

1/σ

is the revenue per unit sold for a firm that exports to markets

1 to j and Aj is market j’s capacity. As before, the export entry decision can be characterized by
the stock effect. Letting hj be the time elapsed between a firm’s entry to markets j and j + 1,
Appendix A.5 shows that the entry times h1 , h2 , .., hK satisfy
S1 (h1 , h2 , .., hK ) ≤ f1 , = if h1 < ∞
yj − yj−1
Sj (hj , hj+1 , .., hK ) ≤ fj − e−γhj
fj−1 , = if hj < ∞ for j = 2, .., K,
yj−1 − yj−2

(29)
(30)

where fj is the fixed entry cost to market j conditional on having entered the previous markets
and Sj (·) is the stock effect of delaying the entry to market j after having entered the previous
markets, defined in (63). These conditions characterize the timing and ordering of multiple investments. Firms enter faster in market j the lower its cost fj /fj−1 or the higher its revenue gain
(yj − yj−1 ) / (yj−1 − yj−2 ) relative to the previous market.59 The general equilibrium variables
{Pv (v) , Gv (v) , λe , λu , u, {yk }} can be solved following similar steps as in the benchmark model.
I calibrate this extended model to the same targets of the baseline calibration under the assumption that β = 0. The model allows for an arbitrary number of asymmetric markets. Since I do 
not
j
observe exports by destination, I simply assume that foreign markets are symmetric: Aj = K A
 
and fj = Kj fX , so that higher-j markets are larger but also harder to enter. Given K, this model
includes the same number of parameters as the benchmark, and exactly nests it when K = 1. I
set K = 10, and choose the remaining parameters to simultaneously target the same statistics as
in the baseline calibration. Column (7) of Table A.1 in the Online Appendix shows the calibrated
parameters. This parametrized extended model gives an average number of export destinations
across exporters equal to 6.7, whereas in the data the same number is 5.2.
An appealing feature of this extended model is that it yields growth in income per employed
worker throughout the lifetime of firms as firms enter to more export markets. In contrast, in the
baseline model, firms grow in revenue per worker only once at the moment of export entry. This
property is illustrated in Figure A.7 in the Online Appendix, which shows the increase in revenue
per worker for 25 firms with different productivity evenly split over the productivity distribution.
Higher productivity firms enter to more markets, and more rapidly so. Hence, by adding more
59

This structure also allows for a simple numerical solution algorithm for the partial-equilibrium problem. Because
the first-order condition to enter market j only depends on the times hj , .., hK , these conditions define a triangular
system which can be solved starting with the solution for hK and iterating backwards. This solution also gives a
necessary condition such that the ordering 1, .., K is chosen: because an interior solution requires a positive stock
effect Sj at hj = 0, the sequence 1, ..., K cannot be an outcome if fj /fj−1 < (yj − yj−1 ) / (yj−1 − yj−2 ) for some j.
If that were the case, market j would be more attractive than market j − 1 and the firm would revert their ordering.

37

markets, revenue per worker can grow more frequently for extended periods of time over the firm
life cycle for some firms.
Reduction in Frictions

Impact on
Income per Employee Export Destinations

0.2%
3.6%

From Unemployment Only (λu )
Job-to-job Only (λe )

0.9%
2.9%

Table 5: Impact of a 25% reduction in Frictions, Multiple Investments
Table 5 shows the impact of a 25% increase in the matching efficiencies from employment and
unemployment on income per employed worker y and on the average number of export destinations
across exporters. This impact is similar to the benchmark case with a single export destination.
Hence, this extra margin of adjustment does not change the elasticity of income with respect to
frictions. The average number of export destinations among exporters grows by a similar order of
magnitude as the increase in income per employed worker.

6.5

Labor Market Frictions and Gains from Trade Liberalization

To conclude, I examine the interaction between trade and labor market frictions. Specifically,
I ask if frictions in job-to-job mobility matter for the model-implied effects of lower trade costs. I
simulate increases in the market capacity A, both in the benchmark calibration and in a restricted
calibration assuming λe = 0 and dropping the average share of job-to-job hires as a target. The
parameters resulting from this restricted calibration are reported in column (8) of Table A.1 in the
Online Appendix.
Figure 3 shows the impact on income per employed worker resulting from increasing A from
its calibrated value to 50% above that value, in both the benchmark calibration (dashed red line)
and in the calibration assuming away job-to-job transitions (dotted blue line). Since trade costs
enter in the definition of A (see (6) and Footnote 19), these counterfactuals are equivalent to
trade liberalizations of varying magnitudes. In both cases, there is an increase in real income per
employed worker, but the elasticity of income with respect to trade costs is larger in the benchmark
calibration. Excluding job-to-job transitions from the calibration leads to an under-estimation of
the gains from reducing trade frictions.
The previous result suggests that matching the share of job-to-job transitions matters to predict
the real income gains of a given trade liberalization. It is still worth asking whether the Arkolakis
et al. (2012) formula, according to which the elasticity of trade flows to trade costs and the change in
the domestic expenditure share suffice to measure the gains from changes in trade costs, remains a
good approximation. My model falls outside of the class of models in that paper because it assumes
frictional labor markets, but it also shares the key feature of a constant-elasticity aggregator of
varieties. Section B of the Online Appendix shows that the Arkolakis et al. (2012) formula indeed
remains a very good approximation in data generated by my model. I conclude that accounting for
job-to-job transitions matters for the change in the domestic expenditure share of a given reduction
38

in trade costs, but this change and the trade elasticity provide a very good approximation to the
real income gains when combined with the Arkolakis et al. (2012) formula.
Figure 3: Impact of Increasing Foreign Market Capacity

7

Conclusion
This paper developed a model to study the aggregate effects of labor market frictions in a small

open economy where firms grow slowly and make fixed export investments. The novel feature of the
model is the interaction between firms’ dynamic fixed investments in exporting and search frictions
with job-to-job mobility. Through this channel, the degree of firm heterogeneity in the economy is
partly endogenous and depends on export investments undertaken during the firm’s life cycle.
Using the model I demonstrated the channels through which frictions in hiring from unemployment and from other jobs impact firm growth and the timing of export entry. I calibrated the model
to Argentina’s economy, where I can observe both firm export dynamics and the rates at which
firms with different export statuses hire workers directly from other employers. The calibrated
model replicates various aggregate statistics pertaining to export participation and labor market
outcomes, as well as cross-sectional features of the data such as the firm size distribution.
The theoretical and quantitative results suggest that frictions in job-to-job transitions have a
stronger impact on income per worker, firm investments and growth than frictions in hiring from
unemployment. Through the mechanisms in the model, I find that labor market reforms that
would push Argentina from the top to the bottom third of the distribution labor market rigidities
would lead to a 5% increase in income per worker, of which 80% would be due to lower frictions in
job-to-job mobility. I also find that accounting for barriers to worker mobility across firms matters
to predict the real income effects of a given reduction in trade costs
While I focused the analysis on investments in export capacity, the framework naturally lends
itself to the interaction between labor market frictions and other fixed investments in either closed
or open economy, such as technology choice, foreign direct investment, or number of products. I

39

have also studied the implications of changes in contact rates, but abstracted from including specific
labor market policies or additional forces such as firm-level productivity shocks that may interact
with labor market frictions.

References
Acemoglu, D., P. Antràs, and E. Helpman (2007). Contracts and technology adoption. The American
economic review 97 (3), 916–943.
Acemoglu, D. and R. Shimer (2000). Wage and technology dispersion. The Review of Economic Studies 67 (4),
585–607.
Almeida, R. K. and J. P. Poole (2017). Trade and labor reallocation with heterogeneous enforcement of
labor regulations. Journal of Development Economics 126, 154–166.
Amiti, M. and D. R. Davis (2012). Trade, firms, and wages: Theory and evidence. The Review of economic
studies 79 (1), 1–36.
Arkolakis, C. (2016). A unified theory of firm selection and growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (1), 89–155.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012). New trade models, same old gains?
American Economic Review 102 (1), 94–130.

The

Atkeson, A. and A. Burstein (2010). Innovation, firm dynamics, and international trade. Journal of political
economy 118 (3), 433–484.
Atkin, D., A. K. Khandelwal, and A. Osman (2017). Exporting and firm performance: Evidence from a
randomized experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2), 551–615.
Bagger, J. and R. Lentz (2014). An empirical model of wage dispersion with sorting. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bassanini, A. and A. Garnero (2013). Dismissal protection and worker flows in oecd countries: Evidence
from cross-country/cross-industry data. Labour Economics 21, 25–41.
Benassy, J.-P. (1998). Is there always too little research in endogenous growth with expanding product
variety? European Economic Review 42 (1), 61–69.
Bento, P. and D. Restuccia (2018). On average establishment size across sectors and countries. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007). Firms in international trade. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (3), 105–130.
Bertola, G. and R. J. Caballero (1994). Cross-sectional efficiency and labour hoarding in a matching model
of unemployment. The Review of Economic Studies 61 (3), 435–456.
Blanchard, O. and P. Portugal (2001). What hides behind an unemployment rate: comparing portuguese
and us labor markets. American Economic Review 91 (1), 187–207.
Blanchard, O. J. and N. Kiyotaki (1987). Monopolistic competition and the effects of aggregate demand.
The American Economic Review , 647–666.
Bontemps, C., J.-M. Robin, and G. J. Van den Berg (2000). Equilibrium search with continuous productivity
dispersion: Theory and nonparametric estimation. International Economic Review 41 (2), 305–358.
Botero, J. C., S. Djankov, R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, et al. (2004). The regulation of
labor. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4), 1339–1382.
Burdett, K. and G. Menzio (2017). The (q, s, s) pricing rule. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (2),
892–928.

40

Burdett, K. and D. T. Mortensen (1998). Wage differentials, employer size, and unemployment. International
Economic Review , 257–273.
Burstein, A. and M. J. Melitz (2011). Trade liberalization and firm dynamics. Technical report, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Cahuc, P., F. Postel-Vinay, and J.-M. Robin (2006). Wage bargaining with on-the-job search: Theory and
evidence. Econometrica 74 (2), 323–364.
Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2019). Trade and labor market dynamics: General equilibrium
analysis of the china trade shock. Econometrica 87 (3), 741–835.
Caselli, F. (2005). Accounting for cross-country income differences. Handbook of economic growth 1, 679–741.
Chatterjee, S. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2012). Spinoffs and the market for ideas. International Economic
Review 53 (1), 53–93.
Cooper, R., J. Haltiwanger, and J. L. Willis (2007). Search frictions: Matching aggregate and establishment
observations. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 56–78.
Cosar, A. K., N. Guner, and J. Tybout (2016). Firm dynamics, job turnover, and wage distributions in an
open economy. The American Economic Review 106 (3), 625–663.
Cosar, K. (2010). Adjusting to trade liberalization: Reallocation and labor market policies. University of
Chicago Booth School of Business, unpublished manuscript.
Cuñat, A. and M. J. Melitz (2012). Volatility, labor market flexibility, and the pattern of comparative
advantage. Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (2), 225–254.
Das, S., M. J. Roberts, and J. R. Tybout (2007). Market entry costs, producer heterogeneity, and export
dynamics. Econometrica 75 (3), 837–873.
Davidson, C., S. J. Matusz, and A. Shevchenko (2008). Globalization and firm level adjustment with
imperfect labor markets. Journal of International Economics 75 (2), 295–309.
Davis, S. J., R. J. Faberman, and J. C. Haltiwanger (2013). The establishment-level behavior of vacancies
and hiring. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2), 581–622.
Davis, S. J. and J. Haltiwanger (2014). Labor market fluidity and economic performance. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dey, M. S. and C. J. Flinn (2005). An equilibrium model of health insurance provision and wage determination. Econometrica 73 (2), 571–627.
Dickstein, M. J. and E. Morales (2016). What do exporters know? Technical report.
Dickstein, M. J. and E. Morales (2018). What do exporters know?
nomics 133 (4), 1753–1801.

The Quarterly Journal of Eco-

Dix-Carneiro, R. (2014). Trade liberalization and labor market dynamics. Econometrica 82 (3), 825–885.
Djankov, S. and R. Ramalho (2009). Employment laws in developing countries. Journal of Comparative
Economics 37 (1), 3–13.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2011). An anatomy of international trade: Evidence from french
firms. Econometrica 79 (5), 1453–1498.
Fallick, B. and C. A. Fleischman (2004). Employer-to-employer flows in the us labor market: The complete
picture of gross worker flows.
Feenstra, R. C. (2014). Restoring the product variety and pro-competitive gains from trade with heterogeneous firms and bounded productivity. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Felbermayr, G., J. Prat, and H.-J. Schmerer (2011). Globalization and labor market outcomes: Wage
bargaining, search frictions, and firm heterogeneity. Journal of Economic theory 146 (1), 39–73.

41

Frıas, J. A., D. S. Kaplan, E. Verhoogen, and D. Alfaro-Serrano (2018). Exports and wage premia: Evidence
from mexican employer-employee data.
Garibaldi, P., E. R. Moen, and D. E. Sommervoll (2016). Competitive on-the-job search. Review of Economic
Dynamics 19, 88–107.
Garin, A., F. Silvério, et al. (2019). How responsive are wages to demand within the firm? evidence from
idiosyncratic export demand shocks. Technical report.
Haltiwanger, J., S. Scarpetta, and H. Schweiger (2014). Cross country differences in job reallocation: the
role of industry, firm size and regulations. Labour Economics 26, 11–25.
Head, K., T. Mayer, et al. (2013). Gravity equations: Toolkit, cookbook, workhorse. Handbook of international economics 4, 131–195.
Heckman, J. and C. Pages-Serra (2000). Gross worker flows over the business cycle. Economia 1 (1), 109–154.
Heise, S. and T. Porzio (2019). Workers home bias and spatial wage gaps. Technical report, Working Paper,
UCSD.
Helpman, E. and O. Itskhoki (2010). Labour market rigidities, trade and unemployment. The Review of
Economic Studies 77 (3), 1100–1137.
Helpman, E. and O. Itskhoki (2015). Firms, trade, and labor market dynamics. Manuscript, Princeton
University.
Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, M.-A. Muendler, and S. J. Redding (2012). Trade and inequality: From theory
to estimation. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, and S. Redding (2010). Inequality and unemployment in a global economy.
Econometrica 78 (4), 1239–1283.
Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2008). Estimating trade flows: Trading partners and trading
volumes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 441–487.
Hobijn, B. and A. Şahin (2009). Job-finding and separation rates in the oecd. Economics Letters 104 (3),
107–111.
Hopenhayn, H. and R. Rogerson (1993). Job turnover and policy evaluation: A general equilibrium analysis.
Journal of political Economy, 915–938.
Hornstein, A., P. Krusell, and G. L. Violante (2011). Frictional wage dispersion in search models: A
quantitative assessment. The American Economic Review 101 (7), 2873–2898.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2014). The life cycle of plants in india and mexico. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 129 (3), 1035–1084.
Jolivet, G., F. Postel-Vinay, and J.-M. Robin (2006). The empirical content of the job search model: Labor
mobility and wage distributions in europe and the us. European Economic Review 50 (4), 877–907.
Kaas, L. and P. Kircher (2015). Efficient firm dynamics in a frictional labor market. The American Economic
Review 105 (10), 3030–3060.
Kambourov, G. (2009). Labour market regulations and the sectoral reallocation of workers: The case of
trade reforms. The Review of Economic Studies 76 (4), 1321–1358.
Karabarbounis, L., G. Chodorow-Reich, et al. (2015). The cyclicality of the opportunity cost of employment.
Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Klette, T. J. and S. Kortum (2004). Innovating firms and aggregate innovation. Journal of Political Economy 112 (5).
Krugman, P. (1980). Scale economies, product differentiation, and the pattern of trade. The American
Economic Review 70 (5), 950–959.

42

Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, R. Rogerson, and A. Şahin (2017). Gross worker flows over the business cycle.
American Economic Review 107 (11), 3447–76.
Kugler, A. D. (2007). The effects of employment protection in europe and the us. Opuscle, CREI .
Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen (2012). Prices, plant size, and product quality. The Review of Economic
Studies 79 (1), 307–339.
Lagos, R. (2006). A model of tfp. The Review of Economic Studies 73 (4), 983–1007.
Lentz, R. (2014). Optimal employment contracts with hidden search. Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Lentz, R. and D. T. Mortensen (2012). Labor market friction, firm heterogeneity, and aggregate employment
and productivity. University of Wisconsin Discussion Paper .
Lise, J. and J.-M. Robin (2017). The macrodynamics of sorting between workers and firms. American
Economic Review 107 (4), 1104–35.
Luttmer, E. G. (2010). Models of growth and firm heterogeneity. Annu. Rev. Econ. 2 (1), 547–576.
Manova, K. and Z. Zhang (2012). Export prices across firms and destinations. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 127, 379–436.
Martellini, P. and G. Menzio (2018). Declining search frictions, unemployment and growth. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Matsuyama, K. (1992). A simple model of sectoral adjustment. The Review of Economic Studies 59 (2),
375–387.
McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2009). Openness, technology capital, and development. Journal of
Economic Theory 144 (6), 2454–2476.
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity.
Econometrica 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Merz, M. and E. Yashiv (2007). Labor and the market value of the firm. The American Economic Review 97 (4), 1419–1431.
Molina, D. and M.-A. Muendler (2013). Preparing to export. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Morales, E., G. Sheu, and A. Zahler (2014). Extended gravity. Technical report, mimeo, Princeton University.
Mortensen, D. T. (2000). Equilibrium unemployment with wage posting: Burdett-mortensen meet pissarides.
Contributions to Economic Analysis 243, 281–292.
Moscarini, G. and F. Postel-Vinay (2013). Stochastic search equilibrium. The Review of Economic Studies,
rdt012.
Moscarini, G. and F. Postel-Vinay (2016). Did the job ladder fail after the great recession? Journal of Labor
Economics 34 (S1), S55–S93.
Moscarini, G. and F. Postel-Vinay (2017). The job ladder: Inflation vs. reallocation. Draft, Yale University.
Nickell, S. (1997). Unemployment and labor market rigidities: Europe versus north america. The Journal
of Economic Perspectives 11 (3), 55–74.
Nickell, S. and R. Layard (1999). Labor market institutions and economic performance. Handbook of labor
economics 3, 3029–3084.
Nocke, V. and S. Yeaple (2014). Globalization and multiproduct firms. International Economic Review 55 (4),
993–1018.
OECD (2010). OECD Employment Outlook 2010: Moving Beyond the Jobs Crisis. Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.

43

Papageorgiou, T. (2013). Learning your comparative advantages. The Review of Economic Studies, rdt048.
Papp, T. K. (2013). Frictional wage dispersion with bertrand competition: an assessment. Review of
Economic Dynamics 16 (3), 540–552.
Pissarides, C. A. (1985). Short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment, vacancies, and real wages. The
American Economic Review 75 (4), 676–690.
Pissarides, C. A. (2000). Equilibrium unemployment theory. MIT press.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002). The distribution of earnings in an equilibrium search model with
state-dependent offers and counteroffers. International Economic Review 43 (4), 989–1016.
Redding, S. and A. J. Venables (2004). Economic geography and international inequality. Journal of
international Economics 62 (1), 53–82.
Ridder, G. and G. J. van den Berg (2003). Measuring labor market frictions: a cross-country comparison.
Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (1), 224–244.
Salas, J. (2018). Drivers of spain export performance and the role of the labor market reforms. IMF Working
Paper 18/283.
Schaal, E. (2012). Uncertainty, productivity and unemployment in the great recession. Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, mimeo.
Schaal, E. and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2016). Aggregate demand and the dynamics of unemployment.
Technical report, unpublished manuscript.
Seker, M. (2012). Rigidities in employment protection and exporting. World Development 2 (40), 238–250.
Shimer, R. (2005). The assignment of workers to jobs in an economy with coordination frictions. Journal of
Political Economy 113 (5), 996–1025.
Shimer, R. and L. Smith (2000). Assortative matching and search. Econometrica 68 (2), 343–369.
Wang, F., C. Milner, and J. Scheffel (2018). Labour market reform, firm-level employment adjustment and
trade liberalisation. Technical report.
Zhelobodko, E., S. Kokovin, M. Parenti, and J.-F. Thisse (2012). Monopolistic competition: Beyond the
constant elasticity of substitution. Econometrica 80 (6), 2765–2784.

A
A.1

Additional Expressions and Derivations
Appendix to Section 3.2 (Firm Revenues)

Exporter Revenue Premium I characterize the revenue premium in an environment with K +1 countries indexed
by j = 0, .., K, where j = 0 denotes the home country. This environment can be specialized to the benchmark model
and to the extension with multiple destinations. The derivations in this section follow from CES demand and
monopolistic competition; i.e., they do not rely on either the quality choice discussed in the next section or features
of the labor market environment. In each country j, aggregate output of the final good results from combining
imported varieties i,
!σ/(σ−1)
Z
1/σ
(σ−1)/σ
Yj =
zj (i)
qj (i)
di
,
(31)
i∈Ij

where Ij is the set of varieties from any origin available in country j. Each differentiated variety is produced by a
different firm. zj (i) and qj (i) respectively denote the quality and the quantity at which firm i sells its variety in

44

country j. Using (31), we obtain the inverse demand for each variety. From that inverse demand, the price in country
j of a variety with quality zj (i) = z sold in quantity qj (i) = qj is


1/σ

z
qj

1/σ

Pj Y j

,

(32)

where Pj is the price index in market j. Consider the problem of a firm located in the home country that produces
q units of output with quality z which are then shipped to markets 1 to k ≤ K in addition to the home market. The
decision to export is characterized in the text, and here it is taken as given. Given the set of export destinations
j = 1, 2, .., k, the choice variables for the firm are the fractions skj of total output q allocated to each markets. Because
of iceberg trade costs τj > 1 to market j, only (1/τj ) skj q units are exported to market j, the quantity (1 − 1/τj ) skj q
being used shipping the good. Using (32), gross revenues of a firm selling to k markets are


!1−1/σ
k
k


X
X
skj
1/σ
k
1/σ 1−1/σ
s.t.
sj = 1
(33)
rk (z, q) = max
z q
Pj Y j

τj
{sk }k 
j

= yk z

j=0

j=0

j=0

1/σ 1−1/σ

q

.

(34)

In the last expression, yk is the revenue per quality-adjusted unit of output for a firm that exports to markets 0 to k,
k
X

yk =

!1/σ
Aj

,

(35)

−(σ−1)

Pjσ Yj .

(36)

j=0

where
Aj ≡ τj

From the aggregate budget constraint, aggregate expenditures equal aggregate income, Pj Yj = (1 − uj ) yj , where yj
is income per employed worker in j. Conditions (4) and (5) follow from assuming only one export market (K = 1),
letting A1 = A, using τ0 = 1 , and letting the final good be the numeraire. The revenue premium relative to a firm
that only sells domestically is:
!1/σ
k
X
Aj
yk
Γk ≡
= 1+
,
(37)
y0
Y0
j=1
Equation (34) follows from evaluating the revenue function at the optimal output shares allocated to each destination
that solves the maximization problem in (33),
skj = Pk

Pjσ Yj τj1−σ

j 0 =0

Pjσ0 Yj 0 τj1−σ
0

.

(38)

Note that skj is also the share of market j in firm revenues.60 Combining (38) and (37) implies
1/σ

skj

=

Pj Y j

!σ
−(σ−1)

τj

1/σ

Y0

Γ−σ
k ,

(39)

so that the domestic revenue share of an exporter to k markets is sk0 = Γ−σ
k .
Quality Choice I assume that workers are perfect substitutes within the firm between production of quality z
and quantity q. The number of workers in the firm, n, is determined over time through the process of labor search
characterized in the text. A firm with n workers and productivity ψ that sells to markets j = 0, .., k solves
max rk (z, q) s.t. (1/σ) z + (1 − 1/σ) q = ψn,
z,q

1−1/σ

60

I.e., it can be verified that skj =

pj (sk
z 1/σ q 1−1/σ
j /τj )

1−1/σ
k
p 0 s 0 /τj 0
z 1/σ q 1−1/σ
j 0 =0 j
j

Pk

45

.

(40)

where rk (z, q) is given in (34). The introduction of the parameter σ in the constraint of this firm problem only
serves the purpose of saving notation. The optimal allocation of workers between producing quantity q and quality
z resulting from (40) implies that quantity and quality increase linearly with the stock of workers, regardless of the
firm’s export status:
z = q = ψn.
(41)
Using (41) into the revenue function (34), the total real revenues of a firm located in market j = 0 with n workers
exporting to markets j = 1, .., k is
yk ψn,
which corresponds to (3) when K = 1, the home market is denoted by D, and the foreign market is denoted by
X. Note that the linearization of the revenue function implies that the “love for variety” component of welfare is
neutralized. To see why, consider aggregate real income in a closed economy where all firms have productivity ψ.
Letting z and q be the quality and productivity of every firm, from (31) we have Y = (M q)σ/(σ−1) = ((1 − u) ψ)σ/(σ−1)
where the first equality follows from (41) and the second from the fact that, with symmetric firms, qM = ψ (1 − u).
Hence, the measure of firms does not impact aggregate real income directly. However, love for variety could be easily
reintroduced as in Benassy (1998) and Acemoglu et al. (2007), among others, by including the measure of firms
elevated to some power as an additional term in front of the definition of aggregate real income.

A.2

Appendix to Section 3.3 (Job Values)

I present the solution for the value of a new job in an economy where the CDF of the sampling distribution (i.e.,
of the probability that a worker samples a firm offering jobs with value lower than v) is Pv (v) with bounded support
[vmin , vmax ]. Firms are heterogeneous in terms of age a and of an age-invariant firm type ε = (ψ, fX ) where ψ is firm
productivity and fX is the cost of investing, fX . At age a, firm ε makes revenue per worker of r (a, ε).
Let V (a, ε) be the value of a match in firm (a, ε), W (w, a; ε) be the value received by a worker who is employed
in a firm of type ε and age a who has committed to pay wage w, and β be the worker bargaining power. When
an employed worker contacts a potential employer then the worker and the competing employers start a bargaining
process as in Cahuc et al. (2006). If a worker employed in firm (a, ε) at wage w contacts a prospective employer
(a0 , ε0 ) such that V (a0 , ε0 ) < V (a, ε) (so that the prospective employer offers a job of lower value than the current
employer) then, if it is to the worker’s advantage, a wage renegotiation starts in which the worker uses the value in
the competing employer as fallback position and remains with the current employer (a, ε) at the wage w (a0 , ε0 , a, ε)
that guarantees a value for the worker of W (w (a0 , ε0 , a, ε) , a; ε) = V (a0 , ε0 ) + β (V (a, ε) − V (a0 , ε0 )). When the
worker contacts a prospective employer (a1 , ε1 ) such that V (a, ε) < V (a1 , ε1 ), a re-negotiation is triggered ending
up with the worker transitioning to firm (a1 , ε1 ) who commits to pay the wage w (a, ε, a1 , ε1 ) such that the value
for the worker is W (w (a, ε, a1 , ε1 ) , a1 ; ε1 ) = V (a, ε) + β (V (a1 , ε1 ) − V (a, ε)). The value for the new employer is
V (a1 , ε1 ) − [V (a, ε) + β (V (a1 , ε1 ) − V (a, ε))] = (1 − β) (V (a1 , ε1 ) − V (a, ε)).
Hence, a worker employed in firm (a, ε) at wage w experiences a wage renegotiation (and potentially a transition
(a,ε)
. The flow-value
to another job) whenever the worker contacts a firm offering jobs whose value v > W (w,a,ε)−βV
1−β
of a job for a worker employed in firm (a, ε) at wage w is:
!
Z
V (a,ε)

(ρ + δ) W (w, a, ε) = w + δU + λe
Z

W (w,a,ε)−βV (a,ε)
1−β

[(1 − β) v + βV (a, ε) − W (w, a, ε)] dPv (v) ,

vmax

[(1 − β) V (a, ε) + βv − W (w, a, ε)] dPv (v) +

+ λe
min[V (a,ε),vmax ]

which, integrating by parts, can be re-written as follows:
"
Z
V (a,ε)

(ρ + δ) W (w, a, ε) = w + δU + λe (1 − β)

Z

W (w,a,ε)−βV (a,ε)
1−β

vmax

dW
da

(42)

#
[1 − Pv (v)] dv +

[1 − Pv (v)] dv + β
min[V (a,ε),vmax ]

dW
.
da
(43)

46

Similarly, because when a match ends there is no value for the firm, the value for the firm (a, ε) of employing a worker
at wage w is
Z
(ρ + δ) J (w, a, ε) = r (a, ε) − w + λe
Z

V (a,ε)
W (w,a,ε)−βV (a,ε)
1−β

[(1 − β) (V (a, ε) − v) − J (w, a, ε)] dPV (v)

vmax

[−J (w, a, ε)] dPV (v) +

+ λe
min[V (a,ε),vmax ]

dJ
da

(44)

Adding up (42) and (44), the value of the job is:
Z
(ρ + δ) V (a, ε) = r (a, ε) + δU + λe
Z

V (a,ε)
W (w,a,ε)−βV (a,ε)
1−β

[(1 − β) v + βV (a, ε) + (1 − β) (V (a, ε) − v) − V (a, ε)] dPv (v)

vmax

[(1 − β) V (a, ε) + βv − V (a, ε)] dPv (v) +

+ λe
min[V (a,ε),vmax ]

dV
da

(a,ε)
According to this expression, as long as the worker gets an offer above W (w,a,ε)−βV
but below V (a, ε) there is
1−β
no change in value; instead, only redistribution from the firm to the worker takes place. However, when the worker
draws an offer above V (a, ε), the total surplus increases by the fraction that the worker is able to extract from the
new firm. We can re-write the last expression as
Z vmax
dV
.
(45)
ρV (a, ε) = r (a, ε) + δ (U − V (a, ε)) + λe β
(v − V (a, ε)) dPv (v) +
da
min[V (a,ε),vmax ]

Integrating by parts, expression (45) for the value of a job held by firm ε at age a can be written as
ρV (a, ε) = r (a, ε) + δ (U − V (a, ε)) + λe β [Z (V (a, ε)) + max (vmin − V (a, ε) , 0)] +
where

Z

dV
da

(46)

vmax

Z (v) ≡

[1 − Pv (v0 )] dv0 .

(47)

min[max(v,vmin ),vmax ]

Consider now the case with one investment option from the benchmark model. The investment age, h, is
a deterministic function of the firm type, ε = (ψ, fX ). A firm ε who invests at age h has revenue per worker
r (a, ε) = ψyD for a < h and r (a, ε) = ψyX for a ≥ h. The flow equivalent value of a job held by this firm at age a
therefore is given by

ψyD + δU + λe β [Z (V (a, ε)) + max (vmin − V (a, ε) , 0)] + ∂V (a,ε)
∂a
(ρ + δ) V (a, ε) =
ψyX + δU + λe β [Z (V (h (ε) , ε)) + max (vmin − V (h (ε) , ε) , 0)]

for a ≤ h (ε)

(48)

for a > h (ε).

The fixed cost fX only impacts the value of a job through the age of investing. Hence the value of a job in firm of
type ε = (ψ, fX ) who will invest after the next h − a periods can be defined as v (h (ε) − a, ψ) ≡ V (a, ε). Using the
change of variables x = max (h − a, 0), the value of the job (48) can be re-written as shown in (10) and (11) in the
text.
Using the definition of Z (v) in (47) and integrating (10) forward, the value of the job in a firm that has not yet
invested is:



vmin e(ρ+δ+λe β)(hmin (ψ)−x) + ψyD +δU +λe β[Z(vmin )+vmin ] 1 − e(ρ+δ+λe β)(hmin (ψ)−x)
x > hmin (ψ)
ρ+δ+λe β


,
v (x; ψ) =
R
0
x
ψy
+δU
ψy
+δU
−(ρ+δ)
x−x
−(ρ+δ)x
0
0
(
) Z (v (x ; ψ)) dx
 D
D
+e
v (0; ψ) − ρ+δ
+ λe β 0 e
x ∈ [0, hmin (ψ)]
ρ+δ
(49)
where we have defined hmin (ψ) such that v (hmin (ψ) ; ψ) = vmin , if it exists (otherwise, hmin (ψ) = ∞). The initial
condition v (0; ψ) corresponds to the value of a job in a firm with productivity ψ who has already invested. Using

47

the definition of Z (v) in (47) and (11), it is implicitly determined as the solution to:
v (0; ψ) =

ψyX + δU + λe βZ (v (0; ψ))
.
ρ+δ

(50)

Since Z 0 (v) = − [1 − PV (v)] ≤ 0, there is a a unique solution for v (0; ψ) .

A.3

Appendix to Section 3.5 (Stock Effect and Timing of Export Entry)

I derive expression 20 for the value of a firm at entry. First, take the derivative of Π (h; ε) in (16) to reach
Π0 (h; ε) =

h

Z

e−(ρ+µ)a π 0 (v (h − a) ; ψ) v 0 (h − a; ψ) da + e−(ρ+µ)h fX

0

= π (v (h; ψ)) − e−(ρ+µ)h π (v (0; ψ)) − (ρ + µ)

h

Z

e−(ρ+µ)a π (v (h − a; ψ)) da + e−(ρ+µ)h fX ,

0

where the second line follows from integrating by parts. Rearranging terms and using (16) implies that the value at
entry of a type ε firm in (16) can be written
Π (h; ε) ≡

π (v (h; ε)) − Π0 (h; ε)
.
ρ+µ

This expression holds generically for any h. However, in an interior solution to the firm’s maximization problem, a
firm of type ε chooses h such that Π0 (h; ε) = 0. Applying this condition gives 20.

A.4

Appendix to Section 3.6 (Definition of the General Equilibrium)

Optimal Search Effort

Using (7) and (9), (15) can be written:
π (v) = max (1 − β) π0 (v) qu s − sζ ,
s≥0

where

Z

(51)

v

π0 (v) ≡ (v − U ) + κe

Gv (v0 ) dv0 .

(52)

vmin

Therefore the optimal search effort satisfies the first order condition

s (v) =

(1 − β) qu

π0 (v)
ζ

1/(ζ−1)
,

(53)

Replacing the solution for the optimal search effort s (v) from (53) into (51), the maximized present discounted value
for the firm from all the new hires, is:
π (v) ≡ (1 − β) π0 (v) qu s (v) − s (v)ζ
= (ζ − 1) s (v)ζ
Sampling Distribution

(54)

Let
s∗ (a; ε) ≡ s (v (h (ε) − a; ψ))

(55)

be the search effort exerted by a firm of type ε at age a. The probability that a worker samples a firm offering jobs
with value lower than v is
"Z
#
a(v;ε) ∗
s (a; ε) −µa
Pv (v) = Eε
µe
da ,
(56)
s
0
where the limit of integration a (v0 ; ε) = sup {a : v (h (ε) − a; ε) ≤ v0 } is the age at which firm type ε attains the value

48

v0 and where Eε denotes the expectation over the distribution of firm types, ε.61 Using (53), we can further write
hR
i
a(v;ε)
Eε 0
π0 (v (h (ε) − a; ε))1/(ζ−1) e−µa da
hR
i .
Pv (v) =
(57)
∞
Eε 0 π0 (v (h (ε) − a; ε))1/(ζ−1) e−µa da
Using (52), this functional equation gives Pv (v) given the equilibrium objects {λe , U, a (v; ε)}. This function yields
the share of employment in firms with value of jobs below v,62
Gv (v) =

Pv (v)
.
1 + κe [1 − Pv (v)]

(58)

Firm Size Let N (a; ε) be the number of workers employed by a firm of age a and type ε. Conditional on firm type
ε not exiting the market, firm size evolves according to
N 0 (a; ε) = qu s∗ (a; ε) [1 + κe Gv (V (a, ε))] − [γ + λe (1 − Pv (V (a, ε)))] N (a; ε)

(59)

where V (a, ε) ≡ v (h (ε) − a; ψ) is the value of jobs offered by firm of age a and type ε = (ψ, fX ). Integrating we get
Z a

 γ (a0 −a)−λe R a0 (1−Pv (V (a00 ;ε)))da00 0
a
N (a, ε) = qu
s∗ (a; ε) 1 + κe Gv V a0 ; ε
e
da .
(60)
0

Therefore, normalizing by the average firm size we have

 N (a,ε)
n (a; ε) = Eε,a [N (a,ε)]
0

if Πe (ε) ≥ 0,

(61)

otherwise.

For the proof of Proposition (1) below, it is useful to write this expression explicitly. Using (53) and (60), if Πe (ε) ≥ 0
then:
Ra
Ra
00
00
0
1/(ζ−1)
π0 (V (a0 , ε))
[1 + κe Gv (V (a0 ; ε))] eγ (a −a)−λe a0 (1−Pv (V (a ;ε)))da da0
0
hR
i.
n (a; ε) =
(62)
Ra
0
00
00
a
Eε,a0 0 0 π0 (V (a0 , ε))1/(ζ−1) [1 + κe Gv (V (a0 ; ε))] eγ(a −a)−λe a0 (1−Pv (V (a ;ε)))da da0

A.5

Appendix to Section 6.4 (Multiple Export Destinations)

This section shows that the solution to the firm investment problem under multiple markets is given by (29) and
(30), where the stock effect is defined as:
hj

Z
Sj (hj , hj+1 , .., hK ; ψ) ≡

e(ρ+µ)xj [−πj (xj ; ψ)] dxj for j > 1,

(63)

0

where πj (xj ; ψ) denotes the partial derivative of π (v (x; ψ)) with respect to xj evaluated at xj , where each element
of xj is the time until entry to each market for a firm that has entered market j − 1 but is still xj periods away from
entering market j, i.e.:






xj =
0, ..., 0 , xj , xj + hj+1 , .., xj + hj+1 + ... + hK



 | {z }
j−1 times

To prove the result, note first that we can follow similar arguments to the model with a single investment option to
characterize the value of all new hires as in π (v) in (15). Using (28), following similar steps to solve for the optimal

R ∞

By definition the average search intensity is s = Eε 0 s∗ (a; ε) µe−µa da , so that Pv (vmax ) = 1.
62
This is obtained by setting dGv (v) = 0 in the equation describing the evolution of Gv (v): (1 − u) dGv (v) =
uλu Pv (v) − (δ + λe (1 − Pv (v))) (1 − u) Gv (v).
61

49

search intensity as in Appendix A.4, and imposing λe β = 0, we obtain:
πk (x; ψ) ≡

∂πv (v (x; ψ))
.
∂xk

= − ((1 − β) qu )ζ/(ζ−1)



π0 (v (x; ψ))
ζ

1/(ζ−1)

1 + κe
ψ (yk − yk−1 ) e−(ρ+δ)xk .
1 + κe [1 − Pv (v (x; ψ))]

(64)

In parallel to (16), let Π (h1 , h2 , .., hK ) be the value at entry of a firm that enters export markets k = 1, 2, .., K at
P
ages Hk = kj=1 hj . Defining this value at entry involves more than in the simpler case with one investment option.
It is convenient to define 1i as the length-K vector






1i =
0, ..., 0 , 1, .., 1 ,



 | {z }
i−1 times

and hi+1 as
hi+1





= 0, ..., 0, hi+1 , hi+1 + hi+2 , hi+1 + hi+2 + hi+3 , .., hi+1 + hi+2 + ... + hK .
| {z }

i times

Using this notation, we can recursively define Πi (hi+1 ; ε) as the value of a type-ε firm at the moment of entry to
market i,
hi+1

Z

e−(ρ+µ)(hi+1 −xi+1 ) πv (v (xi+1 1i+1 + hi+2 ; ψ)) dxi+1


fi+1
for i < K
+ e−(ρ+µ)hi+1 Πi+1 (hi+2 ; ε) −
ρ+µ

Πi (hi+1 ; ε) =

0

(65)

where, at the next-to-last market,
hK

Z
ΠK−1 (hK ; ε) =

e−(ρ+µ)(hK −xK ) πv (v (xK 1K ; ψ)) dxK + e−(ρ+µ)hK

0

πv (v (0, 0, .., 0; ψ)) − fK
.
ρ+µ

(66)

Therefore, the value at entry is Π (h1 ; ε) = Π0 (h1 ; ε). The firm’s problem is now defined as maxh1 Π (h1 ; ε). After
some manipulations we can express the derivative of the profit function with respect to each entry time as
K

X −(ρ+µ)H
∂Π (h1 ; ε)
i
=
e
∂h1
i=1

hi

Z

e(ρ+µ)xi

0


dπ (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ)
dxi + fi ,
dxi

(67)

and
j−1 Z h
i

X
∂Π (h1 ; ε)
=
∂hj
i=1
+

K
X
i=j

e(ρ+µ)(xi −Hi )

0

e−(ρ+µ)Hi

Z

hi

dπ (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ)
dxi
dhj

e(ρ+µ)xi

0

dπ (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ)
dxi + fi
dxi


(68)

for j > 1. Note, in addition, that
K
X
dπ (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ)
=
πm (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ) for j > i,
dhj
m=j

(69)

K
X
dπ (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ)
=
πm (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ) ,
dxi
m=i

(70)

where πm (·; ψ) denotes the partial derivative of π (·; ψ) with respect to its mth argument. Combining (69) and (70)
1 ;ε)
= 0 for all i = 1, .., K, we reach the set of
with (67) and (68), and imposing the first-order conditions ∂Π(h
∂hi

50

conditions:
j Z
X
i=1

hi

e(ρ+µ)(xi +Hj −Hi ) πj (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ) dxi + fj = 0 for all j ≥ 1.

(71)

0

Finally, note that (64) implies:
πk+1 (x; ψ)
= e−(ρ+δ)(xk+1 −xk )
πk (x; ψ)



yk+1 − yk
yk − yk−1


.

(72)

πj (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ)
yj − yj−1
= e−(ρ+δ)hj
.
πj−1 (xi 1i + hi+1 ; ψ)
yj−1 − yj−2

(73)

Using (72) we get that, for j > i,

Evaluating (71) at j and at j + 1 together with (73) gives the result.

B

Proofs

Proposition 1. Given λe , changes in the contact rate from unemployment λu impact the employment allocation
and the timing of investments {n (a; ε) , h (ε)} only through general-equilibrium adjustments in revenue per unit sold
{yD , yX } or in the value of unemployment, U . Given λu , changes in the contact rate from employment λe generically
impact these outcomes regardless of whether {yD , yX , U } may adjust.

Proof. Using (53) and (54), the free-entry condition (21) can be written:

ζ/(ζ−1)
h
n
oi
1−β
(ζ − 1) qu
Eε max π0 (v (h (ε) ; ψ))ζ/(ζ−1) , 0 = fD .
ζ

(74)

n
o
This condition defines the set of active firms in equilibrium, ε : π0 (v (h (ε) ; ψ))ζ/(ζ−1) > 0 .
Given the value of jobs at entry v (h (ε) ; ψ), the value of unemployment U , the contact rate from employment
λe , and the sampling distribution, this free-entry condition pins down qu . In turn, the integrand of the stock effect
defined in (19) is πv0 (v (x; ψ)) [−v 0 (x; ψ)]. The two components of this product can be written as follows. First, using
(53) and (54), we have:
π 0 (v) = ((1 − β) qu )ζ/(ζ−1)



π0 (v)
ζ

1/(ζ−1)

1 + κe
.
1 + κe [1 − Pv (v)]

(75)

Second, from (49), after some manipulations we can express the derivative of the value function with respect to the
time until the investment in implicit form as follows:
Z x
 0 0  0
0
−e(ρ+δ)x v 0 (x; ψ) = ψ (yX − yD ) + λe β
e(ρ+δ)x 1 − Pv v x0 ; ψ
v x ; ψ dx .
(76)
0

Combining the first-order condition for optimal investment timing, (17), with the last two expressions, the timing
h (ε) for the optimal investment of firm type ε = (ψ, fX ) is determined as the solution to:


ζ/(ζ−1) Z h
1 + κe
e−γx π0 (v (x; ψ))1/(ζ−1)
ζ
∗,
1
+
κ
[1
− Pv (v (x; ψ))]
e
0


Z x
 0 0  0
0
∗ ψ (yX − yD ) + λe β
e(ρ+δ)x 1 − Pv v x0
v x dx dx ≤ fX

(1 − β) qu
ζ

0

with equality if h (ε) < ∞. Solving for the contact rate from unemployment qu from the free entry condition (74),

51

the last expression becomes:
ζ
ζ −1

R h(ε)
0

e−γx π0 (v (x; ψ))1/(ζ−1)

i
(ρ+δ)x0
0
0
0
0
e
[1
−
P
(v
(x
;
ψ))]
v
(x
;
ψ)
dx
dx
v
0
fX
h
n
oi
≤
,
ζ/(ζ−1)
fD
Eε max π0 (v (h (ε) ; ψ))
,0

1+κe
1+κe [1−Pv (v(x;ψ))]

h

ψ (yX − yD ) + λe β

Rx

(77)
We can now partition the general-equilibrium objects from Definition (1) into three blocks:
GE1 = {v (x, ; ψ) , Pv (v) , Gv (v) , n (a; ε) , h (ε)} ,
GE2 = {λe , U, yD , yX } ,
GE3 = {λu , qu , M, u, y} .
Given GE2 , conditions (49), (57), (58), (62) and (77) jointly determine the objects in GE1 independently from the
objects in GE3 . Conditions (1), (2) for i = e, u, (4), (5), (8), (13), (22), (74) jointly determine GE2 and GE3 given
GE1 . We conclude that variables in GE3 impact the variables in GE1 only through GE2 . Hence, λu only impacts the
employment distribution n (a; ε) and the investment times h (ε) if there are changes in {λe , U, yD , yX }. Moreover, in
any counterfactual where λe is kept constant but λu changes (which are always feasible to implement –see Footnote
30), the variables in GE3 are affected only if GE2 ≡ {U, yD , yX } are allowed to change.

Proposition 2. Assume λe β = 0, constant search effort s across firms and ex-ante homogeneous firms. Then, given
(λe , λu ), there is a unique general equilibrium. Firms never invest at entry unless fX = 0, but eventually invest if
and only if fX is below a finite threshold. Given Γ: i) if β > 0 and λe = 0 then lower matching frictions from
unemployment (higher λu ) lead to faster export entry, a higher employment share in exporters, and higher income
per employed worker if z < ψyD ; and ii) if β = 0 and λe > 0 then lower matching frictions from employment (higher
λe ) also lead to these outcomes if σ is sufficiently large or if z = by for some positive constant b < ψ yyD .

Proof. This proof proceeds under the following three additional assumptions on the full model from Definition 1: i)
λe β=0; ii) the search effort s is exogenously given, common across firms, and (to ease notation) normalized to one;
and iii) there are no innate differences in productivity or in fixed costs across firms. Since all firms are identical, I
drop the index ψ from the value v (x; ψ) of a firm that is x periods away from investing and write instead v (x).
Now I establish the uniqueness of the equilibrium in the home economy given Γ, and then show that there is
a unique Γ consistent with the equilibrium. Using the consistency condition g) of the equilibrium Definition (1)
and taking the ratio between the optimal timing condition (24) and the free entry condition (25) implies that, in
equilibrium:
i−1
R H −γx h
e
1 + κe e−µ(H−x)
dx
0
fX
=
.
(78)
Ω (H) ≡ (ρ + δ) (Γ − 1) (1 + κe )
U
fD
1 − ρ y ψ + (Γ − 1) e−(ρ+δ)H
D

where we have used the fact that firms exit at constant rate µ, so that Pv (v (x)) = 1 − e−µ(H−x) . The value of
unemployment defined in (8) is
hR
i
H
z + βλu 0 v (x) µe−µ(H−x) dx + e−µH v (0)
U=
.
ρ + βλu
Replacing v (x) from (23), and after manipulations, we obtain
ρU =




ρ+δ
βλu
1 − e−µH
z+
ψ yD + (yX − yD ) e−(ρ+δ)H 1 + (ρ + δ)
.
ρ + δ + λu β
ρ + δ + λu β
µ

52

(79)

Replacing this expression into (78), after some manipulations that condition becomes
h
i−1
RH
(ρ + δ + λu β) (Γ − 1) (1 + κe ) 0 e−γx 1 + κe e−µ(H−x)
dx
fX


=
Ω (H) =
βλu
z
fD
−µH
−(ρ+δ)H
− 1) (Γ − 1) e
1 − ψyD + 1 + µ (e

(80)

The numerator of this expression is strictly increasing with H. Using that yD decreases with H we conclude that
the denominator is decreasing with H, and so Ω (H) is strictly increasing. Therefore, given Γ, if an interior solution
> 0. The
for H exists it must be unique. In addition, Ω (0) = 0, so that the solution features H > 0 as long as ffX
D
solution for H is finite if fX /fD < limH→∞ Ω (H, H).
Defining Γ as the exporter premium above which H < ∞ (i.e., such that that limH→∞ Ω (H, H) = ffX
) and H (Γ)
D
as the unique solution of H as a function of Γ resulting from (80) in that case, income per employed worker y is the
following function of Γ:

1
(1 − u) σ−1
if Γ < Γ
y (Γ) =
(81)
1
σ
(1 − u) σ−1
[1 + eX ψ (Γ − 1)] σ−1
if Γ ≥ Γ,
where the fraction of employment in exporters is
eX =

(1 + κe ) e−µH
.
1 + κe e−µH

(82)

dy(Γ)
dΓ

≥ 0 when Γ > Γ. In turn, from (4) and (5), the revenue premium Γ is
h
i1/σ
dy
A
strictly decreasing with income per worker, Γ = 1 + (1−u)y
. This implies dΓ
> 0, where limΓ→1 y = ∞ and
limΓ→∞ y = 0. Therefore, there is a unique interior equilibrium. To determine whether the equilibrium indeed
features export entry, note that, if it does not, then ffX
> fX /fD ≡ limH→∞ Ω (H) at the Γ such that no firm
D
exports. Using (4) for yD , this condition is equivalent to


1/σ
A
−1
(ρ + δ + λu β) (1 + κe ) 1 + 1−u
fX
1
> fX /fD =
.
(83)
fD
γ
1 − (1−u)z/ψ
1/(σ−1)
The relationship (81) implies that



Therefore, an interior equilibrium exists if and only if fX /fD ∈ 0, fX /fD .
I now move to the comparative statics. Consider first the case β = 0 and λe > 0. Then (79) implies ρU = z, and
(78) becomes
i−1
h
RH
dx
(ρ + δ) (Γ − 1) (1 + κe ) 0 e−γx 1 + κe e−µ(H−x)


.
(84)
Ω (H) =
(1 + (Γ − 1) e−(ρ+δ)H ) − ψyzD
The numerator is increasing with λe . A sufficient condition for the function to be increasing with λe is that yD does
not increase too fast with λe . When that happens, the value of unemployment falls relatively to domestic market
size, leading to entry. We now show that this is the case if σ is sufficiently large or if z = by. Multiplying numerator
and denominator by yzD , the numerator is increasing with λe , and the denominator is decreasing if
(Γ − 1)
(Γ − 1) e−(ρ+δ)H
∂yD 1
1
1 eX (1 − eX )
=
< (ρ + δ)
∂λe yD
σ − 1 1 + eX (Γ − 1) δ
1 + κe
1 + (Γ − 1) e−(ρ+δ)H
where the first equality follows from using (4) and (81). Given the initial eX and H, this condition holds for σ
sufficiently large. Another sufficient condition is z = by. In that case, using (4) and (81),
1 + [κe + ψ (Γ − 1) (1 + κe )] e−µH
z
by
=
= b [1 + eX (H) ψ (Γ − 1)] = b
,
yD
yD
1 + κe e−µH
h

which is increasing with λe , so that the denominator of (84) is decreasing with λe .63 The condition b ∈ 0, ψ yyD
63

Our previous proof of uniqueness given Γ proceeded under the assumption that z is an exogenous parameter.

53

ensures that the value of jobs is always positive and that an equilibrium with positive entry therefore exists.
Consider now the case λe = 0 and β > 0. Then, (78) becomes
Ω (H) =

(ρ + δ) (Γ − 1) (1 + κe )

1−e−γH
γ

1 − ρ ψyUD + (Γ − 1) e−(ρ+δ)H

=

fX
,
fD

(85)

where, using (79),
ρ+δ
ρU
=
ψyD
ρ + δ + λu β



z
ψyD


+




βλu
1 − e−µH
1 + (Γ − 1) e−(ρ+δ)H 1 + (ρ + δ)
.
ρ + δ + λu β
µ

As a special case of Proposition 1 in the general model, we see that λu impacts equilibrium outcomes only through
U/yD . If this term is increasing in λu , then H decreases with λu . A higher λu places a higher weight on the value of
employment relative to unemployment. A sufficient condition for this term to be increasing is:
z
< 1 + (Γ − 1) e−(ρ+δ)H
ψyD


1 + (ρ + δ)

1 − e−µH
µ


.

The right hand side is bounded below by 1, hence this condition is satisfied if z < ψyD .

C
C.1

Appendix to Section 5 (Calibration)
Data Sources and Summary Statistics

I use summary statistics extracted from confidential microdata. Exports data comes from official customs data
at the firm-year level. These data were merged with firm employment data from administrative records by the
Employment and Business Dynamics Observatory (OEDE) of the Ministry of Labor and Social Security of Argentina
(http://www.trabajo.gob.ar/estadisticas/oede/index.asp). All firms are required to report their formal employees on
a monthly basis. In each of six two-month periods within each year between 1998 and 2007, every formal worker
aged 18 to 64 is linked to the firm where he/she is reported as earning the highest wage. Workers earning below the
minimum wage are excluded.
The data includes the universe of firms that report employment above the minimum wage in any period during
these years. A worker employed in a firm in a period is considered a new hire if he/she is not employed in the firm
in the previous period. To compute the fraction of new hires entering from other formal jobs in any sector of the
economy for each firm-year, the shares are first computed for each pair of consecutive periods within year, and then
averaged across periods within firm-year. Similar steps are followed to compute the fraction of new hires from the
manufacturing sector entering from jobs in exporting firms.
Each firm-year observation is classified as exporter if the firm exports at least USD 10,000. Firm age is the
difference between the current year and the year of birth in the tax record. The number of workers per firm is the
average employment across periods within year. All figures are based on firms from the manufacturing sector. Exiting
firms of any export status (i.e., firms present in a given year who do not report employment in the next) are excluded.
Firms who do not report formal employment but who report exports are excluded, as well as industries with less
than one-hundred firms in any year. The resulting sample represents, on average, 97% of the formal employment and
82% of all firms who either export or formally report the wages of their employees in the manufacturing sector.

Assuming z = by, uniqueness given Γ would also be guaranteed for Γ <

54

1+κe /b
.
1+κe

Statistic
Aggregate Export Shares
Fraction of exporting firms
Employment share of exporters
Firm Size Distribution
Average Firm Size
Share of firms with 0-14 workers
Share of firms with 15-99 workers
Share of firms 100-199 workers
Share of firms with 200-399 workers
Share of firms with 400+ workers
Job-to-job Hiring
Average share of job-to-job hires, all firms
Average share of job-to-job hires, non-exporters
Average share of job-to-job hires, exporters
Average Firm Age (years)
Non-exporters
Exporters

1998-2002

2003-2007

9.8%
52.1%

10.9%
52.8%

19.5
78.7%
18.3%
1.7%
0.8%
0.6%

21.7
75.5%
21.0%
2.0%
0.9%
0.6%

17.5%
16.3%
28.1%

17.3%
15.7%
30.3%

11.3
20.4

11.7
20.8

Table 6: Summary Statistics, 1998-2002 and 2003-2007

C.2

Numerical Algorithm

The algorithm to solve the model consists of an outer loop on {Pv (v) , yD , yX , u, λe , λu , U } and an inner loop on
the distribution of firm choices, {h (ε)}, and the aggregate tightness qu . In the corresponding steps of each iteration,
the functions Pv (v) and h (ψ, fX ) are interpolated using cubic splines on a grid with 25 equally-spaced job values
in [vmin , vmax ] and productivity levels in [ψmin , ψmax ]. The value function v (x; ψ) is interpolated using a grid of
15 equally spaced times to investment in log-units in [0, 40]. restricting 40 years to be the maximum age to enter
exporting.

1. Starting from a guess for {Pv (v) , yD , yX , u, λe , λu , U } or from the outcomes of the last iteration, construct the
value functions v (x; ψ) for each ψ using (10), the optimal search effort s∗ (v) using (53), and the value of all
new hires using (54).

2. Guess a value for qu or use the last iteration outcome. Then, use (17), (19), (75), and (76) to solve for h (ε) (in
the extension to multiple investment options described in (A.5), this step involves solving for the {hj (ε)}K
j=1
entry times to all markets using (29)-(30)); adjust qu such that the free entry condition (74) holds; and iterate
on the last two steps until convergence of {h (ε) , qu }.

3. Compute s using the rules s∗ (v (h (ε) − a; ε)), and solve for the aggregate search sM using the solution for qu
from step 2.

4. Compute the distribution Pv (v) using (56) and support for the grid for values such that vmin = v (∞; ψmin )
and vmin = v (0; ψmax ); income per worker y from (22) and then {yD , yX } using (4) and (5) (in the extension
to multiple investment options described in (A.5), this step involves computing income per worker using a step
function with the {yj }K
j=1 revenue levels, and recomputing those revenue levels using (35)-(37)); unemployment
and equilibrium contact rates {u, λe , λu } using (1)-(2); and the value of unemployment U using (8).

5. Move back to point 1 for the next iteration.

55

Labor Market Frictions, Firm Growth, and
International Trade
Appendices for Online Publication
Pablo D. Fajgelbaum (UCLA)

A

Additional Figures and Tables
Figure A.1: Job-Finding Rates and Employment Regulation

(a) λe (Ridder and van den Berg, 2003) vs. EPL and RE

(b) λu (Hobijn and Şahin, 2009) vs. EPL and RE

(c) λu and λe (Jolivet et al., 2006) vs. EPL

(d) λu and λe (Jolivet et al., 2006) vs. RE

Note: each panel reports the correlation between job-finding rates estimated in the respective paper and indexes
of labor market rigidity. RE stands for the Rigidity of Employment Index (World Bank) and EPL stands for the
Employment Protection Legislation Index (OECD). EPL takes a value from 0 (less rigid) to 6 (more rigid) and RE
takes value from 0 (less rigid) to 100 (more rigid). The variables are reported in logs and demeaned. In each panel,
the value of the EPL and RE indexes correspond to an average over the available values of the index in the available
years in the dataset.

1

Figure A.2: Rigidity of Employment Index and Income Per worker

Note: the figure shows income per worker from for the year 2005 from the World Development indicators against the
Rigidity of Employment index for the same year from the Doing Business database of the World Bank. The correlation
between both variables is -0.28. If the U.S. is excluded the slope falls to -0.69 (s.e. 0.22) and the correlation becomes
-0.25.

2

Figure A.3: Export Participation and Firm Growth by Firm Productivity
(a) Age of Export Entry (Years)

(b) Fraction of Exporters by Productivity

(c) Firm Size by Age for Different Productivity Levels

(d) Firm Size by Productivity

3

Figure A.4: Wage and Value Trajectories

(a) Wage Trajectories (all firms)

(b) Wage Trajectories (high productivity firms)

(c) Value Trajectories (all firms)

(d) Value Trajectories (high productivity firms)

Note: the figures show the fitted values from locally weighted linear least squares regressions of wages or values on
months spent employed (potentially, across many jobs) in simulated employment spells under β = 0.44. The left
panel includes all trajectories, and the right panel limits the simulated data to trajectories entirely spent in firms in
the top 1% of the productivity distribution. The top panel shows individual wages relative to income per worker in
the economy, and the bottom panel show the value to the worker relative to the value in unemployment. For the
details of the computation of the wage and value functions see Footnote 46.

4

Figure A.5: Firm Size Distribution, Export Participation by Age, and Firm Growth

(a) Firm Size Distribution

(b) Export Participation by Age

(c) Average Firm Size by Age, All Firms

(d) Average Firm Size by Age, Exporters

5

Figure A.6: Impact of Lowering Frictions, Additional Outcomes

(a) Exporter Revenue Premium Γ (β = 0)

(b) Exporter Revenue Premium Γ (β = 0.44)

(c) Exporter Employment Share (β = 0)

(d) Exporter Employment Share (β = 0.44)

(e) Share of Exporters (β = 0)

(f) Share of Exporters (β = 0.44)

6

Figure A.7: Revenue Per Worker in Model with Multiple Export Destinations

Note: this figure shows the growth in the revenue per worker of firms with different productivity as these firms enter
multiple export destinations. The parametrization corresponds to the model with multiple investments developed in
Section 6.4.

7

8

6.93
3.07
0.16
0.12
0.35

B. Calibrated Parameters
Domestic Cost over pc. income
Export Cost over pc. income
Relative on the job rate ( λλue )
Fraction of Never Exporters
CV of productivity distribution
7.12
2.21
0.14
0.07
0.37

9.9%
53.2%
20.4
71.6%
24.8%
18.0%
6.43
4.22
0.16
0.36
0.27

11.0%
53.3%
22.5
75.3%
20.4%
17.1%
4.75
4.25
0.15
0.40
0.15

11.0%
53.1%
21.9
75.2%
20.8%
17.3%

Different ζ
ζ = 1.75 ζ = 1.5
(3)
(4)
z
y

10.48
2.94
0.14
0.13
0.76

10.5%
56.7%
22.1
74.4%
21.7%
17.6%
5.06
1.85
0.13
0.00
0.60

11.0%
53.6%
20.8
71.9%
24.8%
17.7%

Different yz
= 0.05 yz = 0.7
(5)
(6)

5.37
3.72
0.16
0.15
0.17

11.3%
51.3%
21.7
67.8%
28.3%
20.2%

Multiple
markets
(7)

7.00
4.13
0
0.07
0.60

10.0%
54.2%
20.7
69.4%
26.2%
0%

No job-to-job
transitions
(8)

Note: This table shows the model prediction for the calibration targets (Panel A) and the calibrated parameters (Panel B) under alternative assumptions relative
to the benchmark calibration with β = 0 in Table 2. Columns (1) and (2) impose higher values of σ and re-calibrate the exporter premium to Γ = (1 − 0.28)−1/σ
in order to match the export share of exporters; columns (3) and (4) impose lower values of ζ; and columns (5) and (6) impose lower or higher income flows for the
unemployed relative to income
per worker. Column (7) is the extension to multiple investments discussed in Section 6.4. It assumes K = 10 export destinations

j
j
with entry costs fj = K
fX and market sizes Aj = K
A; the table reports the parameter fX . This last calibration chooses A to match an average Γk = 1.12
across destinations as in the benchmark model. Column (8) assumes no job-to-job transitions (λe = λ˜e = 0), β = 0, and drops the average share of job-to-job
hires as a target.

Table A.1: Calibrated Parameters and Targeted Statistics Under Alternative Assumptions

10.7%
55.4%
20.2
74.2%
22.1%
18.8%

A. Calibration Targets
Fraction of exporters
Exporters employment share
Average Firm Size
Share of firms with 0-14 workers
Share of firms with 15-99 workers
Average share of job-to-job hires

Different σ
σ = 4.5 σ = 6.7
(1)
(2)

Growth in y
Only λu Only λe
Benchmark
β=0
β = 0.44
Higher σ
σ = 4.5
σ = 6.7
Lower ζ
ζ = 1.75
ζ = 1.5
Different z
z
y = 0.05
z
y = 0.7
Fixed yz
β=0
β = 0.44
χ (x) = x1/2
β=0
β = 0.44

Both

∆ Share of Hires Job-to-job
Only λu Only λe
Both

∆ Unemployment
Only λu Only λe
Both

0.6%
0.6%

3.5%
3.7%

4.2%
4.4%

0.2%
0.1%

1.1%
1.8%

1.3%
1.9%

-1.9%
-1.9%

0.5%
0.3%

-1.5%
-1.7%

0.4%
0.3%

3.9%
3.8%

4.4%
4.1%

0.1%
0.0%

0.5%
0.6%

0.7%
0.7%

-1.9%
-1.8%

0.7%
0.7%

-1.3%
-1.3%

0.8%
0.7%

3.6%
2.2%

4.4%
3.0%

0.1%
0.1%

0.6%
0.8%

0.6%
0.8%

-1.9%
-1.9%

0.7%
0.6%

-1.3%
-1.3%

0.8%
0.3%

7.0%
3.9%

7.9%
4.5%

0.2%
0.2%

1.2%
1.8%

1.3%
2.0%

-1.9%
-1.9%

0.4%
0.3%

-1.5%
-1.7%

0.7%
0.6%

4.4%
3.7%

5.2%
4.4%

0.1%
0.1%

0.5%
1.8%

0.6%
1.9%

-1.9%
-1.9%

0.7%
0.3%

-1.3%
-1.7%

0.7%
0.6%

4.3%
3.7%

5.1%
4.4%

0.1%
0.1%

0.5%
1.8%

0.6%
1.9%

-1.9%
-1.9%

0.7%
0.3%

-1.3%
-1.6%

Table A.2: Impact of 25% reduction in Frictions Under Alternative Parametrizations
Note: This table shows the model predictions corresponding to a 25% increase in matching efficiencies under the
alternative parametrizations of Table A.1. The “fixed z/y” case uses the parameters from the benchmark calibration
but assumes z = by, where b is fixed at the value of yz in the calibrated model. The last two rows show the
counterfactuals under the same parametrization as in the benchmark calibration but assuming a Cobb-Douglas
aggregate matching function with weights 12 on workers and firms.

9

B

Link to Arkolakis et al. (2012)

Arkolakis et al. (2012) show that, in a class of gravity models, the real income change ∆ ln y caused by a
1
∆ ln λ, where ∆ ln λ is the change in the domestic
change in trade costs can be measured as (∆ ln y)ACR = − σ−1
share of expenditures associated with this change in trade costs, and σ is the elasticity of substitution parameter,
corresponding to product differentiation by origin in an Armington model. Empirically, σ − 1 is the elasticity of trade
with respect to trade costs. My model does not fall in that class, but I can verify whether their formula works well
numerically. For this, I simulate shocks ∆ ln τ in my model to generate data on ∆ ln λ. Then, I implement the steps
that a researcher working on these data through the lens of the Arkolakis et al. (2012) model would do. Specifically,
given knowledge of the trade cost shock ∆ ln τ , one can obtain an estimate σ̂ of σ using a log-linear gravity equation,
and use this estimate along with the observed data on ∆ ln λ to compute the real income gains (∆ ln y)ACR .
I follow these steps, and then compare (∆ ln y)ACR to the real income gain ∆ ln y implied by my model. I generate
a reduction in trade costs leading to an increase of 5% in the foreign market potential Aj . Given the definition of the
foreign market potential Aj in (36) and the value of σ = 2.98 assumed in my calibration, this shock corresponds to
a change in trade costs of ∆ ln τ = −2.46%. Using the calibrated model, this shock generates a change in the import
share of expenditures of ∆ ln λ = −1.39% (from 79.3% to 78.2%) and an increase in real income of ∆ ln y = 0.69%.
Through the lens of a 2-country gravity model, the parameter σ would be estimated from a log-linear gravity
ln(1−λ)
equation using the relationship 1 − σ̂ = ∆ ∆
. My model-generated data implies ∆ ln (1 − λ) = 5.17% (an
ln τ
increase in the export share share from 20.7% to 21.8%), leading to σ̂ = 3.09. This number is very close to the
product differentiation parameter σ = 2.98 that I imposed in the calibration, suggesting that my model generates
1
(−1.39%) = 0.66%, which is very
close to a log-linear gravity equation. As a result, I obtain (∆ ln y)ACR =− 3.09−1
close to the value of ∆ ln y = 0.69% implied by my model. Figure A.8 re-does this previous analysis under a range
of values of ∆ ln τ including larger and smaller shocks. I also plot an alternative calculation of the Arkolakis et al.
(2012) formula where σ is fixed to the 2.98 value from my calibration instead of being re-computed each time from
model-simulated data. This formula with a fixed value of σ does not perform as well, reflecting that the parameter
σ − 1 is not the elasticity of trade to trade costs in my model.

Figure A.8: Real Income Gain in the Model and Implied by Arkolakis et al. (2012)

10

C

Relationship Between Labor Market Rigidity and Exports

I consider the relationship between country-level indexes of labor market rigidities and exports using datasets
with variation in exports across countries, industries and firms. Country level data is obtained from the World
Development Indicators (WDI), industry level data is obtained from UN Comtrade, and firm-level data is obtained
from the World Bank’s Enterprise Survey. I use two index measures of labor market rigidities, the Strictness of
Employment Protection Legislation index (EPL), constructed by the OECD, and the Rigidity of Employment index
(RE), introduced in the Doing Business report by the World Bank. These indexes combine measurable features of
labor market legislation that relate to the costs of hiring and firing workers.64 Version 1 of the EPL index is available
for 72 OECD and non-OECD countries with a coverage of thirty years (1985-2015) for OECD countries and one
to six years (2010-2015) for non-OECD countries. The RE index is available for 193 countries from 2003-2009 and
2013-2017.65
At the country level, I consider the following relationship,
ln (Yct ) = β0 + β1 ln (LM Rct ) + γc + γt + Xct + εct ,

(A.1)

where variables are indexed for country c in period t. The dependent variable Yct are real country-level exports.
Both the EPL and RE indexes are used as measure of labor market rigidity (LM Rct ). The additional controls,
Xct , include the logarithms of GDP and population. The regression includes country and period fixed effects, and
the standard errors are clustered at the country level.66 Due to country fixed effects, the coefficient β1 captures the
correlation between labor market rigidity and exports within countries over time. At the industry level I run a similar
specification,
ln (Yict ) = β0 + β1 ln (LM Rct ) + Xct + γi + γc + γt + εict ,
(A.2)
where Yict are exports of industry i in country c at time t and where now the regression includes industry-level
fixed effects. Industries are measured at the HS2 level of aggregation, with 97 industries included in the data. The
industry-level regression addresses that labor market rigidities may drive specialization patterns in more open sectors.
Finally, at the firm level I run
ln (yjict ) = β0 + β1 ln (LM Rct ) + Xct + sizejt + γi + γc + γt + εjct ,

(A.3)

where yjict are exports of firm j in industry i from country c at time t relative to sales.67 Firms are sorted into 51
sectors and 3 size categories. Each firm appears at most twice in the survey, precluding the computation of firm fixed
effects. However, I can include the firm-level size as a control. Therefore, the regression captures the relationship
between rigidity and exports across countries within groups of firms of similar size.
64

I use the indicator for individual and collective dismissals for workers with a regular contract from the EPL, which
captures twelve items that can be categorized into Procedural Inconveniences, Notice and Severance Pay, Difficulty
of Individual Dismissal, and Collective Dismissals. Each of this items is converted into a cardinal scale from 0 to 6,
increasing in strictness, and then aggregated into the common index. The RE index is based on hiring and firing
laws and regulations data published by the International Labour Organization. Similar to the EPL, it summarizes
different sub-indices: Difficulty of Hiring (including measures on the flexibility and duration of fixed-term contracts),
Rigidity of Hours (including five components regarding restrictions such as the length of the workday) and Difficulty
of Firing (reflecting various costs associated with firing, such as whether redundancy is grounds for dismissal). The
RE index is calculated as the average of all sub-indices and scaled from 0 to 100.
65
The index was discontinued in 2010, but the answers to each component of the index are also available since
2013. Hence for 2013-2017 I reconstruct the index applying the methodology used in the original index.
66
The overlap between the WDI and OECD datasets results in data availability for 70 countries in periods that
range from 1985 to 2015. Using the RE index, the overlap yields 163 countries for periods that range from 2003 to
2009 and 2013 to 2017.
67
The EPL covers mostly developed countries and the Enterprise Survey covers mostly developing countries.
Hence, only the World Bank’s ER index is used for this regression. On average, the survey includes 300 firms in each
country, with survey frequency weights used in the regression to add up to the total population. In total there are
76 countries in the survey over the years in which the RE measure is available.

11

Table A.3 shows the estimated value of β1 from the country level regression (A.1) and the industry level regression
(A.2) under the two employment protection measures. The first column of Table A.4 shows the estimate of β1 from
the firm level regression (A.3). The coefficient on labor market rigidity is negative and statistically significant in all
cases except in the case of the RE index at the industry level. This relationship is broadly suggestive of a negative
relationship between labor market rigidities and exports, but cannot be given a causal interpretation.68 Further
including an interaction term with firm size as in the second column of Table A.4 yields a negative point estimate,
suggesting a higher correlation between rigidity and exports of larger firms. The point estimate becomes positive and
non-significant within the group of small firms.

Table A.3: Country and Industry Level
(1)
Country Level
-0.458∗∗∗
(0.127)

EPL

RE
Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Controls
Time FE
Country FE
Industry FE

850
0.964
YES
YES
YES
N/A

(2)
Country Level

(3)
Industry Level
-0.536∗∗
(0.192)

-0.0420∗
(0.0204)
1614
0.909
YES
YES
YES
N/A

(4)
Industry Level

71127
0.662
YES
YES
YES
YES

-0.0281
(0.0250)
27721
0.819
YES
YES
YES
YES

Note: Data for 70 countries from 1985 to 2015 for EPL and for 173 countries from 2003 to 2009 and 2013 to 2017 for
RE. Dependent variable and controls are from WDI (country level) or UN Comtrade (industry level). EPL is from
OECD database, and RE is from the Doing Business reports. Standard errors between parentheses are clustered at
the country level in the country-level regression and at country-industry level in the industry-level regression.

Table A.4: Firm Level

RE

(1)
All firms
-0.185∗∗∗
(0.0514)

(2)
All firms
-0.162∗
(0.0709)

(3)
Only small firms
0.00136
(0.122)

266819
0.187
YES
YES
YES
YES

-0.229∗∗∗
(0.0544)
266819
0.189
YES
YES
YES
YES

112307
0.233
YES
YES
YES
NO

RE*Size
Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Time FE
Country FE
Industry FE
Size FE

Note: Data for 76 countries from the World Bank Enterprise Survey panel datasets from 2003 to 2009 and 2013 to
2017. Controls are from WDI and RE is from the Doing Business reports. Standard errors between parentheses are
clustered at the country-industry level.
68

The coefficient remains negative with more flexible controls, but the estimates become noisier. E.g., country level
regressions using the EPL index remain negative and significant using 1-year lags instead of contemporaneous changes,
although it becomes insignificant under the RE measure. Industry-level regressions are negative and significant at
10% using industry-time and industry-country fixed effects with both the EPL and RE measures. The coefficient in
the firm-level regression remains negative but not significant using a balanced panel for the countries present from
2009-2013 only.

12

