NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANKING GLOBALIZATION, TRANSMISSION, AND MONETARY POLICY AUTONOMY
Linda S. Goldberg
Working Paper 19497
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19497
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Arun Gupta provided excellent research assistance. I deeply appreciate comments
and feedback received from participants at the Sveriges Riksbank Conference on Two Decades of
Inflation Targeting: Main Lessons and Remaining Challenges, especially from Karolina Ekholm, and
from Nicola Cetorelli, Michael Klein, Hamid Mehran, Maurice Obstfeld, Jay Shambaugh, and Chris
Sims. Data from Michael Klein, Jay Shambaugh, and Neeltje van Horen are gratefully acknowledged.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Linda S. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Banking Globalization, Transmission, and Monetary Policy Autonomy
Linda S. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19497
October 2013
JEL No. E44,F36,G32
ABSTRACT
International financial linkages, particularly through global bank flows, generate important questions
about the consequences for economic and financial stability, including the ability of countries to conduct
autonomous monetary policy. I address the monetary autonomy issue in the context of the international
policy trilemma: countries seek three typically desirable but jointly unattainable objectives: stable
exchange rates, free international capital mobility, and monetary policy autonomy oriented toward
and effective at achieving domestic goals. I argue that global banking entails some features that are
distinct from broad issues of capital market openness captured in existing studies. In principal, if global
banks with affiliates established in foreign markets can reduce frictions in international capital flows
then the macroeconomic policy trilemma could bind tighter and interest rates will exhibit more co-movement
across countries. However, if the information content and stickiness of the claims and services provided
are enhanced relative to a benchmark alternative, then global banks can weaken the trilemma rather
than enhance it. The result is a prediction of heterogeneous effects on monetary autonomy, tied to
the business models of the global banks and whether countries are investment or funding locations
for those banks. Empirical tests of the trilemma support this view that global bank effects are heterogeneous,
and also that the primary drivers of monetary autonomy are exchange rate regimes.
Linda S. Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I.

Introduction

Financial globalization is frequently criticized, with concerns voiced about consequent increases in
economic volatility and disruptions to monetary policy autonomy. Questions about the structure of the
system for international capital flows and funding intermediation are of first order importance, and
actively debated. 2 One concern is that such globalization amplifies the vulnerability of economies to
shocks, while limiting the tools that central banks and policy authorities have for addressing the shocks
generated at home and abroad. In the aftermath of the Great Recession and global financial crisis,
particular attention has been focused on the activities of global banks and their contribution to
economic vulnerability. Do these banks play a role in stabilizing or destabilizing host markets? Do global
banks make it more difficult for countries to use local interest rates to address domestic cyclical needs,
thereby reducing monetary autonomy?
In this paper, I focus on the relationship between global banks, international shock transmission,
and monetary policy autonomy. Throughout, I consider banks as global when they have international
activity achieved at least in part through networks of physical branches and subsidiaries in foreign
countries. This type of global activity has increased dramatically in recent decades, whether measured
in terms of cross-border funding flows, local lending by bank branches and subsidiaries in host markets,
counts of foreign banks operating in local markets, or the share of local intermediation activity
accounted for by global banks. The composition of international funds provided has also changed
tremendously, with more emphasis on longer-term funding, greater use of internal capital markets as
compared to cross-border transactions, and more off-balance sheet activity in the form of derivatives,
credit guarantees, and commitments. Additionally, global banks use offshore financial centers to a
greater degree, and have become more complex organizations in terms of their structures, geographical
reach, and service provision.
The consequence of openness to international capital flows for monetary policy autonomy is not
a new question. This theme is directly confronted in literature on the macroeconomic policy trilemma,
wherein countries seek three typically desirable but jointly unattainable objectives: stable exchange
rates, free international capital mobility, and monetary policy autonomy oriented toward and effective
at achieving domestic goals (for example, see Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2005, 2010)). Monetary
autonomy, proxied by low interest rate co-movement, is most obtainable under flexible exchange rate
regimes and some forms of capital flow restrictions (Klein and Shambaugh 2013).
2

For example, at the 2013 Jackson Hole conference, both Rey (2013) and Landau (2013) addressed issues
regarding the behavior of global liquidity and dynamics of the global financial cycle.

1

Does the presence of global banks per se require some distinct considerations relative to other
forms of international capital movements? I argue that this distinction matters. In principal, if global
banks enter markets by establishing affiliates, this can lead to reduced frictions in international capital
flows. In turn, the macroeconomic policy trilemma could bind tighter and interest rates will exhibit
more co-movement across countries. Research already shows that international capital flows through
global banks adjust rapidly to shocks through cross-border and internal capital markets, so local
monetary policy effects through the bank lending channel can be weakened (Cetorelli and Goldberg
2012a). However, it also could be the case that, if the global banks are engaged in local lending activity,
the information content and stickiness of the claims and services provided in the host market are
enhanced relative to a benchmark alternative This higher information intensity may enable more
stability of flows to individual non-bank counterparties in host markets, even in the face of larger
macroeconomic disturbances and diminishing financial frictions. Such an argument is consistent with
the observation that the presence of global banks is tied to the reduced incidence of crises across
countries. . In this case, the global banks can weaken the trilemma rather than enhance it. Overall,
heterogeneity in shock transmission and autonomy effects across countries and types of counterparties
should be expected, and could depend on the form of foreign bank entry, the information content of
loans, and the role of affiliate markets in the overall parent organizations as funding sources or
investment locations (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2012c).
I conduct empirical tests of the trilemma, closely following the analyses of Obstfeld, Taylor and
Shambaugh (2005, 2010) and Klein and Shambaugh (2013), but also adding variables that introduce the
extent of global bank penetration of local economies. The share of global banks in domestic credit
creation, not the relative counts of banks with operations in a country, is correlated with interest rate
co-movements in countries with pegged or floating exchange rate regimes. In particular, global bank
presence is associated with stronger interest rate co-movements in the pegged rate countries that have
the most open capital accounts. Global bank penetration matters, while standard measures of capital
account openness do not, for floating exchange rate countries, and is associated with higher interest
rate co-movements. That said, exchange rate regimes matter most and are the primary reason for
differences in interest rate co-movements across countries.
Does this mean that global banking does exacerbate a policy trilemma? In some cases the
answer may be yes, but not conclusively so. Global banks follow customers into many markets, and
should be correlated with international trade activity, which is not a separate control in the regressions.
At the same time, the transmission of shocks between economies through banks is quite

2

heterogeneous, as are the expected effects for the macro-economy.

Some host countries are

investment locations for banks, where information-intensity of transactions plays a larger role, while
other locations are funding locations. Indeed, recent work also suggests that the complexity of the
overall global bank parent organization may influence transmission (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2013b),
alongside the health and vulnerabilities of banks (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2011), and the structure of
finance beyond these banks should matter for transmission and macroeconomic consequences. Clearly,
more work is needed before a “negative” assessment of the effects of global banks on monetary policy
autonomy is levied.
Finally, it is worth noting that my arguments go in a different direction from those of Rey (2013),
who considers the large gross capital flows in international banking and elsewhere as destabilizing
economies and making more difficult the conduct of monetary policy. These gross flows certainly could
contribute to the incidence of crises, and the severity of crises as also argued by Obstfeld (2012).
However, net flows and the specific counterparties for these flows might matter more for the regular
conduct of monetary policy. Moreover, research generally shows that the entry of global banks into
economies, especially emerging market ones, has reduced crisis vulnerabilities rather than enhanced
these.
Section II proceeds by presenting trends in global banking across recent decades. Section III
presents key lessons from the literature that examines the roles of global banks in international shock
transmission and business cycle co-movement. Section IV turns to evidence on the international
macroeconomic policy trilemma, and Section V concludes with a discussion of some outstanding
challenges.
II. Trends in banking globalization and international flows
To provide perspective for understanding the macroeconomic consequences of global banks, this section
presents facts on the scale and composition of international banking activity. Consider first the
international banking flows by approximately thirty countries that report consolidated, national data at
a quarterly frequency to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). These data reflect banks' “onbalance sheet” financial claims vis-à-vis the rest of the world, aggregated across all banks within each
reporting country. They cover contractual lending by the head office, its branches, and subsidiaries on a
worldwide consolidated basis, i.e. net of inter-office accounts. Intermediation activity includes the
extension of credit by a bank headquartered in a particular country to residents of another country, and
can occur via: (i) cross-border lending; (ii) local lending by affiliates established in the foreign country, or

3

(iii) lending booked by an affiliate established in a third country (e.g. an international financial center).
The underlying financial instruments could be loans, deposits, or securities, as well as derivatives
contracts and contingent facilities. 3
Figure 1 shows an informative trajectory in international banking growth (as a share of GDP).
While growth during the mid-1980s and 1990s was gradual, the early 2000s saw a significant
acceleration until the start of the financial crisis of 2007. This was followed by a significant retrenchment
during the crisis, with international capital flows through banks dropping nearly 25 percent through
2012. Cross-border flows drive much of the dynamics (in red). These patterns can be compared with the
growth in international trade activity (Figure 2). The early rise in international banking tightly mirrored
the growth of international trade, in accord with the view that early internationalization of banking was
associated with financial multinationals following the production conglomerates and real resource firms
abroad. The sharper liftoff in global banking flows through the 2000s occurred as the activities and
customer bases of global banks broadened.
Insert Figure 1 here
Insert Figure 2 here
As globalization of banks and opportunities for claims through affiliates increased, cross-border
and interbank flows could have tilted toward transactions that are more risky and volatile. 4 For example,
international capital flows to unaffiliated banks in emerging markets are more volatile than lending flows
to the non-bank sector (Figure 3). The claims extended through affiliates could be the more information
intensive ones, and expanded activity in local markets could be with counterparties that have harder
information available. The volatility of flows is not purely a story of shortened maturity of funding
extended by global banks. Between the 1990s and the 2000s, the share of short-term flows in
international claims (Figure 4), which includes both cross-border and foreign currency denominated local
claims, declined.
Insert Figure 3 here
The types of claims reported to the BIS are described as international claims and foreign claims. International
claims encompass the cross-border lending and local claims extended by foreign affiliates of the parent bank that
are denominated in foreign currency. Foreign claims are broader than international claims, in that they also
capture local claims denominated in local currency terms. The data do not cover asset management services.
Parts of section update evidence provided in BIS CGFS No. 41 (2010) on long term trends in international banking.
4
Some of these flows may respond more to stress events, leading to greater volatility in bank financing than in
foreign direct investment, portfolio equity, and net international debt securities.
3

4

Insert Figure 4 here
The opportunity to shift activities from being cross-border to locally-based arose with the
establishment of branches and affiliates of global banks in host markets. As carefully documented by
Claessens and van Horen (2013), the numbers and shares of banks operating internationally with local
affiliates exhibit their strongest growth in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and again in 2006 to 2007
(Figure 5). 5 In some countries, particularly in emerging markets, the foreign-owned bank shares in local
activity grew to dominate shares by domestically-owned banks.

The volume of credit issuance

originating from foreign-owned banks within local markets also grew rapidly, although not
homogeneously, across countries.
Insert Figure 5 here
As part of the growing number of global banks with centralized decision-making and liquidity
management practices, flows between affiliated banks through internal capital markets also reached
significant levels. These intra-affiliate flows, in gross terms, are almost as large as interbank transactions
(Figure 6). 6
Insert Figure 6 here
The 2000s also were a period of expanded off-balance sheet exposures, flows to offshore
financial centers, and enhanced organizational complexity. Off-balance sheet transactions, which include
derivatives positions, credit commitments, and guarantees 7, had growth (Figure 7) that outpaced that of
local claims and cross-border claims. US banks were responsible for the largest growth in guarantees
extended and credit commitments, while UK banks accounted for the growth in derivatives contracts
(BIS CGFS No. 41 2010). At the same time, global bank flows channeled through offshore financial
centers increased three-fold over this period (Figure 8). The economic rationale behind use of OFCs and

5

Various studies explore the entry decisions by these banks, including Buch (2003, 2005), Focarelli and Pozzolo
(2006) and Lehner (2009). Niepmann (2013) provides a model where more efficient banks are able to absorb fixed
costs of entry into foreign markets, and therefore access these markets through local affiliates instead of crossborder flows, monitoring customers and absorbing higher costs then domestic banks. Empirical evidence by Buch,
Koch, and Koetter (2012) provide support for size and efficiency arguments. Cerutti, Dell’Ariccia and Peria 2007
explore the decision over form of entry through branches or subsidiaries.
6
Examples of studies providing direct evidence are Cetorelli and Goldberg 2012 a,b,c, and Duwell 2013.
7
These positions of international banks are captured by BIS banking statistics for the period since 2005 and fall
under “other exposures”. The derivative positions are the “net value of derivatives”, including derivatives used to
hedge balance sheet positions, but not derivatives used for proprietary trading.

5

the economic consequences of this activity are the subject of ongoing analyses (For example, Rose and
Spiegel (2007)).
Insert Figure 7 here
Insert Figure 8 here
The growth in global banking activity is accompanied by a large increase in the complexity of
these organizations, as measured by the number and industrial classifications of their affiliates (Cetorelli
and Goldberg 2013a). There is a widespread perception that the size of organizations is closely mapped
to the complexity of organizations. While higher value organizations do tend to have greater numbers of
affiliates, especially when considering the largest of financial institutions, this tight link is absent when
geographic and business line complexity are considered. Still to be determined are reasons for such
complexity: whether due to a search for production efficiency, tax avoidance, information obfuscation,
or other explanations. Many global bank affiliates are found within the parent organization’s borders,
but other affiliates are scattered worldwide). Complexity may be intertwined with the role of global
banks in international shock transmission. Cetorelli and Goldberg (2013b) posit that the US branches of
foreign banks may play a larger role in liquidity provision and insurance when they are part of more
complex global organizations.

III. Global Banks and International Shock Transmission
Ultimately I ask the question of whether banking globalization, distinct from other forms of international
financial integration, undermines the ability of countries to conduct autonomous monetary policy.
Before turning to empirical tests related to that proposition, in this section I review evidence on global
banks and international shock transmission. I begin with evidence that financial integration strengthens
international co-movement of business cycles and the transmission of shocks across markets, and then
turn to global bank roles.
III.1

Financial Globalization and business cycle co-movements.
Alternative theoretical frameworks use two-country models to understand the role of financial

globalization in the international propagation of shocks originating in one country and leading to more
synchronized business cycles. Calibrated models introduce financial frictions and international business

6

cycles 8. Specific mechanisms differ across studies, for example when leverage-constrained investors with
internationally diversified portfolios are responsible for reallocating capital in response to shocks.
Alternatively, investors equalizing returns across internationally traded assets transmit shocks that hit
their respective net worth, leading to enhanced co-movements of business cycles. 9
VAR studies have explored the responses of shocks to GDP across the United States, Euro Area,
Japan, and an aggregate of small industrialized countries - with the goal of identifying the major
international channels through which shocks are propagated (Bayoumi and Swiston 2009). The largest
contributions to spillovers almost universally come from financial variables, as opposed to from trade
flows or through commodity prices. World interest rates are also found to be important for emerging
market business cycles (Neumeyer and Perri 2005), and U.S. shocks are clearly transmitted to Latin
American countries (Canova (2005)). Financial integration raises business cycle synchronization among a
sample of industrialized countries, even though these countries also tend to be more specialized (Imbs
2004).
The financial integration that is viewed as enhancing business cycle co-movement is not purely a
story about international risk sharing. Empirical evaluations of risk sharing patterns among countries
exhibiting differing degrees of international financial integration finds it is at best modest, and certainly
nowhere near the levels predicted by theory (Terrones et al. 2007). In addition, only industrial countries
have attained better risk sharing outcomes during the recent period of globalization. This evidence
concludes that developing countries have been partly shut out of this benefit because portfolio debt,
which has dominated the external liability stocks of most emerging markets until recently, is not
conducive to risk sharing.
III.2 Direct Evidence on Global banks and International Shock Transmission
What is the specific role of global banks in business cycle co-movements? The diversification
benefits of risk-sharing in banking are illustrated in basic macro-banking models where integration tends
For example, see Devereux and Yetman (2010), Kollman, Enders and Muller, 2011, Dedola and Lombardo (2012),
and Meier (2013).
9
Adrian and Shin (2010) argue that financial intermediaries – and more generally the suppliers of credit -- drive the
business cycle through their role in driving the price of risk, and argue (in a one country setting) that balance sheet
aggregates such as total assets and leverage are the relevant financial intermediary aggregates to consider in
macroeconomic analysis. In their context, with data on the United States, the quantitative discussion considers
both the banking and shadow banking system or more market-based intermediaries such as broker-dealers (and
which are dependent on more volatile external finance). The institutional structure of intermediation is stressed. In
principle, these arguments should extend to the international environment and the location of sensitivities to
changes in risk and leverage.
8

7

to dampen the effect of bank capital shocks within borders, but amplifies the effect of bank-specific
shocks across borders (Morgan, Strahan, and Rime (2004)). In the international setting, the dampening
of local shocks starts with a basic observation that the availability of loanable funds via the home deposit
base contributes to the pro-cyclicality of lending and the real economy. If foreign-owned bank entrants
are less reliant on host-country funding sources and more dependent on foreign sources than their
domestically-owned counterparts are, the pro-cyclicality in their supply of loanable funds may be lower.
By now it is well-established that global banks are agents for international shock transmission
and generate more integrated international lending activity. Japanese banks transmitted the shocks
from Japanese stock price movements that hit their own capital bases into the U.S. real estate market
through Japanese bank branches operating in the United States (Peek and Rosengren 1997, 2000). 10
Liquidity shocks transmitted through individual U.S. global banks weakened the bank lending channel
within the United States and increasing transmission into markets where U.S. banks have overseas
affiliates (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2012a). Internal capital markets within global banks work alongside
cross-border flows as paths for this transmission, with intra-bank borrowing and lending less volatile but
still adjusting to liquidity shocks in crisis and non-crisis times (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2012b,c). Cross
border funds and traditional interbank transactions are more volatile than local claims (Cetorelli and
Goldberg (2006, 2011), Schnabl (2012), Correa, Sapriza, and Zlate (2012)). Syndicated lending activity is
a form of cross-border flows shown to be highly responsive to balance sheet conditions and responsible
for international transmission (de Haas and van Horen 2012, Giannetti and Laeven 2012).
These observations also point to the importance of being very clear about the form of
international banking flows in studies of the effects of banking globalization. Global bank intermediation,
along with related internal capital market flows to international affiliated banks or branches, may reduce
the financial frictions in international capital markets, and potentially lead to more rapid adjustments of
positions. At the same time, there can instead be reduced volatility in international capital flows as
counter-party risk declines with the shift away from long distance relationships between borrowers and
lenders; the transition from cross-border connections to those through local claims of banks can both
ease the potential for international capital movements while reducing the flightiness of those flows; and
the incidence of crises in local markets has declined. Such observations can be consistent with the
message of Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Peydro (2012).

In the Malaysian case, banks with sufficient international diversification played a stabilizing role in host credit
markets during the Asian crisis, while foreign banks that had a narrower focus on Asia behaved similarly to
domestic banks (Detragiache and Gupta (2004)).
10

8

Moreover, business model differences across and within banks should drive their consequences
for international shock transmission and business cycle co-movements, implying heterogeneity in
international transmission. While shocks to both the parent organization and local markets are
smoothed through capital reallocations, not all affiliate markets are similarly treated by parents. In US
bank external flows, a pecking order approach to the affiliates applies, instead of the alternative where
there is an organizational hierarchy supporting the parent at the uniform expense of the affiliates
(Cetorelli and Goldberg 2012c). The real effects and form of shock transmission is not expected to be
uniform across locations. Duwel (2013) shows the German parent banks likewise used internal markets
to reallocate funding within their organizations, with different dynamics of protections to branches and
subsidiaries as the funding pressures evolved.
Nonetheless, from a macroeconomic perspective, the role of global banks in enhanced business
cycle co-movements may be exaggerated. Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Peydro (2012) explore
business cycle co-movement within more than 150 bilateral pairs of advanced economies between 1970
and 2006. The cross-section of country pairs confirms the significant positive correlation between
banking integration and output synchronization, but the panel estimates show that within country pairs,
increases in cross-border banking and more legislative/ regulatory harmonization in financial services
inside the EU has been followed by less synchronized, more divergent output fluctuations. Moreover,
aggregate credit effects depend on the potential for local borrowers to substitute credit through bond
markets and shadow banking (Adrian, Colla, and Shin 2012), which can differ widely across countries.
III.3 Financial Globalization and Crises
Oddly, another reason for enhanced business cycle co-movements across countries could be
because banking globalization is associated with a reduced incidence of (idiosyncratic) financial crises in
emerging market economies, and thereby with fewer sharp output contractions that accompany such
crises (Calvo and Reinhart 2000). In a wide sample of countries, the share of bank assets held by foreign
owners is negatively correlated with the probability of a crisis (Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Levine 2003).
Foreign bank presence was found to have a negative and statistically significant coefficient in crosscountry regressions on crisis probability (Demirguc-Kunt, Levine, and Min 1998). More recent work
using data from a sample of 20 developed countries between 1978 and 2009 compared the bilateral
linkages and crisis probabilities in periods with and without financial crises (Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou,
and Perri 2012). In periods without financial crises, increases in bilateral banking linkages are associated
with more divergent output cycles. This relation is significantly weaker and turned positive during

9

financial turmoil periods, suggesting that financial crises induce co-movement among more financially
integrated countries and more generally that the type of shock matters for the direction of business
cycle co-movement.

IV.

Interest rate co-movements and the macroeconomic policy trilemma
The consequences of financial globalization generally, and banking globalization specifically, for

the monetary autonomy of countries has been explored in many studies through the lens of interest rate
co-movements. 11 Bilateral studies of the economic news effect provide one set of perspectives, though
without explicitly considering magnitudes of the financial or banking integration of countries. Consistent
with increasing globalization, impacts of U.S. shocks on euro area interest rates have grown larger over
time (Ehrmann and Fratzscher 2005), although other studies find more mixed results depending on the
particular period studied.12 These long term structural changes are not the only factors behind changing
interest rate co-movements. Similarities in perceived central bank policy reaction functions matter
(Goldberg and Klein 2011). Risk conditions also matter: uncertainty alters the information content of
news announcements, the interaction of monetary policy and financial stability objectives of central
banks, and the effect of economic news announcements on risk premia (Goldberg and Grisse 2013).
In a cross-country setting, exchange rate regimes, controls on financial flows, and economic
inter-linkages are tied to interest rate co-movements. Countries with de jure or de facto currency pegs
with respect to the U.S. dollar have their interest rates and monetary stances move largely in step with
U.S. interest rates, tying the broader business cycles more closely together (di Giovanni and Shambaugh
2008, and Frankel, Schmukler and Serven 2004). Forbes and Chinn (2004) find that the response of bond
yields in smaller economies to those of the world’s largest economies depends more on trade than
financial linkages, whereas Hausman and Wongswan (2011) find both types of linkages are important to
the response of bond yields to U.S. monetary shocks.
The macroeconomic policy trilemma facing countries is that only two of the following three
options might be achieved: exchange rate fixity, monetary autonomy, and international financial
openness. Extensive cross-country and time series tests by Obstfeld, Taylor and Shambaugh (2005,

Kamin (2010) provides a comprehensive review of a number of distinct literatures on asset price co-movements
and international shock transmission.
12
Faust, Rogers, Wang, and Wright (2007) find that surprises in U.S. macro announcements affect both short- and
longer term interest rates in Europe, but find little evidence that these effects grew stronger over the 1987-2002
period. Contrary to that finding, Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005) find that the effect of U.S. macro announcements
on euro area interest rates rose from before to after 1998.
11

10

2010) provide evidence that is broadly supportive of the trilemma, particular with respect to less
monetary autonomy observed for countries with fixed exchange rates, and more interest rate
independence for countries under flexible exchange rate systems. Klein and Shambaugh (2013)
demonstrate that countries with extensive capital controls or floating exchange rates retain more
monetary autonomy. However, partial capital controls and limited exchange rate flexibility did not lead
countries to have more monetary autonomy than in situations with open capital accounts and fixed
exchange rates. The trilemma policy mix of countries also feeds back into their output volatility and
inflation performance, as Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito (2010) document for developing countries.
IV.1 Underpinnings for Global Bank Effects on the Macroeconomic Policy Trilemma
Within this context, why might banking globalization per se matter for monetary autonomy?
Banking globalization, especially through the establishment of branches and affiliates in host countries,
can be viewed from the lens of reducing financial frictions in international capital markets. 13 These
frictions are largely informational, and can be captured under a broad heading of counterparty risk. The
increased global bank entry into many economies is accompanied by an expansion of local lending
through these banks. This lending is presumably more information intensive than the previous armslength cross border flows that would have occurred through these same banks. At the same time, there
has been an increased use of internal capital markets by these global banks. The presumption here is
that the reduced “distance” between the lending source (the global bank) and the client - when this
global bank operates through its local branch or subsidiary - increases information intensity. While the
costs of moving credit across countries may be reduced when operating within an organization, the
information content of the flows associated with lending may be higher, enhancing rather than
reducing the stability of loans relative to a cross-border relationship. 14 Indeed, in a systemic crisis or
stress situation, such flows may continue to a greater degree than other flows with more counterparty
risk.

While relevant for the branches and subsidiaries that operate lending operations in countries,

information as a stabilizing factor to net lending flows may be less important in economies that some
global banks use mainly as locations for raising local funds and offering other portfolio services.
For thinking about financial frictions, a broad macroeconomic literature considers a type of financial frictions and
effects on lending activity. The early literature takes a closed economy view and models frictions as related to
credit constraints related to borrower collateral. Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) instead places borrowing constraints
on the lender (the bank), still within a closed economy framework. Other frictions arise from access to external
finance when liquidity conditions adjust, a phenomenon argued by Kashyap and Stein (2000) to explain differential
bank lending channel effects of monetary policy on loan supply by large versus small banks in the United States, or
Cornett, McNutt, Strahan, and Tehranian (forthcoming) on their responses to liquidity risk.
14
For example, see Degryse and Ongena (2005) and Buch (2005).
13

11

Thus, in addition to the looser restrictions on international capital markets access that can
enhance the policy trilemma for countries (particularly those without fully flexible exchange rates), I
consider whether the presence of global banks also alters the strength of the trilemma. 15 The empirical
exercise below examines whether measures of global bank participation within countries and over time
add explanatory power to existing studies of interest rate co-movements across countries and the policy
trilemma.
The main empirical specification from Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2005, 2010) is

∆rit = α + β∆rbit + µit

(1)

where changes ∆ at time t in the nominal local interest rate r of country i move in step with changes in
the interest rate r of a dominant or base currency b, which is the currency of the nation to which
country i has some degree of de facto or de jure exchange rate pegs. Most tests use short-term rates for
both country i and the base country. Many variants on this basic test have been derived and tested in
prior studies. I follow the trilemma literature, in which tests introduce non-structural functional forms
for 𝛃, capturing the intuition that co-movements of interest rates should be higher for countries with

currency peg relationships and with more open capital accounts, captured in variable vector X.
Specifically,

β= β 0 + β1 X it

(2)

High values of β are interpreted as indicating less monetary autonomy for country i. This interpretation
is certainly subject to objections, as tight interest rate co-movements can arise for other reasons,
including tight inter-linkages of economies through trade, production integration, or similar industry
structures (eg. Stockman and Tesar 1995, and Burstein, Kurz, and Tesar 2008).

Interestingly,

specification results of (1) with broader controls introduced for these other country linkages still
generate robust conclusions about the roles of exchange rate regimes and capital controls (Shambaugh
2004). My contribution to this literature is to explore whether interest rates co-move more tightly
across countries when we introduce controls for the presence of global banks,. This result might
As discussed further below, the metric for foreign bank penetration – relative counts of banks – used in our first
tests is one indicator, but certainly is unlikely to capture the extent of integration. It also does not reflect the
relationships between the operations in the host markets and the entire parent operations, factors that Cetorelli
and Goldberg (2012c) identify as important for the use of internal capital markets and transmission into lending
supply in the host markets.
15

12

especially arise under fixed exchange rate regimes, but also might be present under flexible exchange
rate regimes. If I find indication of a significant role of global bank participation, more analysis would be
needed to parse if this role exists independently or exists because these banks are in markets that
otherwise have more correlated trade and business cycles. 16
IV.2 Data.
I adopt the exchange rate regime metrics of Shambaugh (2004), where a currency is treated as
in a “peg” if its exchange rate is within a 2 percent band over the course of a year against a base
currency. For example, pegs against the U.S. dollar would have the base interest rate be that of the
United States. In addition, I use the “soft pegs” definition of Obstfeld et al. (2010), where the exchange
rate bands are between +/-2 percent and +/- 5 percent per year.
I capture restrictions on international capital flows by adopting the Chinn and Ito (2006) capital
account openness measure. This metric allows for a variety of capital controls, including covering
current account transactions, capital account transactions, and multiple exchange rates. The measure is
highest when these restrictions are few, and takes a low or negative value when extensive restrictions
on international capital movements are in place. 17 These capital control metrics are intended to reflect
de jure impediments or frictions in international movements of capital. My regression specifications
introduce the Chinn-Ito metrics, which are continuous variables that range between -1.86 and 2.45 in
our sample, or introduce discrete categories of capital account openness (high, medium or low) based
on the continuous Chinn-Ito metric. 18
Global bank presence in each country (denoted by variable GlobalBank) is introduced using two
measures of foreign penetration. First, I draw on the Claessens and van Horen (2013) database on
foreign bank penetration into local financial systems. One measure, denoted as count in the regression
tables, is the relative count of foreign banks out of total banks in each economy in each year from 1995
Spiegel (2009) considers whether financial globalization disciplines local monetary policy implementation in the
sense of reducing the returns from using monetary policy to stabilize output. Using a financial remoteness
variable, he finds a negative relationship between median inflation and financial globalization, but not a robust
relationship.
16

Klein (2013) also constructs useful measures distinguish between long-standing capital controls that extend over
a wide range of assets, described as “walls”, and controls that are more narrowly targeted over a limited duration,
which he describes as “gates”. Klein and Shambaugh (2013) introduce both sets of measures into their benchmark
set of tests of the policy trilemma for countries.
18
These high, medium, and low categories follow the idea of Klein and Shambaugh (2013), who divide countryyear observations into true open, mid-open, and other. While the high openness observations correspond to true
open in that study, we broaden the definition of low openness to include some observations that Klein and
Shambaugh included as mid-open. The cut-offs for each category are described in the data appendix.
17

13

to 2009. 19 These data are then merged with the dataset used in Klein and Shambaugh (2013, “KS”),
resulting in a sample of 136 countries and spanning 15 years of data.20 I construct a second measure of
foreign bank penetration that is based on credit extension, instead of counts of banks. This measure,
denoted as GlobalinCredit in the regression tables, is the share of foreign bank claims on local residents
from the Bank for International Settlements Consolidated Banking Statistics Database, relative to
Domestic Credit volumes reported in the International Financial Statistics (IFS) database. The latter are
converted into USD using IFS bilateral exchange rates. The resulting variable for foreign local credit
share is lagged in regression specifications to deal with simultaneity concerns. The global bank presence
measures may be positively correlated with financial openness, but these are not identical concepts.
I use the Chinn-Ito measures to describe capital market openness as high, medium, or low, and
using the peg, softpeg, and flexible exchange rate regime indicators. The data observations are well
distributed over the alternative capital account openness and exchange rate regimes (Table 1).
Finally, the specifications use times series of nominal short-term interest rates for each country.
The specific short-term interest rates and base countries used for each country at each date, along with
all other data sources, are described in the data appendix. I use the KS assignment of base countries for
each peg, as presented in Appendix Table A1. While all of the reported specifications use annual
interest rates, I have also run specifications with quarterly interest rates and various lag structures. The
qualitative and quantitative results are robust to this frequency choice, but more noise is added to
interest rates and regression fits decline. 21
IV.3 Results for Global Bank Effects on the Macroeconomic Policy Trilemma
Table 2 reports the results of interest-rate co-movement specifications (1) with various controls
introduced. The specifications labeled as baseline replicate the KS specifications, although that study
spanned a longer time frame, more countries, and included a broader exploration of capital control
types. Specifications (1) do not include any capital controls distinctions, specifications (2) do not include
any exchange rate regime distinctions, and specifications (3) introduce exchange rate regimes and a
division of capital account regimes according to degree of openness (high, medium, or low). Under each
of these are three columns, labeled a, b, and c. Columns b and c separately introduce the two global
bank variables (count and GlobalinCredit), both non-interacted and interacted with the other regression
An alternative variable, on foreign bank share in total banking system assets, is available only from 2004.
I thank both sets of authors for providing the data. The Klein and Shambaugh (2013) study covers 209 countries
and data for 1960 to 2011.
21
I do not explicitly focus on the interesting issue of the speed through which the base rate feeds through to
domestic rates.
19
20

14

variables. Table 3 follows a similar format, except that instead of using dummy variables for the capital
account openness regime, the continuous Chinn-Ito series is used. Tables 4 and 5 parallel each other,
but present separate regression analyses for sample observations divided according to exchange rate
regime (peg, soft peg, or float).
The baseline specifications show that exchange rate regimes are associated with significant
differences across countries in interest rate co-movements relative to base country rates (Table 2,
specification 1a). The lack of significance on the base rate (non-interacted) shows that on average,
pegged exchange rate countries have the tightest co-movement at 0.57, soft peg countries have a
weaker co-movement at 0.49, and flexible exchange rate countries do not display statistically significant
co-movements . Table 2, specification 2a demonstrates that those specifications that only distinguish by
capital account openness, and not exchange rate regimes, do not measure significant distinctions in
interest rate co-movements. When both capital account and exchange rate regimes are simultaneously
introduced (Table 2, specification 3a), the coefficients associated with the exchange rate regimes
become more pronounced as the coefficient on pegs rises, and the distinction between low and medium
capital accounts openness appears to be more prominent. Table 3 results use the continuous Chinn-Ito
measures, again showing that both pegged exchange rates and capital account openness are associated
with stronger interest rate co-movements. For robustness, we have run regressions without the
constant term in addition to other specifications using quarterly interest rates (and various lag
structures). The study’s findings are robust to these alternative specifications.
These results have a lot in common with the central message from prior studies: pegged
exchange rate regimes are associated with higher interest rate co-movements. Specifically, while full
pegs have the strongest co-movements, with higher point estimates than soft pegs, soft pegs do not
seem to provide much added insulation or “monetary policy autonomy”, a result that Klein and
Shambaugh confirms in a range of other tests. I find weaker evidence for the role of capital controls in
this baseline as compared to prior studies that used earlier sample periods in the empirical analysis.
These earlier periods may have had more extreme capital account restrictions in place than those we
associate with our low capital account openness regime. 22 During the period I examine, and for the
country sample included, capital controls as captured by the Chinn-Ito measures do not appear to be
effective for changing interest rate co-movements.
Results provided in Table 4 baseline specifications correspond to separate specifications for the
observations within each exchange rate regime subsample.
22

Only the specification applied to pegged

Our “low” openness regime overlaps with the KS “mid-open” categorization.

15

exchange rate regimes (Table 4, specification 1) explains much of the interest rate variation with an
adjusted 𝑅 2 of 0.18 and with significant roles for the base country interest rate, regardless of discrete

capital account categories. Table 5 specifications using the continuous Chinn-Ito measure show that
pegged exchange rate countries with greater capital account openness also have their short-term policy
rates move more closely with the base currency interest rate.
The other specifications within these tables introduce additional measures to reflect global bank
participation by country and date. Specifications (b) across the tables introduce the ratio of foreign
banks to total number of banks in each country at each date (count). Specifications (c) introduce the
share of global banks in the provision of domestic credit (GlobalinCredit), corresponding to the lending
operations of local affiliates (branches and subsidiaries) of these global banks. In general, these variables
add very little explanatory power to the specifications. These metrics of banking globalization do not
change the basic message regarding key drivers of monetary autonomy for countries. The exchange rate
regimes in place dominate the results. Across the two alternative global bank metrics, a consistent
finding is that the number of foreign-owned banks relative to the total number of domestic banks is not
correlated with patterns interest rate co-movements. However, global bank penetration in credit
provision can be significant.
Among pegged exchange rate countries (Tables 4 and 5, specification c), high foreign bank
shares in credit are associated with some increased co-movements of interest rates. This is especially the
case for countries already with a high degree of capital account openness. It is interesting that a role for
foreign bank penetration in credit provision also is associated with more interest-rate co-movement
among floating exchange rate countries. In some specifications, this type of openness strengthens comovement of interest rate, damping the effect of capital account openness per se.
Overall, the regression tables using data from 1995 to 2009 show that the primary distinction
across countries in interest rate co-movements arise according to exchange rate regimes, and in
particular, if a pegged exchange rate regime is in place. Soft pegs are associated with somewhat lower,
but still high and significant interest rate co-movements. Countries that have “fear of floating” (Calvo
and Reinhart 2002) and adopt soft pegs still forgo a lot of monetary independence. The broad capital
account openness measures of Chinn and Ito (2006) play a distant secondary role in our data and
country sample.

Instead, there is some evidence that global bank presence in local economies

influences co-movements. This evidence does not appear when controls capture the numbers of foreign
entrants, but when the unit of observation is the share of the foreign banks in domestic credit provision.
For pegged and flexible exchange rate countries, interest rate co-movements are greater as foreign bank

16

credit share rise, pointing to a specific channel which may offset some of the direct differences across
countries that would come from the capital account openness measures.
Despite this statistical significance, it is important to emphasis the low incremental explanatory
power that resulted from the inclusion of the global bank variables. I already have stressed that, ex ante,
it might be difficult to have a single generalized effect of global banking on interest rate co-movement or
“monetary autonomy” across countries and time. Global banks enter markets for different reasons, and
perform very different functions within specific localities. The health of the foreign bank is an important
consideration for transmission (Dages, Goldberg, and Kinney 2000), as is the pattern of foreign bank
vulnerabilities (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2011, 2012b) and organizational complexity (Cetorelli and
Goldberg 2013a). For any global bank, the type of shock transmission to any economy should depend on
the importance of that economy to the overall business of the parent organization - both as a funding
source and an investment location (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2012c). Additionally, the corresponding
aggregate credit effects depend on the potential for local borrowers to substitute credit through bond
markets and shadow banking. Other data on measures of financial and foreign exchange market
development could be usefully added in future studies.
V. Conclusions
Global banks serve to reduce frictions to international capital flows, especially as they enter
local markets through branches and subsidiaries and increase flows with related parties. At the same
time, more information intensity of transactions with unrelated parties can support more stable
funding, compared with cross-border flows. Such developments are consistent with research on the
relative cyclicality of alternative flows and the reduced incidence of crises in host markets.
Does this mean that global banking exacerbates a policy trilemma? In some cases the answer
may be yes, but not conclusively so. Global banks follow customers into many markets, and should be
correlated with international trade activity, which is not a separate control in the regressions. 23 At the
same time, studies do clearly show transmission of shocks between economies through banks, although
with heterogeneous on the direct effects through banks, and also on the transmission into the macroeconomy.

Some host countries are investment locations for banks, where information-intensity of

transactions plays a larger role, while other locations are funding locations. Indeed, recent work also
suggests that the complexity of the overall global bank parent organization may influence transmission

As the careful work of Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Peydro (2012) cautions, there is a danger of ascribing
too much of a role to global banks in studies of business cycle co-movement.

23

17

(Cetorelli and Goldberg 2013b), alongside the health and vulnerabilities of banks (Cetorelli and Goldberg
2011), and the structure of finance beyond these banks should matter for transmission and
macroeconomic consequences. Clearly, more work is needed before a negative assessment of the
effects of global banks on monetary policy autonomy is levied.

References
Adrian, T.,Shin, H., 2010. “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics,” Handbook of Monetary
Economics 3A Ch. 12, edited by Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford, pp. 601-650.
Adrian, T., Colla, P., and Shin, H., 2012. “Which Financial Frictions? Parsing the Evidence from the
Financial Crisis of 2007-09,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012, edited by Daron Acemoglu,
Jonathan Parker, and Michael Woodford.
Aizenman, J., Chinn, M., and Ito, H. 2010. “The emerging global financial architecture: Tracing and
evaluating new patterns of the trilemma configuration” Journal of International Money and
Finance vol. 29, pp. 615-641.
Bank for International Settlement, 2010. “Long-term issues in International Banking,” Committee on
Global Financial Stability Publications CGFS No. 41 .
Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2003. “Bank Concentration and Crises,” NBER working paper No.
9921.
Bayoumi, T., Swiston, A., 2009. "Foreign Entanglements: Estimating the Source and Size of Spillovers
Across Industrial Countries," IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 56(2), pp. 353-383 .
Buch, C., 2003. “Information or regulation: What Drives the International Activities of Commercial
Banks,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Volume 35 No. 6 pp. 851–69.
Buch, C., 2005. “Distance and International Banking,” Review of International Economics Vol. 13 No. 4
pp. 787-804.
Buch, C., Koch, C., Koetter, M., 2012. “Do Banks Benefit from Internationalization? Revisiting the market
Power-Risk Nexus,” Review of Finance.
Burstein, A., Kurz, C., Tesar, L., 2008. “Trade, Production Sharing, and the International Transmission of
Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 55 pp. 775-795.
Calvo, G., Reinhart, C., 2000. “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden Stop: Consequences and Policy
Options,” Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System, edited by Peter B. Kenen
and Alexander Swoboda, IMF pp. 175-201.
Calvo, G., Reinhart, C. 2002. "Fear Of Floating," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol.
117(2), pages 379-408, May.
Canova, F., 2005. “The Transmission of US shocks to Latin America,” Journal of Applied Econometrics Vol.
20 Issue 2 pp. 229-251.
Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L., 2013a. “Measures of Complexity of Global Banks,” manuscript, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L., 2013b. “Size, Complexity, and Liquidity Management: Evidence from Foreign
Banks in the United States,” manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

18

Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L., 2012a. “Banking Globalization and Monetary Transmission,” Journal of
Finance Vol. 67 No. 5, pp. 1811-1843.
Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L., 2012b. "Follow the Money: Quantifying Domestic Effects of Foreign Bank
Shocks in the Great Recession," American Economic Review Vol. 102 No. 3, pp. 213-18.
Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L., 2012c. “Liquidity management of U.S. Global Banks: Internal Capital Markets
in the Great Recession,” Journal of International Economics Vol. 88 Issue 2 pp. 299-311.
Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L., 2011. “Global Banks and International Shock Transmission: Evidence from the
Crisis,” International Monetary Fund Economic Review Vol. 59 No. 1 pp. 41-76.
Cetorelli, N., Goldberg, L., 2006. “Risks in U.S. Bank International Exposures,” Cross Border Banking:
Regulatory Challenges in ed. Jerry Caprio, Douglas Evanoff and George Kaufman (Singapore:
World Scientific Publishing Company, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and World Bank).
Cerutti, E., Dell’Ariccia, G., Martínez Peria, M., 2007. “How Banks Go Abroad: Branches or Subsidiaries?”
Journal of Banking and Finance Vol. 31 pp. 1669–92.
Chinn, M., Ito, H., 2006. “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions, and
Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics Vol. 18 Issue 1 pp. 163-192.
Claessens, S., van Horen, N., 2013. "Foreign Banks: Trends and Impact," Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, forthcoming.
Cornett, M., McNutt, J., Tehranian, H., and Strahan, P.,2011. “Liquidity Risk Management and Credit
Supply in the Financial Crisis” Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 101 Issue 2 pp. 297-312
Correa, R., Sapriza, H., Zlate, A., 2012. “Liquidity Shocks, Dollar Funding Costs, and the Bank Lending
Channel During the European Sovereign Crisis,” Federal Reserve Board International Finance
Discussion Papers 1059.
Dages, B.G., Goldberg, L., Kinney, D., 2000. “Foreign and Domestic Bank Participation in Emerging
Markets: Lessons from Mexico and Argentina,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic
Policy Review Vol. 6 No. 3 pp. 17-36.
De Haas, R., van Horen, N., 2012. “International Shock Transmission after the Lehman Brothers Collapse:
Evidence from Syndicated Lending,” American Economic Review Vol. 102 No. 3.
Dedola, L., Lombardo, G., 2012. “Financial Frictions, Financial Integration, and the International
Propagation of Shocks,” Economic Policy, Vol. 27 Issue 70 pp. 319-359.
Degryse, H., Ongena, S., 2005. “Distance, Lending Relationships, and Competition," Journal of Finance,
Vol. 60 Issue 1 pp. 231-266.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., Min, H., 1998. “Opening to Foreign Banks: Issues of Stability, Efficiency,
and Growth,” Proceedings of the Bank of Korea Conference on The Implications of Globalization
of World Financial Markets.
Detragiache, E., Gupta, P., 2004. “Foreign Banks in Emerging Market Crises: Evidence from Malaysia,”
International Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/04/129.
Devereux, M., Yetman, J. 2010. “Leverage Constraints and the International Transmission of Shocks,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Vol. 42 pp. 71-105.
di Giovanni, J., Shambaugh, J., 2008. “The Impact of Foreign Interest Rates on the Economy: The Role of
the Exchange Rate Regime,” Journal of International Economics Vol. 74 pp. 341-61.
Duwel, C., 2013. “Repo funding and internal capital markets in the financial crisis,” Deutsche Bundesbank
No. 16 Discussion Paper.

19

Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., 2005. “Equal Size, Equal Role? Interest Rate Interdependence Between the
Euro Area and the United States,” The Economic Journal No. 115 pp. 928-948.
Faust, J., Rogers, J., Wang, S.B., Wright, J.H., 2007. “The High-Frequency Response of Exchange Rates
and Interests Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements,” Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 54
Issue 4 pp. 1051-1068.
Focarelli, D., Pozzolo, A., 2006. “Where do Banks Expand Abroad? An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of
Business Vol. 79 No. 1 pp 2435–63.
Forbes, K., Chinn, M., 2004. “A Decomposition of Global Linkages in Financial Markets over Time,”
Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 86 Issue 3 pp. 705-722.
Frankel, J., Schmukler, S., Serven, L., 2004. “Global Transmission of Interest Rates: Monetary
Independence and the Currency Regime,” Journal of International Money and Finance Vol. 23
No. 5 pp.701-734.
Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., 2010. “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business Cycle Analysis,”
Handbook of Monetary Economics.
Giannetti, M., Laeven, L., 2012. “Flight Home, Flight Abroad, and International Credit Cycles”, American
Economic Review Vol. 102 No. 3 pp. 219-24.
Goldberg, L., Grisse, C., 2013. “Time Variation in Asset Price Responses to Macro Announcements: The
Role of Risk,” manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Goldberg, L., Klein, M. 2011. "Evolving Perceptions of Central Bank Credibility: The European Central
Bank Experience," NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, University of Chicago Press,
vol. 7, pages 153 - 182.
Hausman, J., Wongswan, J., 2011. "Global asset prices and FOMC announcements," Journal of
International Money and Finance, Vol. 30 No.3 pp. 547-571.
Imbs, J., 2004. “Trade, Finance, Specialization, and Synchronization,” Review of Economics and Statistics
Vol. 86 No. 3 pp. 723-734.
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Papaioannou, E., Peydró, J., 2013. “Financial Regulation, Financial Globalization, and
the Synchronization of Economic Activity,” Journal of Finance,Vol. 68 Issue 3 pp.1179-1228.
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Papaioannou, E., Perri., F., 2012. “Global Banks and Crisis Transmission,” Journal of
International Economics Vol. 89 pp.495-510
Kamin, S., “Financial Globalization and Monetary Policy,” Encyclopedia of Financial Globalization ed.
Caprio, G., forthcoming.
Kashyap, A., Stein, J., 2000. "What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the Transmission of
Monetary Policy?" American Economic Review Vol. 90 No.3 pp. 407-428.
Klein, M., 2013. “Capital Controls: Gates versus Walls” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Vol. 1.
Klein, M., Shambaugh, J., 2013. “Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma” Manuscript presented at
the 2013 Bank of Japan IMES Conference.
Kollman, R., Enders, Z., Muller, G., 2011. “Global Banking and International Business Cycles,” European
Economic Review, Vol. 55, pp. 407-426.
Landau, J.P., 2013. “Global Liquidity: Public and Private,” manuscript for 2013 Jackson Hole Meeting.
Lehner, M., 2009. “Entry Mode Choice of Multinational Banks,” Journal of Banking and Finance Vol.33
pp. 1781-1792.

20

Meier, S., 2013. “Financial Globalization and Monetary Transmission,” Working Papers 2013-03, Swiss
National Bank.
Morgan, D., Strahan, P., Rime, B., 2004. “Bank Integration and Business Volatility,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics Vol. 119 No. 4 pp.1555-1584
Neumeyer, P., Perri, F., 2005. “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: the Role of Interest Rates,”
Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 52 pp.345-380.
Niepmann, F., 2013. “Banking across Borders with Heterogeneous Banks,” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staff Report No. 609.
Obstfeld, M. 2012. "Does the Current Account Still Matter?" American Economic Review, 102(3): 1-23.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J., Taylor, A., 2005. “The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs among Exchange
Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility,” Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 87 No. 3
pp. 423-438.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J., Taylor, A., 2010. “Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and International
Reserves,” American Economic Association Journal: Macroeconomics Vol. 2 No.2 pp. 57-94.
Peek, J., Rosengren, E., 1997. “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The Case of Japan,”
American Economic Review Vol. 87 No.4 pp. 495-505.
Peek, J., Rosengren, E., 2000. “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on Real Activity in
the United States,” American Economic Review Vol. 90 No. 1 pp. 30-45.
Rey, H., 2013. “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”
manuscript for 2013 Jackson Hole Meeting.
Rose, A., Spiegel, M., 2007. “Offshore Financial Centers: Parasites or Symbionts?” Economic Journal Vol.
117 pp. 1310-1335.
Schnabl, P., 2012. “The International Transmission of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from an Emerging
Market,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 67 Issue 3 pp.897-932.
Shambaugh, J., 2004. “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy," The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 119, pp. 300-351.
Spiegel, M., 2009. “Financial Globalization and Monetary Policy Discipline: A Survey with New Evidence
from Financial Remoteness,” IMF Staff Papers Vol. 56 No. 1 pp. 198-221.
Stockman, A. Tesar., L., 1995. “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of the Business Cycle:
Explaining International Comovements,” American Economic Review Vol. 85 pp. 168-85.
Terrones, M., Kose, M., Prasad, E., 2007. "How Does Financial Globalization Affect Risk Sharing? Patterns
and Channels," IMF Working Papers WP/07/238.

21

Figure 1 Ratio of Bank International and Foreign Claims to Global GDP1
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

International Claims/GDP

Foreign Claims/GDP

The series are based on current exchange rates vis-à-vis the US dollar. International claims comprise cross-border
claims and local claims in foreign currencies. Foreign claims comprise cross-border claims and local claims in all
currencies. Interoffice accounts are excluded. BIS International Claims show a 4 Trillion USD increase in 1999 due to
the inclusion of reporting countries as vis-a-vis countries (see http://www.bis.org/statistics/breakstablescons.pdf)
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook Database for Global GDP; BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics. Reproduced
from CGFS No. 41 (2010).
1

Figure 2 Ratio of International Trade and Bank International Claims to Global GDP1
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%

International Claims/GDP

Exports of Goods and Services/GDP

The series are based on current exchange rates vis-à-vis the US dollar. Foreign claims comprise cross-border
claims and local claims in all currencies. Interoffice accounts are excluded. BIS International Claims show a 4 Trillion
USD increase in 1999 due to the inclusion of BIS reporting countries as vis-a-vis countries
(see http://www.bis.org/statistics/breakstablescons.pdf)
1

Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook Database for World GDP; BIS Consolidated Banking statistics. Reproduced
from CGFS No. 41 (2010).

22

Figure 3 Cross-border lending to banks and non-banks in emerging markets, 1996-2012
Rolling four-quarter sum in Billions of USD
400
Lending to banks

300
200
100
0

Lending to the non-bank sector

-100
-200
-300
-400

Source: BIS Locational Statistics. Figures are adjusted for exchange rate effects.

Figure4 Short Term Flows (Up to 1 Year Maturity) as Share of Total International Claims
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%
45%
40%

Source: BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics, immediate borrower basis

23

Figure 5 Foreign Banks in Host Markets Worldwide
40%

1600
1400

35%

1200
1000

30%

800

25%

600
400

20%

200

15%

0

Number of Foreign Banks

Share of Foreign Banks

Source: Claessens and van Horen (2013), Figure 1.

Figure 6 Intra-bank and Interbank flows of US banks1
2,000
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0

Intrabank Flows

Interbank Flows

Source: FFIEC 009 and BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics
1 Intra-bank flows are computed as the sum of net due to (from) of affiliates (in absolute value), from FFIEC
009. Interbank flows are computed as the sum of foreign claims of the U.S. vis-a-vis rest of world and of rest
of world vis-a-vis the U.S., from BIS. A break appears in the Intrabank Flows in 2009 due to the new inclusion
of the Goldman Sachs Group, Morgan Stanley, Barclays Group US, CIT Group, American Express, and Ally

24

Figure 7 International Banking: Derivatives, Credit Commitments, and Guarantees
In Trillions of USD
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Credit Commitments

Derivatives

Guarantees

Source: BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics, ultimate risk basis.

Figure 8 Global Bank Deposits in Offshore Financial Centers1
In Billions of USD
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0

1

Based on current exchange rates vis-à-vis the US dollar. Vis-à-vis countries are Aruba, Bahrain, the Bahamas, Belize,
Barbados, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Dominica, Grenada, Hong Kong SAR, Ireland, the Isle of Man, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Macao
SAR, Malta, Mauritius, Panama, St Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, the Seychelles, Singapore, Switzerland and Vanuatu.
Source: BIS Locational Banking Statistics

25

Table 1: Regression Observations across Exchange Rate Regimes (Shambaugh) and Categories of
Capital Account Openness (Chinn-Ito)
Annual
Frequency
high open
medium open
low open
total

peg

softpeg

float

total

274
66
211
556

176
133
93
406

162
123
132
419

612
322
436
1381

26

Table 2 – Interest Rate Co-Movement Across Countries, using Discrete Capital Openness Categories (Chinn-Ito), Annual Data 1995-2009
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)

(b)

(c)

(a)

(b)

GlobalBank
∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

peg * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

softpeg * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

(b)

GlobalBank

(c)

GlobalBank

count

GlobalinCredit

baseline

count

GlobalinCredit

baseline

count

GlobalinCredit

-0.089
(0.117)
0.572***
(0.131)
0.467***
(0.168)

-0.132
(0.177)
0.685***
(0.204)
0.551*
(0.290)

-0.350***
(0.132)
0.778***
(0.158)
0.666***
(0.228)

0.147
(0.119)

0.012
(0.199)

0.081
(0.125)

0.152
(0.146)
0.140
(0.154)

0.421*
(0.235)
0.351
(0.275)
0.003
(0.004)

0.025
(0.177)
0.193
(0.197)
0.591**
(0.270)

-0.267
(0.163)
0.641***
(0.139)
0.466***
(0.163)
0.181
(0.139)
0.258*
(0.149)

0.058
(0.380)
-0.913*
(0.524)

-0.472***
(0.158)
0.829***
(0.166)
0.637***
(0.219)
0.106
(0.159)
0.293*
(0.175)
1.130***
(0.198)
-1.109***
(0.371)
-1.088*
(0.597)
0.188
(0.396)
-0.625
(0.473)

1,193
0.034

medium open * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

0.001
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.007)

∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

peg * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

softpeg * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

1.069***
(0.211)
-0.942**
(0.365)
-1.026*
(0.568)

-0.370***

-0.370***

-0.433***

-0.343***

(0.061)

(0.060)

(0.064)

(0.058)

-0.006
(0.005)
-0.006
(0.006)
0.343***
(0.058)

1,195
0.034

1,370
0.015

1,370
0.015

high open * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

Constant

(a)

baseline

high open * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

medium open * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

(c)

1,381
1,381
Observations
0.032
0.031
Adj R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

-0.403***

-0.373***

(0.061)

(0.061)

-0.298
(0.256)
0.631***
(0.201)
0.460
(0.282)
0.304
(0.232)
0.298
(0.247)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.000
(0.005)
0.000
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.373***
(0.060)

1,193
0.013

1,370
0.034

1,370
0.031

-0.437***
(0.064)

27

Table 3 - Interest Rate Co-Movement Across Countries, using Continuous Capital Openness (Chinn-Ito), Annual Data 1995-2009
(1)

(a)
baseline
∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

peg * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

softpeg * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

(b)
count

(2)

(c)
GlobalBank
GlobalinCredit

(a)
baseline

(b)
count

(3)

(c)
GlobalBank
GlobalinCredit

(a)
baseline

(b)
count

(4)

(c)
GlobalBank
GlobalinCredit

(a)
baseline

(b)
count

(c)
GlobalBank
GlobalinCredit

-0.089

-0.132

-0.350***

0.210***

0.205

0.116

-0.153

-0.132

-0.389***

-0.153

-0.231

(0.117)

(0.177)

(0.132)

(0.071)

(0.126)

(0.083)

(0.120)

(0.181)

(0.130)

(0.132)

(0.204)

-0.373***
(0.132)

0.572***

0.685***

0.778***

0.605***

0.580***

0.809***

0.584***

0.658***

0.798***

(0.131)

(0.204)

(0.158)

(0.128)

(0.195)

(0.156)

(0.150)

(0.249)

(0.163)

0.467***

0.551*

0.666***

0.476***

0.506*

0.678***

0.550***

0.729**

0.768***

(0.168)

(0.290)

(0.228)

(0.252)

Chinn-Ito * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

(0.171)

(0.299)

(0.233)

(0.207)

(0.324)

0.058

0.135**

0.045

0.061*

0.107*

0.061

0.060

0.251***

0.092

(0.038)

(0.062)

(0.046)

(0.036)

(0.060)

(0.041)

(0.077)

(0.093)

(0.084)

peg * Chinn-Ito * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡

softpeg * Chinn-Ito * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡
∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

0.001

peg * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

softpeg * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

0.043

-0.131

-0.016

(0.085)

(0.115)

(0.098)

-0.088

-0.424**

-0.176

(0.117)

(0.174)

(0.153)

1.057***

0.003

1.117***

1.069***

0.000

0.425*

-0.000

(0.005)

(0.211)

(0.003)

(0.234)

(0.005)

(0.218)

(0.005)

(0.217)

-0.003

-0.942**

0.000

-1.052***

-0.003

-1.451***

(0.005)

(0.365)

(0.005)

(0.372)

(0.006)

(0.358)

-0.002

-1.026*

-0.001

-1.152*

-0.007

-2.032*

(0.007)

(0.568)

Chinn-Ito * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank

(0.007)

(0.645)

(0.009)

(1.174)

-0.002

-0.035

-0.001

-0.008

-0.005*

-0.318**

(0.001)

(0.115)

(0.001)

(0.109)

(0.002)

(0.135)

0.004*

0.571***

(0.003)

(0.184)

0.009**

0.872

peg * Chinn-Ito * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 *
GlobalBank

softpeg * Chinn-Ito * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 *
GlobalBank

(0.004)

(0.575)

-0.370***

-0.370***

-0.433***

-0.342***

-0.342***

-0.406***

-0.370***

-0.369***

-0.440***

-0.371***

-0.369***

-0.437***

(0.061)

(0.060)

(0.064)

(0.058)

(0.058)

(0.061)

(0.060)

(0.060)

(0.064)

(0.061)

(0.060)

(0.064)

Observations

1,381

1,381

1,195

1,370

1,370

1,193

1,370

1,370

1,193

1,370

1,370

1,193

Adj R-squared

0.032

0.031

0.034

0.017

0.017

0.014

0.035

0.033

0.034

0.035

0.036

0.037

Constant

Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

28

Table 4 - Exchange Rate Regime Subsamples, Interest Rate Co-Movement Across Countries, Discrete Capital Openness, 1995-2009
(1)
(2)
(3)
peg
softpeg
float
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
GlobalBank
GlobalBank
GlobalBank
baseline
count
GlobalinCredit
baseline
count
GlobalinCredit baseline
count
GlobalinCredit
0.327**
0.299
0.375**
0.363
0.443
0.245
-0.232
-0.437
-0.433*
∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡
(0.129)
(0.249)
(0.151)
(0.279)
(0.433)
(0.352)
(0.244)
(0.365)
(0.239)
high open * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡
0.334**
0.386
0.220
-0.159
-0.604
-0.307
0.196
0.825**
0.217
(0.147)
(0.277)
(0.175)
(0.312)
(0.502)
(0.397)
(0.298)
(0.398)
(0.345)
medium open * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡
0.176
0.313
0.098
0.104
0.152
0.304
0.314
0.150
0.255
(0.244)
(0.486)
(0.281)
(0.344)
(0.494)
(0.431)
(0.262)
(0.392)
(0.299)
∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank
0.001
-0.504
-0.003
0.678
0.006
1.368***
(0.004)
(0.394)
(0.011)
(2.064)
(0.009)
(0.217)
high open * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank
-0.001
0.883**
0.011
0.127
-0.015
-0.788
(0.005)
(0.436)
(0.012)
(2.114)
(0.010)
(0.545)
medium open * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank
-0.004
-0.754
-0.004
-1.817
0.005
-0.421
(0.009)
(1.090)
(0.014)
(2.251)
(0.011)
(0.587)
Constant
-0.287*** -0.286***
-0.265***
-0.743*** -0.729***
-0.853***
-0.102
-0.091
-0.216
(0.068)
(0.068)
(0.072)
(0.126)
(0.127)
(0.133)
(0.160)
(0.161)
(0.158)
Observations
551
551
Adj R-squared
0.179
0.175
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

470
0.178

402
0.020

402
0.018

356
0.011

417
-0.004

417
-0.002

367
0.004

29

Table 5 - Exchange Rate Regime Subsamples, Interest Rate Co-Movement Across Countries, Continuous Capital Openness, 1995-2009
(1)
(2)
(3)
peg
softpeg
float
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
GlobalBank
GlobalBank
GlobalBank
baseline
count
GlobalinCredit
baseline
count
GlobalinCredit baseline
count
GlobalinCredit
0.442***
0.437**
0.444***
0.360**
0.456*
0.327
-0.096
-0.173
-0.318**
∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡
(0.086)
(0.169)
(0.100)
(0.151)
(0.247)
(0.204)
(0.137)
(0.212)
(0.133)
Chinn-Ito * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡
0.102**
0.121
0.072
-0.029
-0.165
-0.069
0.062
0.254***
0.090
(0.040)
(0.076)
(0.049)
(0.085)
(0.154)
(0.117)
(0.077)
(0.096)
(0.085)
∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank
0.000
-0.319
-0.004
-0.597
0.003
1.108***
(0.003)
(0.285)
(0.007)
(1.238)
(0.005)
(0.222)
Chinn-Ito * ∆𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑡 * GlobalBank
-0.000
0.258**
0.004
0.401
-0.005*
-0.315**
(0.001)
(0.124)
(0.003)
(0.576)
(0.002)
(0.138)
Constant
-0.285*** -0.284***
-0.274***
-0.737*** -0.732***
-0.851***
-0.108
-0.105
-0.221
(0.067)
(0.067)
(0.072)
(0.123)
(0.123)
(0.131)
(0.160)
(0.160)
(0.158)
Observations
551
551
Adj R-squared
0.184
0.181
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

470
0.181

402
0.020

402
0.018

356
0.007

417
-0.003

417
0.000

367
0.011

30

DATA APPENDIX
Data Sources:
•

Claessens - van Horen Bank Ownership Database
(http://www.dnb.nl/en/onderzoek-2/databases/bank.jsp)

•

BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics Database
(http://www.bis.org/statistics/consstats.htm)

•

IMF International Financial Statistics
(http://elibrary-data.imf.org/finddatareports.aspx?d=33061&e=169393)
(http://fweb.rsma.frb.gov/php/if/data/fame/#/intl/index/)

•

Chinn-Ito Index
(http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Chinn-Ito_website.htm)

•

IMF Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER)
(http://www.elibrary.imf.org/page/AREAER/www.imfareaer.org)

Dataset Dimensions:
The dataset used in Klein and Shambaugh (2013) covers a panel of 209 countries from 1960 to 2011. After merging
foreign bank proxies from the Claessens and van Horen (2013) datasets, this paper’s analysis covers 136 countries from
1995 to 2009. Additional data are introduced from the IMF International Financial Statistics (IFS) and BIS Consolidated
Banking Statistics Database.

The Claessens – van Horen Bank Ownership Database provides country-year data on the

counts of foreign bank (as a share of total banks) and foreign bank assets as a share of total banking assets in each
country. These yield the first set of proxies for foreign bank penetration used in the annual and quarterly regression
analyses.
IFS Series for quarterly domestic credit (local currencies) are obtained for all countries from 1995-2009 using DLX Haver,
and are converted to USD using IFS exchange rates. Country-quarter BIS series on total cross-border, interbank, and
local claims from the rest of the world vis-à-vis each country are then merged in order to BIS Claims on Local Residents /
IFS Domestic Credit.

31

Variable

Definition

Country
Own Rate
Own Rate Type
Base Country
Base Rate
Base Rate Type
Exchange Rate Controls

Panel variable
The interest rate of the local currency
The type of interest rate (central bank discount, money market, t-bill, etc) used for the local currency
The country corresponding to the base currency
The interest rate corresponding to the base currency
The type of interest rate (central bank discount, money market, t-bill, etc) used for the local currency
The type of exchange rate regime
Exchange rate converted to USD from IFS Series 32 (local currency)
This series consists of all claims of the central bank and depository institutions vis-a-vis all the following:
(32an) Central government, and treasury
(32b) State and local governments, and public financial institutions
(32c) Nonfinancial public enterprises
(32d) Private sector
(32f) Other Banking Institutions
(32g) Nonbank Financial Institutions

Domestic Credit (in USD)

USD Exchange Rate
Central Bank Discount Rate
Money Market Rate
Treasury Bill Rate

Excludes the domestic claims of Nonbank Financial Institutions vis-à-vis all counterparty sectors
Inverted calculation of IFS series AE (provided as Local per USD)
The rate at which the central banks lend or discount eligible paper for deposit money banks
The rate on short-term lending between financial institutions
The rate at which short-term securities are issued or traded in the market
An index measuring a country's degree of capital account openness. It is based on the binary dummy
variables that codify the tabulation of restrictions on cross-border financial transactions reported in the IMF's
Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER).

Chinn-Ito Index

Open
Trueopen
Midopen
Closed

Interbank Claims

This index was first introduced in Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2006). “What Matters for Financial
Development? Capital Controls,Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, Volume
81, Issue 1, Pages 163-192 (October).
Binary Discretized version of Chinn-Ito Index: Equals 1 if Chinn-Ito > 0.15
Trinary Discretized version of Chinn-Ito Index: Equals 1 if Chinn-Ito > 1.2
Trinary Discretized version of Chinn-Ito Index: Equals 1 if 1.2 > Chinn-Ito > -1.15
Trinary Discretized version of Chinn-Ito Index: Equals 1 if Chinn-Ito < -1.15
The asset claims of:
1) All domestic banks in BIS reporting countries
2) All branches and subsidiaries located in BIS reporting countries whose activities are consolidated in a
parent bank institution that is located in another BIS reporting country
3) All banking offices located in BIS reporting countries whose controlling parent bank institution resides in a
non-BIS reporting country
4) All branches or subsidiaries located in BIS reporting countries whose activities are not consolidated by a
controlling parent bank institution in another BIS reporting country (e.g. banking subsidiary with a nonbank
controlling parent)

Data Source

Variable Code Name (s) Frequencies

Klein-Shambaugh
IMF IFS
IMF IFS
Klein-Shambaugh / IMF AREAER
IMF IFS
IMF IFS
IMF AREAER

country_combined
ownr
ownrate
base_country
baser
baserate
peg, softpeg, float

Annual / Quarterly
Annual / Quarterly
Annual / Quarterly
Annual
Annual / Quarterly
Annual / Quarterly

IMF IFS Series 32

domcred_USD

Annual / Quarterly

IMF IFS Series AE
IMF IFS Series 60
IMF IFS Series 60b
IMF IFS Series 60c

exchrate
cbintrate
mmr
tbill

Annual / Quarterly
Annual / Quarterly
Annual / Quarterly
Annual / Quarterly

Chinn-Ito Index

kaopen

Annual

Chinn-Ito Index
Chinn-Ito Index
Chinn-Ito Index
Chinn-Ito Index

open
trueopen
midopen
closed

Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual

BIS Consolidated Banking
Statistics

banks

Annual / Quarterly

locclaims

Annual / Quarterly

intclaims

Annual / Quarterly

fgnbankct

Annual

shnum_

Annual

shta_

Annual

vis-a-vis:

Claims on Local Residents
Cross Border Claims

All banks in the panel variable country. This excludes central banks and multilateral development banks
The asset claims of all banking offices (that reside in the panel variable country and are owned by a BIS
reporting parent) vis-à-vis the residents of the panel variable country.
The asset claims of all BIS reporting banks (not located in the panel variable country) vis-à-vis the panel
variable country.

Number of Foreign Banks

The number of active foreign banks in the country

Share of Foreign Banks

The share of foreign banks out of total banks in the country

Asset Share of Foreign Banks

The share of foreign bank assets out of total bank assets in the country

BIS Consolidated Banking
Statistics
BIS Consolidated Banking
Statistics
Claessens - van Horen Bank
Ownership Database
Claessens - van Horen Bank
Ownership Database
Claessens - van Horen Bank
Ownership Database

32

Table A1: Country list
Presents base country pairings, interest rate types used, and period coverage for the country sample (1995-2009)
Country
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia, Republic of
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan, Republic of
Bahrain, Kingdom of
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Chile
China
China, P.R.: Hong Kong
Colombia
Congo, Democratic Republic of
Costa Rica
Cote d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba

Own Rate Type
tbill
tbill
N/A
tbill
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
N/A
tbill
N/A
tbill
mmkt
tbill
N/A
N/A
N/A
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
N/A
N/A
tbill
mmkt
N/A
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
N/A
mmkt
mmkt
N/A

Base Country
Germany
France
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
Germany
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
Germany
France
United States

N/A
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
tbill

Own Rate Coverage
all
1995Q1-1995Q3,1998Q2-2009Q4
missing
all
all
1995Q3-2009Q4
all
all
1997Q2,1997Q3,1998Q1,1998Q3-2009Q4
all
missing
all
missing
all
all
all
missing
missing
missing
all
all
all
all
missing
missing
missing
all
1999Q4-2009Q4
missing
all
all
missing
missing
all
all
missing
1995Q1-1996Q1,1996Q3-2000Q1,2000Q32001Q2,2002Q1,2002Q3,2003Q3,2004Q1-2005Q2,2006Q12006Q3,2007Q1
missing
1995Q1-2000Q4,2001Q2-2009Q4
1996Q1-2009Q4
missing
1997Q1-2009Q4

Cyprus

tbill

Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt

Germany
South Africa
United States
United States
Germany
France
United States

Base Country Period
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
1995-1996
1997-2009
all
all
1995
1996-2009
all
all

United States

El Salvador

mmkt

1997Q1-2004Q3,2005Q2-2005Q4,2006Q2,2007Q4,20089Q2,2008Q3

United States

Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Latvia
Latvia
Lebanon
Libya
Lithuania
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia, FYR
Madagascar

mmkt
tbill
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
tbill
mmkt
N/A
N/A
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
tbill

1995Q1-1999Q3,2000Q1-2009Q4
1995Q1-2008Q4
all
all
1995Q2-2009Q4
all
all
all
1997Q1-2006Q1
missing
missing
all
all
1995Q1-1998Q2,2006Q2-2009Q4
all
missing
all
all
all
all
all
1999Q1-2009Q4
1995Q1-1998Q2,1998Q4-2009Q4
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
1998Q1-2005Q3
all
all
1995Q1-1999Q1
missing
2000Q3-2002Q1,2002Q4-2009Q4

Germany
United States
Germany
Germany
United States
United States
United States
Germany
United States
United States
United States
Germany
Germany
United States
United States
United States
Germany
United States
Germany
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
Germany
United States
United States
United States
Germany
Belgium
Germany
France

Base Rate Type
tbill
tbill
N/A
tbill
fedfunds
tbill
fedfunds
mmkt
tbill
fedfunds
N/A
tbill
N/A
tbill
mmkt
tbill
N/A
tbill
N/A
fedfunds
fedfunds
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
N/A
N/A
tbill
fedfunds
tbill
fedfunds
fedfunds
fedfunds
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
N/A

Base Rate Coverage
1995Q1-2007Q2
all
missing
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
missing
all
missing
1995Q1-2007Q2
all
all
missing
1997Q1-2007Q2
missing
all
all
all
all
all
missing
missing
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
missing

France
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
France
Germany

all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all

France

all

tbill

all

Germany
Germany
United States

all
all
all
all

mmkt
mmkt
fedfunds
N/A
tbill

all
all
all
missing
all

all

fedfunds

all

all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
1995-2003
2004-2009
all
all
1995-2001
2002-2009
all
all
all

mmkt
tbill
mmkt
tbill
fedfunds
fedfunds
tbill
tbill
fedfunds
N/A
N/A
tbill
mmkt
fedfunds
fedfunds
N/A
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
tbill
fedfunds
fedfunds
tbill
tbill
fedfunds
fedfunds
tbill
fedfunds
mmkt
tbill
fedfunds
fedfunds
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
tbill

all
all
all
1995Q1-2007Q2
all
all
all
1995Q1-2007Q2
all
missing
missing
1995Q1-2007Q2
all
all
all
missing
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
missing
all

33

Country
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, Republica Bolivariana de
Vietnam
Yemen, Republic of
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe

Own Rate Type
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
tbill
N/A
N/A
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
mmkt
tbill
N/A
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
mmkt
N/A
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
tbill
mmkt
N/A
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
N/A
mmkt
fedfunds
mmkt
N/A
mmkt
tbill
tbill
tbill
mmkt
mmkt

Own Rate Coverage
all
all
all
all
all
all
missing
missing
all
1998Q1-2009Q4
all
1995Q2-2009Q4
all
all
missing
all
all
missing
2004Q1-2009Q4
all
2002Q1-2009Q4
all
1995Q4-2009Q4
all
all
all
2004Q3-2009Q4
all
all
all
1996Q3-2009Q1,2009Q4
missing
all
missing
all
all
2000Q1-2008Q3
all
all
all
all
missing
all
all
missing
all
all
all
all
all
all
1996Q4-2009Q4
missing
all
all
all
missing
1996Q1-2009Q4
1997Q1-2007Q3,2008Q1,2008Q3-2009Q4
1995Q4-2009Q4
all
missing
1995Q1-2005Q3

Base Country
United States
United States
France
United States
United Kingdom
United States
United States
United States
France
United States
South Africa
India
Germany
Australia
United States
France
United States
Germany
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
Germany
Germany
United States
United States
Germany
United States
United States
United States
France

Base Country Period
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
1995-2002
2003-2009
all
all
all
all

United States
Malaysia
Germany
Germany
United States
Germany
India

all
all
all
all
all
all
all

South Africa
Germany
Germany
United States
United States
France
France
United States
United States
United States

all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all

Germany

all

United States

all

United States
United States
United States
United States
United States

all
all
all
all
1995-2008
2009

Base Rate Type
tbill
fedfunds
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
tbill
tbill
tbill
mmkt
fedfunds
tbill
N/A
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
mmkt
tbill
mmkt
fedfunds
fedfunds
fedfunds
fedfunds
fedfunds
fedfunds
mmkt
mmkt
fedfunds
fedfunds
mmkt
fedfunds
fedfunds
fedfunds
mmkt
N/A
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
mmkt
fedfunds
mmkt
mmkt
N/A
tbill
mmkt
mmkt
tbill
fedfunds
mmkt
mmkt
fedfunds
tbill
fedfunds
N/A
mmkt
N/A
fedfunds
N/A
fedfunds
tbill
tbill
tbill
fedfunds
N/A

Base Rate Coverage
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
missing
all
all
missing
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
missing
all
all
all
all
all
all
1995Q1-1998Q2,2006Q2-2009Q4
missing
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
all
missing
all
missing
all
missing
all
all
all
all
all
missing

34

