NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIFTY YEARS OF FAMILY PLANNING:
NEW EVIDENCE ON THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF INCREASING ACCESS TO CONTRACEPTION
Martha J. Bailey
Working Paper 19493
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19493

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

The collection of data on U.S. family planning programs was supported by the University of Michigan’s
National Poverty Center (NPC) and Robert Wood Johnson Health and Society Programs, the University
of Michigan Population Studies Research Center’s Eva Mueller Award, and the National Institute
of Health (grant no. HD058065-01A1), and the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research
through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Planning and Evaluation (grant no. 5 UO1 PE000002-05). Work on various aspects of this project
was generously supported by the Small Grants Program at the University of Michigan’s National Poverty
Center, by the University of California, Davis, Center for Poverty Research (grant no. 1H79AE000100-1
from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Analysis, which was awarded by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration),
and by the Elizabeth Caroline Crosby Fund and Rackham Graduate School at the University of Michigan.
The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the author and should not be construed
as representing the opinions or policy of any of these funders, any agency of the federal government,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Doug Almond and Hilary Hoynes for
sharing the Regional Economic Information System data for the 1959-78 period, to the Guttmacher
Institute and Ted Joyce for sharing information on abortion providers from 1973 to 1979, and to Tara
Watson for collaborating in the collection of state-level information on low birthweight. I am grateful
to Maggie Levenstein and Clint Carter for assisting with the disclosure from the Michigan Census
Research Data Center, and for comments and insights on early versions of this paper from Manuela
Angelucci, Raquel Fernandez, Pamela Giustinelli, Brad Hershbein, Melanie Guldi, David Lam, Olga
Malkova, Zoë McLaren, Amalia Miller, David Romer, and Justin Wolfers.2XWVWDQGLQJUHVHDUFK
DVVLVWDQFHZDVSURYLGHGE\$XVWLQ'DYLV$QGUHZ&RYHUW$QQD(ULFNVRQ$OHNVDQGUD/H\]HURYVND\D
-RKDQQHV1RUOLQJ$QQLH:HQW]DQG-HVVLFD:LOOLDPV
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Martha J. Bailey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Fifty Years of Family Planning: New Evidence on the Long-Run Effects of Increasing Access
to Contraception
Martha J. Bailey
NBER Working Paper No. 19493
October 2013
JEL No. I18,J1,J13,J16,J24,N12
ABSTRACT
This paper assembles new evidence on some of the longer-term consequences of U.S. family planning
policies, defined in this paper as those increasing legal or financial access to modern contraceptives.
The analysis leverages two large policy changes that occurred during the 1960s and 1970s: first, the
interaction of the birth control pill’s introduction with Comstock-era restrictions on the sale of contraceptives
and the repeal of these laws after Griswold v. Connecticut in 1965; and second, the expansion of federal
funding for local family planning programs from 1964 to 1973. Building on previous research that
demonstrates both policies’ effects on fertility rates, I find suggestive evidence that individuals’ access
to contraceptives increased their children’s college completion, labor force participation, wages, and
family incomes decades later.

Martha J. Bailey
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
207 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
baileymj@umich.edu

Family planning policies, defined in this paper as those increasing legal or financial access to modern
contraceptives and related education and medical services, have grown increasingly controversial over the
last decade.1 In 2010 and 2011, congressional Republicans supported proposals to cut family planning
funding through Title X of the Public Health Service Act, which funds U.S. family planning clinics
serving over 4 million women (Cohen 2011). This represents a significant departure from the bipartisan
support enjoyed by these programs over the last 40 years. The first legislation authorizing a national
family planning program passed in 1970 with the strong support of Republican President Richard Nixon.
In fact, public opinion surveys indicate that support for family planning programs was stronger at that
time among Republicans than among Democrats.2
Much of the current debate surrounding family planning focuses on women’s reproductive rights and
health. In the 1960s, however, proponents of these programs often emphasized their links to the economy.
Both President Lyndon Johnson and President Nixon stressed how family planning programs would
promote the opportunities of children and families and thus drive economic growth. This reasoning is
consistent with a long theoretical tradition in economics, including standard formulations of the quantityquality models of investments in children (Becker and Lewis 1973, Willis 1973, Hotz, Klerman, and
Willis 1997) and standard formulations of the importance of family size and credit constraints in limiting
children’s human capital investment (Becker and Tomes 1979, 1986).3 Through changes in fertility rates
and these human capital channels, family planning policies could directly affect the long-run growth of
the economy (Becker, Murphy, and Tamura 1990).
The empirical literature provides evidence consistent with causal links running from family planning
to children’s adult outcomes. It is well known that poorer families have more children than more affluent
families. It has also known that children from poorer families receive fewer parental time and resource
investments (Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney 2008), and that they are more likely to experience delayed
academic development and health problems, live in more dangerous neighborhoods, and attend
underperforming schools (Levine and Zimmerman 2010). Children from poorer households are less likely
to graduate from high school and to complete college (Bailey and Dynarski 2011), which limits their
earnings potential later in life. Ultimately, over 40 percent of children born to parents in the lowest
1

In this paper I do not consider the effects of policies regarding abortion. I refer the interested reader to the large literature in
economics on this topic. See, for instance, Levine and others (1999), Gruber, Levine, and Staiger (1999), Donahue and Levitt
(2001), Charles and Stephens (2006), Foote and Goetz (2008), and Ananat and others (2009).
2
Today the situation is reversed, with Democrats slightly more favorable.
3
The history of this idea is much older. Thomas Malthus popularized the link between childbearing and poverty in his Essay on
the Principle of Population (1798). Malthus argued that this link was rooted in the fact that agricultural yields grow
arithmetically whereas population grows exponentially. Left unchecked, population growth would thus outstrip growth in
agricultural production and perpetuate a subsistence economy. According to Malthus, improving living standards beyond
subsistence required “preventive checks,” namely, a reduction in the number of births through “moral restraint” and delay in
marriage.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 1

quintile of family income remain in that income quintile as adults (Pew Charitable Trusts 2012, figure 3,
p. 6).
However, the extent to which growing up in a larger family per se causes adult disadvantage is
unclear. Poverty itself may directly affect adult outcomes through channels such as inadequate nutrition,
poor health care, and limited access to quality education. That said, larger family size may have an
independent and direct effect on adult outcomes, for instance by reducing the amount of time parents
spend with each child or reducing resources available for each child’s education. Further complicating the
measurement of these relationships, poorer families tend to have more children. Consequently, the
empirical literature provides little guidance regarding the long-run implications of current proposals to cut
federal funding for family planning or to alter funding for family planning services for Medicaid
recipients.
This paper provides new evidence on the relationship between family planning and long-term
economic outcomes such as educational attainment, labor supply, and family income. The analysis
exploits two large policy changes during the 1960s and 1970s: the first is the interaction of the birth
control pill’s introduction with Comstock-era laws banning the sale of contraceptives and the repeal of
these laws after Griswold v. Connecticut in 1965 (Bailey 2010); the second is the expansion of federal
funding for local family planning programs from 1964 to 1973 (Bailey 2012). Previous work has
established the effects of both sets of policy changes on fertility rates, and this paper builds on this work
to examine these policies’ long-run implications for children’s outcomes in adulthood.
The results suggest that increasing access to family planning reduced mothers’ reports of child
“unwantedness” but had no measurable effects on infants’ weight at birth, infant mortality, or maternal
mortality in the 1960s and 1970s. In the long run, increasing access to family planning is associated with
2 percent higher family incomes among the affected cohorts as adults, largely due to increases in men’s
wage earnings and weeks and hours worked. Federal grants for family planning also increased children’s
educational attainment. College completion (proxied by 16 or more years of education attained) increased
by 2 to 7 percent for children whose mothers had access to family planning, relative to children who were
born in the same location just before family planning programs began.
These findings are suggestive of much larger and broader effects of family planning. Not only are
potentially many more outcomes affected than considered in this analysis, but the direct effects on the
families that gained access to contraception may be considerably larger than this paper’s cohort-level
estimates suggest. The within-family and cross-cohort spillovers and the effects of measurement error,
both of which are expected to reduce the magnitudes of the estimates, may lead the analysis to understate
the effects of family planning programs. The results, however, are consistent with the growing literature
on the sizable and persistent effects of early childhood interventions (Heckman and others 2010, Almond
Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 2

and Currie 2011) and place family planning within the set of interventions that potentially increase early
investments in children.
The paper begins by describing the history of family planning policies and their public support,
starting with the early-20th-century birth control movement and extending to today with the rise of
publically funded family planning programs (section I). The paper next describes the expected effects of
changes in these family planning policies on fertility rates, children’s resources, and their adult outcomes
(section II) and discusses the empirical evidence linking family planning policies to these outcomes
(section III). New empirical evidence describing the long-run effects of family planning programs on
children’s outcomes in adulthood is reported in sections IV and V. Section VI draws implications from
the analysis and concludes.

I. From Salacious to Subsidized: A Brief History of Family Planning in the United States
Today, a variety of highly effective contraceptive methods, scientifically tested and U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved, are widely available either by prescription or over the counter.
Manufacturing and selling contraceptives is legal in all 50 states, and federal and state governments and
nonprofit and private organizations subsidize family planning services.
Historically, however, contraceptives and information on contraception were considered obscene
material and banned under federal and many state statutes. At the federal level, the 1873 Comstock Act
outlawed the interstate mailing, shipping, or importation of articles, drugs, medicines, or printed materials
considered “obscenities,” a term that applied to anything used “for the prevention of conception” (18
U.S.C. §1461-1462).4 After the Comstock Act passed, 45 states enacted or amended anti-obscenity
statutes mentioning contraception (Bailey 2010). Doctors received little training relating to
contraception.5 Information (and misinformation) about contraception flowed through families and
friends (and often charlatans) rather than through the medical community.
I.A. The Birth Control Movement
Margaret Sanger is typically credited with beginning the U.S. birth control movement (although there
were many contributors to the cause), which gained traction in the 1920s. The movement is often dated to

4

The Comstock Act banned any “book, pamphlet, paper, writing, advertisement, circular, print, picture, drawing or other
representation, figure, or image on or of paper or other material, or any cast, instrument, or other article of an immoral nature, or
any drug or medicine, or any article whatever for the prevention of conception” (Tone 1996, p. 488). The act takes its name from
its zealous advocate, Anthony Comstock of New York.
5
One large-scale survey of physicians about their attitudes regarding birth control revealed that only 10 percent of medical
school graduates before 1920 had received any training regarding contraception (Guttmacher 1947).

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 3

Sanger’s arrest in 1914 for the publication of a pamphlet using the obscene words “birth control.”6
Consistent with the claim that this event catalyzed the movement, mentions of “birth control” in books
increased sharply around this time, according to Google Ngrams (figure 1). The charges were eventually
dropped, and Sanger’s activism continued. Her strategy for making birth control more acceptable was to
cast it as a means to improve women’s health. The movement’s success in increasing birth control’s
medical legitimacy led the U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals to strike down portions of the federal
Comstock law in U.S. v. One Package (86 F.2d 737, 1936). The following year the American Medical
Association reversed its longstanding opposition to birth control.
Despite the taboos surrounding birth control, early public opinion polls show strong support for the
movement (see the online data appendix for details on surveys).7 In 1936, when the Gallup Poll first
asked respondents whether they “favor the birth control movement,” 61 percent answered affirmatively
(figure 2; 13 percent did not answer). Starting in 1938, Gallup fielded a new question about whether
respondents “would like to see a government agency furnish birth control information to married people
who want it.” The share of affirmative answers varied over the next 10 years, but support appears to have
increased from about 62 percent of the nation’s adults in 1938 to 67 percent in 1947. Twenty years later,
on the eve of the first birth control pill’s approval by the FDA, support had continued to increase. And in
1959, 73 percent of Gallup respondents said that “birth control information should be available to anyone
who wants it.”8 Thus, during the two decades leading up to the introduction of “the Pill”—an era noted
for its large baby boom and pronatalist policies—public support for the free availability and government
provision of birth control information remained high and even increased.
Public support for government-provided birth control information increased at the same time that the
supply of condoms and diaphragms increased. But these contraceptives were expensive and often of low
quality. Encouraged by Sanger’s courtship of the medical community, physicians built lucrative practices
around filling contraceptive prescriptions in house, and local pharmacists provided “legitimate” supplies
at large markups. One study of the diaphragm industry in 1938 found the average physician markup to be
substantial (Tone 2001, p. 132). A device for the typical patient would have cost at least half of an entire
week’s earnings at the 1938 minimum wage. In states prohibiting the sale of contraceptives under their

6

Sanger was indicted for nine violations of the New York state Comstock law for her use of the words “birth control” in her
journal The Woman Rebel. After the charges were dropped, she launched a new journal in 1916 provocatively called The Birth
Control Review, in conjunction with the opening of a “birth control clinic” in Brooklyn, New York. This clinic was shut down by
the vice squad the next day, but Sanger managed to open her first “legal” birth control clinic in 1923, claiming to use birth
control for “medical purposes.”
7
Online appendixes and replication files for the papers in this volume may be accessed on the Brookings Papers website,
www.brookings.edu/about/projects/bpea, under “Past Editions.”
8
The full question reads, “In some places in the United States it is not legal to supply birth control information. How do you feel
about this—do you think birth control information should be available to anyone who wants it, or not?”

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 4

Comstock statutes, black market distribution channels became well established. Couples could often
obtain diaphragms and condoms through the mail, or from gas station clerks or truck stop vending
machines (Tone 2000, 2001; Garrow 1994). Data from the Growth of American Families survey show
that, in 1955, 47 percent of ever-married women aged 18 to 29 had at some time used a barrier method
like the diaphragm or a condom, and rates of “ever use” (not current use) did not differ for women living
in states with Comstock statutes (Bailey 2010, Freedman, Campbell, and Whelpton undated).
In short, Sanger’s strategy of making the sale of birth control methods profitable cultivated the support
of physicians and increased the social acceptance of these methods. Her strategy also increased the
momentum of the family planning movement that would ultimately lead policymakers to subsidize
contraceptives for families with fewer resources.9
I.B. The Introduction of the Pill and Restrictions on the Sale of Contraceptives
Enovid, what would become the first oral contraceptive, was initially introduced for the regulation of
menses in 1957. Only in 1960 was it approved by the FDA for longer-term use as a contraceptive. The
new medication, which soon became known as “the Pill,” was met with “extraordinary immediate
enthusiasm” (Weinberg 1968, p. 1). But enthusiasm turned into controversy as couples realized that state
Comstock laws prohibited physicians from prescribing the Pill and pharmacists from selling it.
State obscenity statutes of the Comstock era varied in their language relating to obscenity and,
consequently, in their implications for access to the Pill. Although the Comstock laws were outdated and
had historically been difficult to enforce, their importance increased with the Pill’s introduction. The Pill
was available only from physicians and pharmacists, who tended to comply with state laws because
violating them could jeopardize their licenses and livelihoods. Newly introduced and still under patent,
Enovid would have been hard to obtain through the usual black market channels,10 and women could not
verify beforehand the effectiveness of illicitly obtained pills—much less their safety.
The popularity of the Pill collided with these statutes in the early 1960s. In 1964 and 1965, affirmative
responses to Gallup’s question (reworded to say, “In some places in the United States it is not legal to
supply birth control information. How do you feel about this—do you think birth control information
should be available to anyone who wants it, or not?”) topped 80 percent (figure 2)—a figure almost
identical to the percent of ever-married women who in 1965 reported ever using a contraceptive.11
9

In fact, Sanger and others used the revenue from the sales of condoms and diaphragms to subsidize free clinics for less
advantaged women. Sanger calculated that the sale of 5,000 diaphragms at market rates by her affiliated company would yield
enough profit to give away 15,000 diaphragms to her birth control clinics (Tone 2001, p. 131).
10
A combination of the chemical compounds mestranol and norethynodrel, Enovid was hard to produce by laypersons—or for
that matter by other pharmaceutical companies that might have tried to infringe on the patent. It took several years for competing
birth control pills to come to market.
11
The comparable figure was 84 percent in the 1965 National Fertility Study (Bailey 2010).

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 5

Popular support for and pervasive use of contraceptives likely helped birth control advocates win the
1965 U.S. Supreme Court case Griswold v. Connecticut (381 U.S. 479), which induced state legislatures
to revise their obscenity statutes. By 1970 every state (and the federal government) had revised its statute
to permit the sale of contraceptives to married individuals. Unmarried adults did not have legal access to
contraceptives in every state until the 1972 Eisenstadt v. Baird decision (405 U.S. 438, 453; see Bailey
and others 2011 for a description of legal changes that expanded access for unmarried minors).12
I.C. The Rise of Today’s Publicly Funded Family Planning Programs
With legal questions settled, advocates next turned their attention to expanding financial access to
reliable contraceptives through government-supported “family planning” programs. The argument for
subsidizing family planning was based upon the premise that the high cost of contraceptives (and related
information and services) tended to keep birth rates high among lower-income individuals. Just as legal
restrictions had inhibited many from obtaining reliable contraceptives, advocates argued that the cost of
modern contraceptives differentially inhibited lower-income individuals from using them.
This argument was especially relevant in the early 1960s, when the monopoly producer of Enovid sold
it at a premium. Shortly after its release, an annual supply of Enovid cost the equivalent of about $760 in
2010 dollars (Tone 2001, p. 257), roughly twice today’s annual cost and equivalent to more than 3 weeks
of full-time work at the 1960 minimum wage. In 1961 Maurice Saugoff of Planned Parenthood asserted
that even his clinic’s discounted price (less than half the retail price) was “beyond the reach of many of
our low-income inquirers” (Tone 2001, p. 257).
Widespread concern about population growth (Wilmoth and Ball 1992, 1995), together with studies
showing that lower-income families were having more children than they desired (National Academy of
Sciences 1963), galvanized support for federal intervention. In 1968, 77 percent of adults surveyed
nationwide said that birth control information should be available to everyone (figure 2). The rise in
public support tracks fairly closely Google Ngrams mentions of birth control, contraception, and family
planning in books published over the same period (figure 1).
The first U.S. family planning programs were quietly funded under the 1964 Economic Opportunity
Act (EOA), a centerpiece of President Johnson’s War on Poverty.13 The EOA did not explicitly mention

12

Eliminating many of these formal restrictions did not result in full, unimpeded access to contraception. Other laws or
regulations in some jurisdictions continued to make the purchase of contraceptives inconvenient or extremely difficult.
Legalization was a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for expanding access.
13

Before 1965, U.S. federal involvement and investments in family planning had been modest. This reflected the view expressed
by President Dwight Eisenhower in 1959, who said that he could not “imagine anything more emphatically a subject that is not a
proper political or government activity or function or responsibility… The government will not, so long as I am here, have a
positive political doctrine in its program that has to do with the problem of birth control. That’s not our business” (Tone 2001, p.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 6

“family planning,” but family planning fit easily within the anti-poverty agenda. The Office of Economic
Opportunity (OEO), the office in charge of administering EOA funding, supported the opening of new
clinics in disadvantaged areas and, to a lesser extent, the expansion of existing family planning programs.
Generally speaking, these programs aimed to bring birth control information and contraceptives to
disadvantaged individuals. Federal family planning dollars funded education, counseling, and the
provision of low-cost contraceptives and related medical services, but they did not fund abortion.
However, less is known about these programs’ day-to-day operations. During these early years,
organizations ran programs with little oversight from the federal government. Not only did the federal
government collect little information on their services and patients, but officials talked very little about
them. In an evaluation of the War on Poverty, Sar Levitan (1969, p. 209) wrote that, “Contrary to the
usual OEO tactic of trying to secure the maximum feasible visibility for all its activities, OEO prohibited
[family planning] grantees from using program funds to ‘announce or promote through mass media the
availability of the family planning program funded by this grant.’”14 The implication is that the treatment
effect of these grants can be understood as one of increasing federal funding for family planning, rather
than the effect of a particular, homogeneous intervention.
During this early period, federal funding for family planning expanded in two large steps (figure 3).
The first expansion came with the 1967 amendment to the EOA, which designated family planning as a
“national emphasis” program along with better-known programs such as Head Start. In the same year,
Title V of the Social Security Act was amended to mandate that at least 6 percent of funds appropriated to
child and maternal health at the state level be earmarked for family planning services (P.L. 90-248, Title
V, §§ 502, 505a, 508a; Title IV, § 201a). In addition, the Maternity and Infant Care projects under the
Department of Health, Education and Welfare (DHEW) supplemented the EOA effort by funding family
planning services through city health departments. From fiscal 1967 to fiscal 1970, federal funds allocated
to family planning increased to roughly $600 million (in 2010 dollars), over 10 times their level in 1967.
In 1969 President Nixon initiated a second expansion of federal support with his endorsement of a
national family planning program, saying, “no American woman should be denied access to family
planning assistance because of her economic condition” (Nixon 1969). Nixon called upon Congress to
“establish as a national goal the provision of adequate family planning services within the next five years
to all those who want them but cannot afford them.” In November 1970 the effort to fund these programs
culminated in the passage of Title X of the Public Health Service Act (also known as the Family Planning

214). According to 1967 estimates, expenditure for family planning through the Maternal and Child Health programs started in
1942 and the Maternal and Infant Care programs under the 1963 Social Security Amendments were small (U.S. DHEW 1974).
14
The fact that the OEO might fund birth control was contentious before the EOA passed. For instance, on April 18, 1964, the
Washington Post (p. A4) reported the controversy on this topic between Representative Phil M. Landrum (D-Ga.), the House
sponsor of the EOA, and Republican members of the special House Education and Labor subcommittee.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 7

Services and Population Research Act, P.L. 91-572). This legislation not only guaranteed the survival of
federal support of family planning during the phasing out of the EOA, but also increased that support by
50 percent in real terms by 1974. As with the earlier federal grants, federal family planning dollars paid
for education, counseling, and the provision of low-cost contraceptives and related medical services. In
addition, Title X explicitly prohibited the use of federal funds “in programs where abortion is a method of
family planning” (§ 1008).
At the time of its enactment, Title X was popular and supported by both Democrats and Republicans.
The year after it passed, a survey by the U.S. Commission on Population Growth and the American
Future asked, “Do you think that information about birth control should or should not be made available
by the government to all men and women who want it?” Eighty-four percent of surveyed adults responded
yes—including 87 percent of Republicans and 82 percent of Democrats. Recent surveys have not asked a
similar question, but in the May 2012 Gallup poll, 89 percent of respondents (including 90 percent of
Democrats and 87 percent of Republicans) said they considered birth control “morally acceptable,”
suggesting that public support for birth control has changed little (figure 2).15
After the initial period of growth, federal appropriations for Title X fell to an average of roughly $400
million per year from 1975 to 1980. Federal appropriations continued to fall throughout the 1980s and
reached a low of $231 million in 1991. Since the early 1990s, annual appropriations have averaged
around $300 million (all amounts are in 2010 dollars). But as federal appropriations have fallen or
stagnated, dollars from other sources have risen. Whereas the bulk of funds before 1977 were federal
(Cutright and Jaffe 1977, p. 3), the Alan Guttmacher Institute (2000) estimates that around 50 percent of
public support of family planning came from Title X by 1980. By 1994 that figure was only 20 percent
(Alan Guttmacher Institute 2000, p. 13).
Public support of family planning programs has continued to grow even as Title X has changed little.
Since 1980, real family planning expenditure through Medicaid has increased 500 percent, accounting for
almost all of the increase in family planning funding. In fiscal 2010 over 75 percent of funds for family
planning came from Medicaid and another 12 percent from state-only sources; Title X funding accounted
for only 10 percent of all public funding (Sonfield and Gold 2012).

II. Expected Effects of Family Planning on Childbearing and Child Outcomes
How have these programs affected children? The potential effects of family planning policies on a variety
of outcomes relate to their effects on fertility rates. By providing cheaper, more reliable contraception and
more convenient services, family planning should reduce ill-timed and unwanted childbearing by
15

This recent question differs from the early question about the government providing information. Answers to this question do
not rule out an increase or a decrease in public support for family planning since the 1970s.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 8

decreasing contraceptive failures. Additionally, reductions in the price of averting births should increase
the number of births that parents choose to avert or delay.16 Standard economic models and related
empirical work highlight the potential for family planning policies to affect children’s outcomes as well.
II.A. Family Size Channel
Fewer children in a household implies an increase in the availability of parental time and material
resources per child. In addition, a reduction in the number of children in the household should decrease
the shadow price of child “quality” and thus increase parental investment in each child (Becker and Lewis
1973; Willis 1973; Becker 1981, p. 109; Hotz and others 1997, p. 297). Many of these parental
investments cannot be directly measured in the data available for this analysis. These theoretical
predictions, however, suggest that any measured effects of family planning should be reinforced by
unmeasured changes.
II.B. Household Income Channel
The availability of family planning may directly increase household income for several reasons. First,
cheaper and more reliable contraception reduces the immediate and expected costs of delaying
childbearing, freeing up resources for investment in the parents’ human capital. Delaying parenthood for a
year or two could allow soon-to-be parents to get more education, work experience, and job training, and
thus increase their lifetime earnings. The results of empirical studies of the effects of teen motherhood
and teen access to the Pill are consistent with the claim that delaying childbearing has value. Bailey, Brad
Hershbein, and Amalia Miller (2012) show that earlier access to the Pill increased women’s investment in
their careers and, ultimately, their wages. Heinrich Hock (2008) shows that early access to the Pill
increased men’s educational attainment as well. Of course, delaying childbearing need not have economic
benefits. Joseph Hotz, Susan McElroy, and Seth Sanders (2005) show that women who became mothers
in their teens have higher subsequent levels of employment and earnings than women of the same age
who miscarried as teens.
Second, family planning also reduces the price of delaying marriage (Goldin and Katz 2002) and could
improve spousal matching, thereby reducing subsequent divorce rates (Christensen 2011, Rotz 2011). The
presence of two adults in a household could lead to an increase in household income as well.

16

Potentially offsetting this effect is the fact that cheaper and more reliable contraception should reduce precautionary
undershooting as well (Michael and Willis 1976). Estimates presented later suggest that reductions in childbearing have
dominated empirically, so that greater access to cheaper and more reliable contraceptives tends to reduce family size.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 9

II.C. Selection Channel
Family planning policy may also affect selection into parenthood. This may be particularly true for the
federal family planning programs of the 1960s and 1970s, as they disproportionately benefited poorer
households. For instance, Aida Torres and Jacqueline Forrest (1985) document that in 1983 these
programs served almost 5 million Americans annually, and roughly 83 percent of family planning patients
had incomes below 150 percent of the poverty line; 13 percent were recipients of Aid to Families with
Dependent Children (AFDC, the principal cash welfare program at the time). Frederick Jaffe, Joy
Dryfoos, and Martha Corey (1973) report that 90 percent of all patients in organized family planning
programs had household incomes of no more than 200 percent of the federal poverty line. If family
planning programs induce some lower-than-average-income households to opt out of or delay
childbearing, this would increase the average incomes of parents.
In summary, family planning programs may directly reduce fertility rates and family size, and increase
parental investment in children, even holding household income constant. These consequences for
children should be reinforced by any effects of family planning on household income and selection of
some lower-income individuals out of parenthood. Any increases in household income would tend to
increase further parental investment in their children, especially if the income elasticity of child quality
exceeds that of child quantity (Becker and Lewis 1973). To the extent that family planning increases
parental investment in children, it may improve their lifetime opportunities and labor market outcomes as
adults.
II.D. Cohort Size Channel
A final channel through which family planning might alter children’s outcomes is by changing cohort
size. Smaller cohorts could increase the public resources available per child and decrease competition for
these limited resources (Easterlin 1978). In schools, for instance, a decrease in cohort size might decrease
class sizes and increase the likelihood of getting attention from teachers. It may also reduce classroom
disruptions if a teacher is more easily able to monitor smaller classes. Finally, because changes in cohort
size are unlikely to be accommodated fully by universities, a larger share of these smaller cohorts may be
admitted to and complete college (Bound and Turner 2007).
Cohort size may also affect the scale of markets for illicit drugs and other social “bads” and thereby
affect the incidence of related crimes. The premise behind this argument is that decreases in cohort size
increase the average cost of drug distribution, which increases prices and reduces use (Jacobson 2004). A
similar logic extends to labor markets, as smaller cohorts reduce aggregate labor supply, decrease
workers’ competition for firms’ resources, increase capital-labor ratios, and tend to raise wages.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 10

Note that these labor market channels—in addition to the within-household spillovers in family
income and reductions in the price of child quality—suggest that the effects of family planning may
extend beyond the children immediately affected. Access to family planning may benefit children slightly
older or younger in the affected households, children in unaffected households in the same cohort, and
children in slightly older or younger cohorts in the same labor market.

III. Empirical Evidence Relating Family Planning to Children’s Outcomes
The idea that higher rates of childbearing cause economic disadvantage is consistent with a large body of
empirical research, but testing this claim rigorously has proved difficult. In the United States, family
planning programs or policies have never been intentionally randomly assigned to a representative set of
locations or group of participants. (I discuss small-scale randomized interventions on teens below.) This is
problematic for empirical researchers, because compelling theoretical reasoning argues that causal effects
run both from childbearing (through childhood disadvantage) to adult disadvantage and from childhood
disadvantage to adult disadvantage directly.17
Time-series evidence is not particularly helpful in sorting this out. The large changes in legal and
financial access to family planning in the 1960s coincided with the end of the U.S. baby boom (figure 4).
The fact that fertility rates fell rapidly over the 1960s is thus consistent both with reversion to the longerterm national trend and with an effect of family planning policies. Largely because fertility rates also
declined sharply in the 1920s, long before the introduction of the Pill and the important changes in family
planning policy discussed above, many scholars have concluded that these factors played an insignificant
role. Gary Becker, for instance, concludes in his Treatise on the Family (1991, p. 143) that “the
‘contraceptive revolution’…ushered in by the Pill has probably not been a major cause of the sharp drop
in fertility in recent decades.”
To address this concern, the empirical literature has used several different research strategies to isolate
the causal role of family planning. The earliest studies used multivariate regressions to adjust estimates of
the relationship between access to family planning (whether areas had a program or individuals used
them) and fertility rates. These largely cross-sectional studies were limited by well-known omitted
variables and endogeneity problems (see Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1986, Hotz and others1997). The
limitations of these studies led to mixed evidence on the effects of family planning (see Mellor 1998 for a
review).

17

Theoretical models suggest that women who use family planning services are different in many ways from those who do not.
Sah and Birchenall (2012) show why women who use family planning services may be expected to differ in terms of their
unobserved preferences as well as in the price associated with a conception. Theory also suggests that cross-sectional associations
in childbearing and family planning may reflect both greater local demand for services and the effects of those services.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 11

More recent studies use localized, randomized interventions that aim to reduce teen pregnancies.
These studies overcome common threats to internal validity but generally find that family planning
programs have had no effect on teen pregnancy in the United States. A. DiCenso and others (2002), in a
review and meta-analysis of 22 randomized studies of family planning, sex education, and abstinence
interventions conducted from 1981 to 2000, conclude that these interventions did not increase the use of
birth control or reduce the number of pregnancies among teens. The failure of these studies to find
program effects may reflect the trials’ short horizons (treatment effects may take longer to manifest than
the 1 to 2 years between baseline and follow-up) or their small sample sizes (even when pooled for metaanalysis).18 Another difficulty is that the effects of family planning interventions for teens, many of whom
already have access to contraception through providers like Planned Parenthood, may not capture the
effects of public family planning initiatives that fund such programs. Moreover, the results for teens may
not generalize to the broader population.
Another recent development has been the use of quasi-experimental methodologies, which are ideal
for addressing both endogeneity and statistical imprecision in the observational and experimental
literatures.This research design also allows an investigation of effects for older individuals. Several
empirical strategies define this genre of studies.
The first exploits recent changes in funding for family planning to estimate its effects on contraceptive
use and birth rates. Melissa Kearney and Phillip Levine’s (2009) state-level, differences-in-differences
study provides the most recent evidence that family planning funding reduces birth rates. Exploiting the
state × year variation in Medicaid eligibility for family planning among the near poor, they find that
greater eligibility for services in 17 states significantly reduced birth rates among teens (by 4 percent) and
among older women (by 2 percent) within a few years.
Although suggestive, these results leave open questions relating to the broader and longer-term effects
of family planning. First, a global change in family planning policy—such as the repeal of state statutes
banning the sale of contraceptives, or the introduction of federal subsidies for family planning
programs—may affect women other than the near poor. (Kearney and Levine’s identification strategy
allows them to examine only the effects for women with incomes ranging from 133 to 200 percent of the
poverty line.) Second, the scale effects of family planning resources may be highly nonlinear. With
diminishing returns to program scale (Schultz 1973, 1992), Kearney and Levine’s identification strategy
may understate the marginal effects of the initial expansion of family planning programs. Third, their
shorter-term estimates may differ from the program’s longer-term effects. If family planning affects
fertility by allowing couples to delay childbearing, then the immediate decline in the birth rate may
18

Helmerhorst and others (2006) cite additional limitations of published randomized control trials, including intentional
exclusion of participants after randomization, failure to use intention-to-treat analysis, and lack of treatment blinding.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 12

overstate the effects of family planning on fertility over a longer period. This critique is not specific to
Kearney and Levine. T. Paul Schultz (2008) argues that the difficulty of recovering longer-term effects is
a general problem for studies of family planning. Although a handful of quasi-experimental studies in
developing countries examine the longer-term effects of family planning programs on childbearing (Joshi
and Schultz 2007, in Bangladesh; Salehi-Isfahani, Abbasi-Shavazi, and Hosseini-Chavoshi 2010, in Iran;
and Miller 2009, in Colombia), these studies do not easily generalize to the United States, where women’s
rights, knowledge, and resources imply a different demand for children and thus different treatment
effects.
A second empirical strategy exploits more historical policy variation. The research design uses statelevel restrictions on contraceptive access for unmarried younger (typically 18- to 21-year-old) women.
For this group, access to contraception was limited by law in many states until the mid-1970s. Using
variation in these laws across states (see Bailey and others 2011), a body of studies shows that early legal
access to the Pill affected the timing of marriages (Goldin and Katz 2002) and births (Bailey 2006, 2009,
Guldi 2008) and the incidence of premarital cohabitation (Christensen 2011) and had broad effects on
women’s and men’s education, labor force attachment, and lifetime wages. Women and men were more
likely to enroll in and complete college (Goldin and Katz 2002, Hock 2008, Bailey and others 2012) in
states where access to contraceptives was easier. Women were more likely to work for pay (Bailey 2006),
invest in on-the-job training (Bailey and others 2012), and pursue non-traditionally female professions
(Goldin and Katz 2002, Bailey and others 2012). And as women aged, these investments paid off. Bailey
and others (2012) find that 30 percent of the reduction in the wage gap between men and women in the
1990s may be attributed to career investments made possible by the Pill. Elizabeth Ananat and Dan
Hungerman (2012) additionally show that access to contraceptives at younger ages improved the
economic resources available to these women’s children before age 18. In short, this series of quasiexperimental studies shows that although family planning interventions for teens had small effects on
teens’ childbearing, they may have had larger, longer-term effects on the same teens at older ages. They
may also have affected the material well-being of their children during childhood.
The long-term effects of family planning on these children as adults, however, remain an open
question. Do the children of mothers with greater access to family planning get more college education,
earn higher wages, or live in more affluent households as adults? The next sections summarize two
historical policy changes that allow an investigation of these questions.

IV. The Long-Term Effects of Increasing Legal Access to Contraception
State-level anti-obscenity statutes (also called Comstock laws) had existed for almost three-quarters of a
century by the time the Pill was introduced. Although 47 of the 48 coterminous states had enacted antiFifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 13

obscenity laws (most before 1900), idiosyncratic differences in their language had an important impact on
their relevance for contraceptive access decades later. For instance, only 31 states explicitly enumerated
“contraception” among the regulated obscenities, and language in 24 states additionally banned “sales” of
contraceptive supplies. These Comstock-era sales bans remained on states’ books and significantly
increased the price of obtaining or using the birth control pill after it became available in the early
1960s.19 The 1965 Griswold decision that struck down Connecticut’s ban on the use of contraceptives had
the effect of reducing compliance with and the enforcement of bans on contraceptive sales nationwide—
even in states where these bans remained in effect. Following this ruling, state legislatures also revised
their obscenity statutes to delete mentions of “contraception” and began permitting the sale of
contraceptives to married women.
The presence of sales bans in almost half the states, which reduced the availability of the birth control
pill for 7 years after its introduction, together with the removal of these bans following the Griswold
decision, facilitate a quasi-experimental strategy for testing the effects of increasing legal access to the
Pill on fertility rates and children’s outcomes. This section first describes my differences-in-differences
methodology to examine the impacts of the Pill. Next it examines these policies’ effects on child
wantedness and birthweight. Finally, it examines the cumulative effects of mothers’ legal access to the
Pill on the affected cohorts’ adult outcomes in the 2000 census and the 2005-11 American Community
Surveys (ACS).
IV.A. The Effect of Increasing Legal Access to the Pill on Childbearing
My analysis is similar to that in Bailey (2010) and uses the following flexible linear specification:
,
where

st

is a measure of the fertility rate in state s observed in year t = 1950, 1951, …, 1980.

PillSalesLegal is a binary variable equal to 1 if state s had no preexisting ban on the sale of
contraceptives, and zero otherwise,20

is a dummy for each year of observation (1950 is omitted),

a vector of time-varying covariates,21

is a set of year fixed effects,

is

is a set of state fixed effects, and

19

My legal research with Allison Davido on anti-obscenity statutes is summarized in Bailey and Davido (2010, wwwpersonal.umich.edu/~baileymj/Bailey_Griswold_Legal_Appendix.pdf). Scans of supporting statutes are posted at wwwpersonal.umich.edu/~baileymj/Comstock_Statutes.
20
Note that the key independent variable (PillSalesLegal) is reverse coded in equation 1 from what Bailey (2010) presents.
21
These covariates are constructed by linearly interpolating the following variables between census years: proportion of the state
population of 15- to 44-year-olds residing on a farm, proportion currently married, proportion nonwhite, proportion foreign born,
proportion in poverty, mean total income, and mean educational attainment. Other covariates include binary indicators for
whether a state mentioned “contraception” in its obscenity law and for whether a state excepted physicians from its ban; both

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 14

is a set of region × year fixed effects. Of interest is whether, after the Pill was introduced in 1957,
fertility rates fell faster in states where it could be sold legally relative to fertility rates in states in the
same census region that banned the sale of contraceptives. This is captured by the time pattern of , which
captures the differential changes in fertility rates in states permitting the sale of contraceptives, after
adjusting for other model covariates.
In this framework a causal interpretation of requires that fertility rates in states permitting the sale of
contraceptives would have changed similarly to those in states banning their sale, in the absence of the
Pill (from 1957 to 1965) and in the absence of Griswold (from 1966 to 1970). That is, states banning the
sale of contraceptives provide an appropriate counterfactual. In addition, the presence of sales bans and
the Griswold decision need to have meaningfully changed access to the Pill after it was introduced. These
assumptions would be violated if, for instance, states permitting the sale of contraceptives experienced
rapid growth in the demand for women workers, which would reduce the demand for children, and thus
decrease fertility rates independent of the Pill’s effect. The latter assumption could be violated if sales
bans were not effective constraints.
Bailey (2010) provides several pieces of empirical evidence to support these assumptions. First, in
analyses using data from the 1955 Growth of American Families survey (Freedman, Campbell, and
Whelpton undated) and the 1965 and 1970 National Fertility Studies (Westoff and Ryder undated-a,
undated-b), both the use of barrier methods specifically and the use of any contraceptives from 1955 to
1970 are unrelated to whether a state permitted sales of the Pill. This is consistent with any relationship
between sales bans and fertility rates being driven by differences in the type of technology available,
rather than by the demand for contraceptives. Second, use of the Pill before 1965 was significantly higher
in states permitting its sale, and after 1965, use of the Pill converged to national rates in states previously
banning the sale of contraception. If the ability to purchase the Pill encouraged the diffusion of modern
contraceptives, and this affected childbearing outcomes, one should observe fertility rates falling more
quickly in permissive states in the early 1960s and, after the Griswold decision, falling more quickly in
states that had banned sales (which would result in the difference reverting toward its pre-1958 level).
Bailey (2010) finds that the general fertility rate did change in a pattern consistent with these predictions.
Figure 5 reproduces these findings and presents estimates for the total fertility rate, an age-adjusted
summary measure of fertility.22 (More details regarding the estimates presented in the figures in this paper
can be found in the online appendix.) Estimates of are close to zero between 1951 and 1957, which

these variables are interacted with each year in the analysis. Following Levine and others (1999), I also include an indicator for
early abortion repeal states (Alaska, California, Hawaii, New York, and California) interacted with each year dummy.
22
The total fertility rate is equal to the sum of 5-year-age-group birth rates (the ratio of births to women in the age group divided
by the population of women in that age group) multiplied by 5.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 15

implies that the difference in fertility rates in states with sales bans and the model-based counterfactual
was stable before the Pill was introduced. Between 1958 and 1965, however, estimates of become more
negative, and statistically significant, indicating that the difference in fertility rates by either measure fell
after the Pill was introduced.23 Because fertility rates were declining overall after the baby boom peaked
in 1957, this increasingly negative difference indicates that fertility rates were falling more rapidly in
states where selling the Pill was legal, as the Pill diffused more quickly there before the Griswold
decision. In states permitting the sale of the Pill, the total fertility rate was about 6 percent lower in 196365 (a decrease of 0.2 from a base of 3.5 children per woman). This trend reversed after the Griswold
decision. After 1965 both the general and the total fertility rates dropped more sharply in states where the
sale of the Pill was illegal, because these restrictions ceased being enforced. Accordingly, the difference
in fertility rates rebounded toward its pre-1958 level, as fertility rates in states previously banning the sale
of the Pill converged to those in states where it could be sold legally over the entire period. Removing
restrictions on contraceptive sales after the 1965 Griswold decision decreased birth rates in those states by
around 4 percent.24
If one takes the estimates in figure 5 as causal estimates of the effects of greater access to the Pill on
fertility rates, counterfactual estimates imply that, without the sales bans, the marital fertility rate could
have been 8 percent lower in states with sales bans and 4 percent lower in the nation as a whole.
Approximately 124,600 more births in 1965 occurred in states with bans on sales of contraceptives than
would have occurred without these restrictions. Finally, Bailey (2010) uses a back-of-the envelope
calculation to show that as much as 40 percent of the decline in the marital fertility rate from 1955 to
1965 might be attributable to the Pill.
IV.B. The Effects of Increasing Legal Access to the Pill on the Next Generation in Childhood
The effects of legal access to the Pill for mothers may have direct or indirect effects on their children’s
lifetime opportunities. This paper cannot separate the importance of each of the channels discussed
previously; instead it investigates the presence of direct associations—the cumulation of many channels—
between increases in legal access to contraceptives and the outcomes of cohorts born in these states.
CHILD WANTEDNESS AND THE TIMING OF BIRTHS
The Integrated Fertility Survey Series (IFSS; Smock, Granda, and Hoelter 2012) allows a direct
investigation of the effect of legal access to the Pill on mothers’ reports of child wantedness and of birth

23

For the total fertility rate, the estimates are individually statistically different in years 1962 through 1965 relative to 1950 and
jointly statistically significant for 1958 to 1965 (F = 7.03) relative to 1950.
24
Bailey (2010) also shows that these results are robust to dropping one region at a time and are present for women across age
groups.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 16

timing, and of subgroup differences in these relationships. The 1955-76 surveys asked (mostly evermarried) female respondents about each of their pregnancies and live births, including whether the
pregnancy was wanted and timed as desired. Because this data set is much smaller than the one employed
in the analysis of fertility rates, I group children born from 1950 to 1988 into birth cohort categories:
1950-57, the period before the birth control pill was introduced; 1958-65, the period following the Pill’s
introduction when only some states permitted its sale; and 1966-76, the period after Griswold when statelevel restrictions on the sales of contraception were lifted.25 In practice,

in equation 1 becomes a

dummy variable equal to 1 for each of the last two periods, so that the point estimates of interest capture
the change in the difference between states permitting the sale of the Pill and others in the same census
region relative to the difference in the pre-Pill era.26
Table 1 presents the results. Column 1-1 shows that the ability to buy the Pill was associated with a 7
percent (0.027 ÷ 0.37) decrease in unwanted or ill-timed births between 1958 and 1965. After the 1965
Griswold decision, the magnitude of this effect fell to less than 0.0001, indicating that the magnitude was
more similar to its pre-1958 level. Neither effect is precisely estimated, however, and neither is
statistically different from zero at conventional levels. Within the sample of second and higher-order
births (column 1-2), legal access to the Pill is associated with a statistically significant 10 percent
decrease in ill-timed or unwanted births, which then falls by 40 percent in the 1966-76 period, after the
Griswold decision. Most of this relationship appears to be driven by decreases in ill-timed childbearing
(column 1-4), although unwanted births are also lower (column 1-3). Consistent with Mark Rosenzweig
and Kenneth Wolpin’s (1993) findings that the prevalence of unwanted births is severely overreported,
these estimates suggest that unwanted births fell by much less than 100 percent with legal access to the
Pill.
The last four columns of table 1 provide additional evidence on the effects of the Pill on wantedness
by estimating the regression in column 1-2 separately for various subsamples of second and higher-order
births: whites, women with 12 or fewer years of education, women with 13 or more years of education
(some college), and women with 16 or more years of education (likely college graduates). Because these

25

Very few births are reported in 1976, because this is the year in which the last IFSS survey that I use was conducted.

26

One limitation of this analysis is its use of an imperfect measure of states where the births occurred, with which to
link children to the legal environment in which they were born. Three of the surveys harmonized in the IFSS, the
1955 Growth of American Families and 1965 and 1970 National Fertility Studies, contain information on residence
at the time of interview. Two others, the 1973 and 1976 National Surveys of Family Growth, contain information on
state of residence of the respondent at ages 6 to 16 (not at the time of the interview). I group this information into a
single measure of “state” for purposes of the analysis. All regressions are weighted by the IFSS-provided sampling
weight, which is normalized to sum to 1 within each of the IFSS surveys and multiplied by the number of
respondents sampled in the survey. This preserves the within-survey weights and gives each respondent a weight in
the analysis proportional to the information contained in the survey.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 17

effects are imprecisely estimated, they are not statistically different from one another. The pattern of
results is, however, suggestive. The magnitude of the effect for whites only (column 1-5) is similar to that
for the entire sample of second and higher-order births (column 1-6). Moreover, the effect appears to be
concentrated in the middle of the education distribution: mothers with 12 or fewer years or 16 or more
years of education in states permitting the sale of the Pill have similarly lower levels of unwanted or illtimed childbearing between 1958 and 1965, and the magnitude of this effect reverts toward zero in the
decade after Griswold. Women with some college in states permitting the sale of the Pill, however, have
significantly fewer unwanted or ill-timed births between 1958 and 1965, and the magnitude of this effect
weakens in the decade after Griswold (column 1-7). The effects appear weaker for the subgroup of
women with 16 or more years of education (column 1-8). This evidence is consistent with the Pill having
widespread effects on women across the education distribution and of both races, rather than only on
women from much more advantaged or disadvantaged households.
WEIGHT AT BIRTH
Differences in wantedness may translate into different prenatal investments in children. Douglas
Almond and Janet Currie (2011) argue that these investments have large and lifelong effects on children’s
well-being as adults. Moreover, a number of studies have shown that the availability of abortion improves
infant outcomes by reducing the number of low-birthweight babies (Grossman and Jacobowitz 1981,
Joyce 1987, Grossman and Joyce 1990). Using a specification identical to the one described above, table
2 examines whether the faster diffusion of the Pill in certain states affected the share of infants with low
birthweights. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the share of low-birthweight infants in total
births; the data come from the universe of reported births from the Vital Statistics database.27 Even with
this very large data set, the analysis finds little evidence that birthweight changed differentially in states
where selling the Pill was legal and in states where it was not, whether the sample is all births, white
births, or nonwhite births (first three columns). An additional specification examines changes in nonwhite
births in the South and again finds no statistically significant relationship (column 2-4). In all cases the
changes are small in magnitude as well as statistically insignificant.
In summary, mothers in states permitting the sale of the Pill were less likely to report that their
children were unwanted or ill-timed—an outcome strongly associated with subsequent developmental
issues and diminished lifetime human capital and earnings. Because these effects appear concentrated

27

Vital Statistics reports annually by racial group the number of births that are classified as low birthweight (below
2,500 grams). These data have been hand entered by Tara Watson from 1954 to 1968 and paired with information
from the Natality Detail files microdata of the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS 2003) from 1968 to
1976. Together with information entered on the number of births each year, these data allow me to construct a panel
of the share of infants born with low birthweight from 1954 to 1980 by race.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 18

among second or higher-order births, one should expect slightly older cohorts (older siblings) to be
affected. However, infants born in states where their mothers could purchase the Pill appear no more
likely to have had low birthweight.
These findings suggest that the selection and household income channels may be much less important
in the context of this policy change: before 1965, the diffusion of the Pill affected older, married
households in states where it could be legally sold; beginning in 1965, Griswold extended legal access to
older, married women in states previously banning the sale of contraceptives. The household income
channel effect may be much less important because most of the affected couples would have already
completed their human capital investments and selected their occupations and partners. (This may be one
reason why effects on wantedness are weaker for first births than for higher-order births.) The selection
effect may have been much less important because the sales of contraceptives and bans on these sales
affected most married women across the socioeconomic and education distributions. Although the
imprecision of the IFSS-based estimates does not permit firm conclusions, the results in table 1 are
suggestive. The Pill affected unwanted births similarly among families of different racial groups and in
the middle of the education distribution. The absence of effects on birthweight is also consistent with this.
Put another way, the marginal mother in states where the sale of the Pill was legal may have been very
similar to the average mother in the population. In terms of interpreting the channels driving the effects, a
stronger case can be made for the family size and cohort size channels: a reduction in the number of
children tends to increase parental investment in each child, increase the public resources available to
each child, and reduce the thickness of markets for illegal drugs. Many changes in parental investment—
in time spent with children and the share of household resources spent on children—may have shifted but
are unobserved in the IFSS and Vital Statistics data.
IV.C. The Effects of Increasing Legal Access to the Pill on the Next Generation in Adulthood
An important and open question is whether differences in parents’ investments in their children due to
differences in access to contraception affect the long-run outcomes of their children. A final set of
analyses tests this idea using data from the 5 percent Integrated Public Use Microdata Samples (IPUMS)
from the 2000 decennial census and the 2005-11 ACS (Ruggles and others 2010). An ideal feature of
these data is that they include the state where each individual was born and the year of birth, which
together tell me whether the individual’s mother lived in a state permitting the sale of contraceptives. In
addition, these data contain information on labor force outcomes, education, marital status, and
childbearing in the individual’s adult prime. I restrict the sample to individuals born from 1946 to 1980,

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 19

and I exclude Alaska, Hawaii, and the District of Columbia.28 I also restrict the sample to individuals aged
20 to 59, to capture labor market effects on workers before they begin retiring. The data are collapsed to
birth year × state of birth × year of observation cells and weighted by the relevant cell population.
The fertility and wantedness analyses show how differences in the availability of the Pill may have
affected individuals directly (by being more wanted or better timed as children), but indirect effects
within the family or across cohorts may operate as well—these are the family size and cohort size
channels discussed previously. This logic implies that differences in access to birth control between 1958
and 1965 may have had an effect on slightly older or younger children in the affected households—
children born before 1958 or after 1965 who have a sibling that arrived in the 1958-65 period—or on
cohorts slightly older or younger than the 1958-65 cohorts. These within-household or cross-cohort
spillovers cannot be examined directly, because the census does not contain information on the siblings of
individuals who are not living in the same household or on the relevant education or labor market cohorts
of an individual. That changes in the law to permit the sale of the Pill affected cohorts who were born just
before 1958 or just after 1965, however, is consistent with importance of the family size and cohort size
channels.
Figure 6 summarizes the long-run, differences-in-differences effects of one’s mother having lived in a
state permitting the sale of the Pill on one’s own total family income, income from wages (for men), and
weeks or hours worked (for men). For descriptive purposes I group cohorts into 4-year categories: 194649, 1950-53, 1954-57, 1958-61, 1962-65, 1966-69, 1970-73, and 1974-80. In practice,

in equation 1

becomes a dummy variable equal to 1 for each category, with 1950-53 omitted. The empirical
specification is otherwise identical to equation 1 except that it adds a quadratic in age to increase
precision. The point estimates of interest capture the change in within-cohort category differences
between children born in states permitting the sale of contraceptives and those born in states in the same
census region banning their sale, with the 1950-53 difference normalized to zero.
The top left panel of figure 6 presents the estimates for log family income. Because the dependent
variable is in logs, the point estimates can be interpreted as percent changes in the difference relative to
the difference between these two groups for the omitted 1950-53 cohort category. Children born from
1958 to 1965 in states permitting contraceptive sales had roughly 1.5 percent higher family incomes as
adults. Cohorts born in these same states just before the Pill was introduced (from 1954 to 1957) also
appear to have been affected, perhaps because of the indirect household or cohort size effects described

28

Restricting cohorts to those born before 1980 means that individuals in the sample will be of working age by 2000, the first
year of data in the analysis. Restricting cohorts to those born in 1946 or later is also appropriate, because many born earlier in the
1940s would have begun retiring from 2000 to 2011, which complicates the interpretation of the labor force outcomes. For all of
these reasons, the 1950-53 cohorts may be a more appropriate comparison group for subsequent cohorts than the 1940s cohorts.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 20

previously. This increase in cohort family income departs from the relative stability of cohort-category
differences for the 1946-53 cohort categories. Moreover, the relative increase in family incomes is
temporary. Consistent with the convergence in access to the Pill between states permitting the sale of
contraceptives over the entire period and those prohibiting their sale until Griswold, the difference in
family incomes for the post-1965 cohorts is not statistically different from that for the 1950-53 cohort
category.
Much of this effect was driven by changes in men’s wage incomes. The top right panel of figure 6
shows that the gap in income from wages is around 2 percent larger for men born from 1962 to 1965 in
states permitting the sale of the Pill. This relative rise in wage earnings gap is largely due to greater labor
force involvement among affected men: the bottom two panels (hours and weeks worked, counting no
hours or weeks worked as zeros) show a relative increase in labor force effort, especially for men in the
1962-65 cohorts. Most of this is driven by changes on the extensive margin. In results not reported here, I
do not find this pattern for average hourly wages (income from wages divided by usual hours times weeks
worked last year) of full-time, full-year male workers. Differences in health and disability may play a role
in these findings, but an investigation of these additional outcomes is beyond the scope of this study.
Figure 7 investigates the role of mothers’ access to contraception on children’s higher education. The
results are also suggestive and concentrated among men. The relative share of men with 16 or more years
of education grows by around 1 to 2 percent for cohorts born from 1958 to 1969 in states permitting
contraceptive sales (top left panel). The positive effect on 16 or more years of education is small and
statistically insignificant for the 1954-57 cohorts (who would have been affected only indirectly), and
negative and statistically insignificant among cohorts born in the 1970s, whose mothers did not differ in
their legal ability to buy the Pill. None of these effects is individually statistically different from that for
the 1950-53 cohorts at conventional levels, nor does a joint test change this conclusion. Interestingly,
these patterns are not present across the education distribution. Using some college or more (13 years or
more of education, top right panel) or high school or more (12 or more years, not reported) as the
dependent variable results in much smaller and statistically insignificant effects for men born after 1957.
The effects for women are even more muted and also statistically insignificant.
In summary, differences in mothers’ access to birth control predict differences in the extent and
intensity of their offspring’s labor force participation, wage earnings, and household income well into the
most recent decade. Despite the multitude of experiences, labor market shocks, and events that shape
labor force outcomes over a lifetime, the evidence suggests that the differential diffusion of the Pill,
induced by preexisting state Comstock laws, had sizable and persistent effects on individuals and labor
markets. These long-lasting effects are the possible result of four channels: family size, household
income, selection, and cohort size. Based on the evidence presented here, the most plausible channels for
Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 21

the effects are family and cohort size. Griswold’s effective repeal of Comstock bans on the sale of
contraceptives likely represents an improvement in families’ ability to invest in each child and, perhaps, a
relaxation of the financial constraints on sending children to college. Significant reductions in cohort sizes
may have also altered children’s resources and opportunities. These within-family and cross-cohort
spillovers are consistent with the effects of contraceptive access extending beyond the immediately
affected cohorts.

V. The Long-Term Effects of Subsidizing Access to Contraception
Legal barriers limited the use of modern medical contraception, but so did its cost. As already noted,
when the Pill was introduced, an annual prescription cost roughly twice what it does today. Over 650
federal grants for family planning between 1964 and 1973 increased financial access to contraception by
subsidizing expensive medical contraceptives (like the Pill) and related medical services, education, and
counseling. These grants expanded existing programs and established new programs in underserved areas.
From 1969 to 1983, users of family planning services increased from 1.2 million to almost 5 million,
owing in large part to increases in federal support and rising support from state and local governments.
Roughly 83 percent of family planning patients in this period had incomes below 150 percent of the
poverty line (13 percent were AFDC recipients); 70 percent of patients were white and 25 percent were
black (Torres and Forrest 1985).
The quiet and disorganized beginning of this program under the EOA and, later, the DHEW facilitates
a quasi-experimental strategy to evaluate its longer-term effects. This section first describes my
differences-in-differences methodology (Bailey 2012) for examining the fertility effects of funding family
planning programs. It next summarizes how subsidized access to medical contraceptives affected the
material and living circumstances of the average child. Finally, it uses a similar research design to
examine the effects of family planning programs on the educational attainment, income, and employment
of these children as adults in the 2000 census and the 2005-11 ACS.
V.A. The Effect of Subsidizing Contraception on Childbearing
The research design in Bailey (2012) relies upon the county-level rollout of over 650 federal family
planning program grants, using the following differences-in-differences framework (Jacobson, LaLonde,
and Sullivan 1993):

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 22

where

is the fertility rate in county j in year t = 1959, 1960, …, 1988 ;

is a set of county fixed

effects, which allow consistent estimation of even in the presence of preexisting unobserved differences
between funded and unfunded counties;

is a set of either year fixed effects or state × year fixed

effects, which captures time-varying, state-level changes in the legal availability of abortion in the late
1960s and early 1970s, changes in Medicaid policy, and changes in family planning funds under Title V
of the 1967 Amendment to the Social Security Act; and X is a vector including a constant and
covariates.29 The idea behind the inclusion of these covariates is to account for potentially confounding
changes in population demographics and policies.
The coefficients of interest,

, measure how outcomes differed over time between counties that

received a family planning grant from 1964 to 1973 (
after the grant began,

= 1) and counties that did not, both before and

. Because family planning grants occurred in different years, time is normalized

to be relative to the date of the grant, using an indicator variable for the event year,
For instance,

.

corresponds to the regression-adjusted difference in outcomes 5 years after the program

began. The date of the grant, y = 0, is omitted, and event years greater than 14 and less than -6 are
grouped into two separate indicators to ensure that all parameters are well estimated.
Using the general fertility rate as the dependent variable,30 figure 8 plots weighted estimates of :
model 1 includes county and year effects (assuming

); model 2 adds state × year fixed effects to

model 1; and model 3 adds the time-varying county-level covariates to model 2 (model 3’s 95 percent
confidence interval is also shown). Across models, the estimates are consistent with family planning
grants reducing childbearing. Before the family planning program began, the trend in the general fertility
rate was similar in counties that would eventually receive them and in those that would not (the
pretreatment differences are close to zero and individually and jointly statistically insignificant), but it fell
sharply in the funded counties after the family planning grants began. Within 3 years of the grant, the
general fertility rate had fallen by roughly 1 birth per 1,000 women of childbearing age in these counties
on average. By years 6 to 10 it had fallen by an average of 1.5 births per 1,000 women. Fifteen years after
an organization received its first federal family planning grant, the fertility rate remained 1.4 to 2 percent

29

These covariates are the interaction of 1960 census characteristics (from Haines 2005; these include the shares of the
population who are in urban areas, nonwhite, under age 5, and over age 64; the share of households with annual income under
$3,000, and the share over $10,000, and the share of the county’s land area that is rural or a farm) with linear time trends. In
addition, information on the number of abortion providers in each county accounts for within-state changes in the availability of
abortion from 1970 to 1988 (zero before 1970). I also use annual, county-level per capita measures of government transfers (from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Regional Economic Information System, REIS; Bureau of Economic Analysis undated); these
transfers include cash public assistance such as AFDC, Supplemental Security Income, and General Assistance; medical
spending such as Medicare and military health care; and cash retirement and disability.
30
Accurate age-county population estimates are not annually available in the early years to allow construction of the total fertility
rate.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 23

lower in the county than in the year the program started, net of declines in fertility in other counties in the
same state and after adjusting for observable county-level characteristics. These findings are robust to
variations in the specification: omitting unfunded counties, not weighting the regressions, and including
county-level linear time trends. In addition, the effects are similar for programs funded before and after
Title X began in 1970 (Bailey 2012).
Because these programs served mostly lower-income women and operated in only one fifth of all U.S.
counties in this period, federally funded family planning programs account for a small portion of the
overall decline in fertility rates over the 1960s. These programs, nevertheless, had large effects on the
poor women they served: the magnitudes are large enough to account for half of the 1965 gap in
childbearing between poor and nonpoor women. Like the expansion of access to the Pill earlier in the
1960s, federally funded family planning programs had large effects on childbearing. They reduced overall
fertility rates in the counties they served by around 2 percent, and among poorer patients (on the
presumption that they were their only beneficiaries) by 20 to 30 percent within a decade.
V.B. The Effects of Subsidizing Contraception on Child Outcomes
A second set of analyses builds on this empirical strategy to investigate the link between federally
funded family planning programs in the late 1960s and early 1970s and child outcomes. The analysis
makes use of two large data sets: the universe of infant and maternal deaths from Vital Statistics from
1959 to 1988 and the restricted long-form samples of the 1970 and 1980 censuses.
INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALITY
The analysis of infant and maternal mortality uses these outcomes as the dependent variable in a
specification identical to model 3 in the fertility analysis (figure 8). Because the denominators of these
outcomes are births, I use the number of births as weights. Figure 9 plots the estimates using infant or
maternal mortality rates (left- and right-hand panels, respectively) as the dependent variable. Although
fertility rates declined rapidly following the introduction of family planning programs, both the infant
mortality rate and the maternal mortality rate changed negligibly after the programs began. I omit
reporting of additional specification checks, because adding additional covariates, county trends, or
omitting weights does not alter this conclusion.
Infant mortality rates are defined as the ratio of infant deaths to births, and figure 8 makes clear that
family planning programs affected births. The absence of changes in infant mortality may therefore
reflect important shifts in who becomes a mother (the selection channel). For instance, if the more
advantaged of poor households used family planning to delay or prevent births, this could increase the
share of infants living in the most disadvantaged of poor households. This, in turn, could increase postneonatal infant mortality rates. In results not reported here, I examine this possibility by separating
Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 24

neonatal and post-neonatal infant mortality. The results are consistent with compositional factors playing
a role. Neonatal mortality declines slightly following the introduction of a family planning program, but
post-neonatal mortality appears to increase. Although the inclusion of covariates reduces the size of these
estimates, the resulting magnitudes imply a sizable effect: an increase of approximately 0.10 death per
1,000 live births, or roughly 1.5 percent, over the 1965 post-neonatal infant mortality rate.
The absence of effects on maternal mortality is less surprising, because of the “population control”
focus of many family planning programs in the 1960s. Whereas today’s programs provide a menu of
reproductive, gynecological, and prenatal health services, many programs in the 1960s provided no health
services at all and only handed out birth control pills (Bailey 1999).
For both infant and maternal mortality rates, the imprecision of the estimates is also important to
consider when interpreting them. For the model shown in figure 9 (model 3), a 95 percent confidence
interval ranges from 0.37 to 0.33 at year 5, encompassing both a reduction in the infant mortality rate of
1.9 percent and an increase of 1.7 percent over the 1970 mean. A 95 percent confidence interval for the
maternal mortality rate arranges from 0.30 to 0.31 at year 5, encompassing a reduction of 13 percent and
an increase of 13 percent over the 1970 mean.
In summary, children born just after federal family planning programs began operating were not
measurably healthier, nor were their mothers. However, the measures I use capture only the extreme (and
rare) events of infant or maternal death and may miss improvements in other dimensions of health. In
addition, the imprecision of the estimates—despite using the universe of all infant and maternal deaths in
the United States during the years in question—does not allow me to rule out meaningful improvements
in either measure.
CHILDREN’S MATERIAL RESOURCES AND LIVING CIRCUMSTANCES
Bailey, Olga Malkova, and Zoë McLaren (2013) also investigate the role of family planning programs
in altering children’s material resources and living circumstances. Our analysis draws on the half of all
respondents on the census long form in 1970 and 1980 (10 percent and 8 percent of the total population,
respectively) who also provided information on their residence in 1965 and 1975. These large samples are
available in the Michigan Research Data Center and contain information on exact county of residence,
rather than county group.31 Using this information, we link children’s year of birth and county of
residence in 1965 and 1975 to the availability of federal family planning programs at their time of birth.

31

Public use census samples contain only information on county groups, which are typically contiguous agglomerations of
counties. In some cases counties are split between different county groups. Moreover, the county groupings changed from 1970
to 1980. Access to these geocoded, large long-form samples is restricted, and the samples are available only in the Census
Research Data Centers.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 25

Estimating a version of equation 2 separately for both the 1970 and 1980 censuses,32 Bailey and others
(2013) find that children born just after a county received its first federal family planning grant
experienced substantial improvements in their material resources. These children lived in households with
higher mean annual incomes and were 5 percent less likely to live in poverty. Family planning grants also
appear to have reduced the share of children living in households receiving welfare payments: that share
fell significantly, by 15 percent, among children born after these grants were made. Finally, family
planning programs reduced the share of children living in single-parent households. This suggests that
greater access to contraception did not appear to influence less committed couples to have premarital sex
or to undertake marriages that were less durable. In short, Bailey and others (2013) show that one reason
to expect family planning programs to have improved longer-term outcomes is that they improved
children’s economic resources and living circumstances in the short run.
V.C. The Effects of Subsidizing Contraception on Adult Outcomes
A final set of analyses investigates the long-run relationship between a mother’s access to family
planning services and the adult outcomes of her children. These analyses are based on the 5 percent 2000
decennial census sample and the 2005-11 ACS. The data do not contain information on the county in
which individuals were born. Instead, I proxy for county of birth using the Public Use Microdata Areas
(PUMAs), the locations where individuals were living at the time of the interview.33 In the absence of
systematic changes in migration patterns for individuals observed in the same PUMA but born before and
after the family planning program began, misclassification error introduced by using PUMAs to proxy for
county of birth should tend to attenuate the results. On the other hand, using PUMAs rather than counties
for longer-term outcomes may reduce misclassification error if, for instance, using a slightly larger area
improves the assignment of mothers’ access to family planning (that is, more of the individuals remain in
the PUMA of birth than lived in their county of birth). Both scenarios are possible, so the impact of
misclassification error for this analysis is difficult to assess without more information on lifetime
migration. Readers should keep both scenarios in mind when interpreting the estimates.

32

Note that children born between 1964 and 1970 will be aged zero to 6 in the 1970 census, and those born between 1964 and
1973 will be aged 6 to 16 in the 1980 census. To avoid the selection problem of children leaving their parents’ household, we
limit the sample to children under age 18. The regressions are not identical to previously presented specifications of equation 2,
because they are unweighted and exclude unfunded counties to minimize the importance of measurement error from migration. In
the 1970 census we set the lowest lead equal to 7 for all leads less than 7, and the highest lag equal to 1, to ensure that the
coefficients can be estimated. The 1980 census allows us to examine the evolution of outcomes 6 years after the establishment of
the family planning program. For this census, we set all leads less than 3 to be equal to 3, and the highest lag equal to 7.
33
There are 2,069 distinct PUMAs, each with a population of 100,000 or more. PUMAs do not cross state borders, and they often
follow county boundaries. Each of 1,269 PUMAs is matched to at least one family planning grant. See the online appendix for
more information.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 26

As in the previous analysis of long-run outcomes, I restrict the sample to include individuals born
from 1946 to 1980. I also restrict the sample to individuals aged 20 to 59, to capture the labor market
outcomes of workers before they begin to retire. The data are collapsed to birth year × PUMA × year of
observation cells. The analysis uses a specification very similar to the model 2 version of equation 2.
First, I limit the PUMAs used to those that ever received a family planning grant from 1964 to 1973
(Bailey and others 2013). Second, I group cohorts into the following categories:34

in equation 2

becomes a dummy variable equal to 1 for each of nine birth cohort categories in event time: -32 to -20
(cohorts born 33 to 20 years before the family planning program began), -19 to -15, -14 to -10, -9 to -5, -4
to zero, 1 to 5, 6 to 10, 11 to 15, and 16 and more. I omit cohorts born 4 to zero years before the family
planning program started, so that the point estimates reflect the changes in cohort differences relative to
the cohort differences for those born in the 5 years leading up to the introduction of the family planning
program. Estimates for the first and last categories are suppressed in the presentation, because they are
estimated using only a subset of cohorts. The point estimates of interest capture the change in the average
difference in cohort outcomes between adults whose mothers would have had access to a family planning
in the adult’s year of birth and adults born in the same PUMA to mothers without access to family
planning. The fact that the policy variation occurred between 1965 and 1973 allows a long preperiod to be
examined for differences in trends before the family planning program began.
Figure 10 summarizes the long-run effects of mothers’ increased access to family planning services on
their affected offspring as adults, including the effects on total family income, men’s income from wages,
and men’s weeks or hours worked. The top left panel shows that children born just after family planning
programs began (years 1 to 10) had family incomes that were approximately 1 percent higher than
residents of the same PUMA born in the immediately preceding years (years -4 to zero). To the extent
that individuals born just before the programs’ introduction may have also been affected (for example,
because they lived in the same family or went to the same schools), the more appropriate comparison may
be with individuals born 5 to 9 years before the family planning program began. This comparison
suggests that greater access to family planning programs results in a statistically significant 2 percent
increase in family income.
These estimates provide a pattern similar to those using Comstock-era bans and the diffusion of the
Pill and are, in many cases, similar in magnitude. This correspondence in magnitude is surprising given
that the two policy changes likely affected individuals at different income levels, and given that the
analyses are based on different identifying assumptions.

34

Previous estimates use model 3, which uses all available covariates. Figure 8 shows that the addition of these covariates
matters little. I omit these covariates here because of the difficulty of mapping them onto PUMAs.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 27

The top right panel of figure 10 shows that much of this increase is driven by increases in men’s
earnings. The estimates are imprecise, but the pattern is suggestive of around a 2 percent increase for men
born after family planning programs began. If some of the effects operated within families or schools or
labor markets on cohorts just older than the affected cohorts (as in the case of the diffusion of the Pill),
this may understate the effect of family planning programs. When instead the comparison is with men
born 9 to 5 years before the family planning grant, the change in the difference reaches almost 3 percent,
and the estimates for categories -9 to -5 years and 1 to 5 years are statistically different at the 5 percent
level. As in the case of Comstock-era sales bans, some of the long-run effects on income appear to be
driven by work decisions, but the estimates are too imprecise to allow firm conclusions. In contrast to the
results in section IV.C, these effects appear to be driven by changes on the intensive margin (hours and
weeks worked exclude zeros).
Figure 11 investigates the relationship between mothers’ access to family planning and their children’s
educational attainment. These results suggest a striking relationship between family planning programs
and children’s human capital. Children born just after family planning programs began were more likely
to complete at least 12, 13, and 16 years of education. These relationships are largely driven by increases
in 16 or more years of educational attainment. Children born 1 to 5 years after a family planning program
began were 2 percent more likely to complete 16 or more years of education than children conceived in
the decade before family planning programs began. This number topped 5 percent for those born 6 to 10
years after family planning programs began and reached over 7 percent for those born 11 to 15 years
after. These results contrast with the more modest pattern of educational attainment effects in the analysis
of Comstock-era sales bans.
The differences between these results and those based on changes in states’ contraceptive laws likely
relate to the role of selection, household income, and family size. The selection effect may have been
much more important for family planning programs, because they disproportionately served lowerincome women. Moreover, increases in household income could complement the selection channel by
reducing the cost to women of delaying their childbearing enough to complete school, finish their job
training, or get a promotion—all of which should increase the resources available to their children once
they are born. Finally, the family size channel implies that the children of these more affluent parents
would have received more parental time and material resources. It is harder to make the case for the
cohort size channel, because overall changes in fertility rates were much smaller than those induced by
changes in the Comstock laws. As a result of all these factors, children of parents with greater access to
family planning appear to have achieved higher lifetime incomes.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 28

VI. Implications and Conclusions
The rationale for funding the first domestic family planning programs in the 1960s was closely
intertwined with the War on Poverty era’s notion of expanding economic opportunities for the poor.
Subsidizing contraception through family planning programs, it was argued, would promote opportunities
for disadvantaged women, who “do not want more children than do families with higher incomes” but
“do not have the information or the resources to plan their families effectively according to their own
desires” (National Research Council 1965, p. 10). It was also argued that these programs would promote
the opportunities of the next generation and thus advance broader and longer-term economic prosperity.
A long literature estimates the costs and benefits of family planning policies. One (in)famous estimate
was cited by President Johnson in 1965: “less than five dollars invested in population control is worth a
hundred dollars invested in economic growth.” Johnson’s claim rests upon some dubious calculations, as
does much of the empirical literature estimating the costs and benefits of family planning programs (Lam
2012). Following some early work by S. Enke (1960, 1966, 1971), the heart of many of these arguments
is that it is easier to increase income per capita by reducing the denominator than by increasing the
numerator.
This paper explores a different set of potential consequences of family planning policies. It has
presented indirect evidence that, as envisioned by some of the programs’ early advocates, family planning
programs may influence national income (the numerator) directly over the longer term. The introduction
of the Pill, the Griswold decision, subsequent state repeals of Comstock-era bans on contraceptive sales,
and increases in federal funding for family planning programs are associated with large and persistent
improvements in the material living circumstances of the affected children as adults. Analyzing two
different policy experiments during the 1960s and 1970s, I find that children conceived in areas with
greater legal or financial access to family planning went on to live in higher-earning households as adults
than did children conceived in the same areas whose mothers had less access to family planning. Both
increasing legal access and increasing financial access to the Pill are associated with a 2 to 3 percent
increase in family income over all adults in the affected cohorts. Scaling these estimates by a guess at the
share of children benefiting from them implies much larger effects, perhaps around a 20 to 30 percent
gain in family incomes for the children of directly benefiting families.35 An important component of these
income gains reflects increases in children’s educational attainment. Children conceived in areas with

35

Bailey and others (2013) show an increase in the share of women using the Pill of around 5 percentage points in areas gaining
family planning programs. Assuming that the only beneficiaries from family planning programs were the women switching onto
the Pill (an assumption that likely understates actual program benefits) and that each of these women had two children, this
implies that the reported intention-to-treat effects might be scaled up by around 10. This is a very rough calculation and intended
only as a benchmark.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 29

greater financial access to contraception were 2 to 7 percent more likely to attain 16 or more years of
education.
At first glance, these estimates may seem large. However, the magnitudes are not inconsistent with
other recent findings on the effects of early-life policy interventions to improve the human capital of
disadvantaged children. For instance, James Heckman and others (2010) show that the 2-year Perry
Preschool program that provided home visits and prescheduled education to disadvantaged children
significantly improved education, employment, and earnings. Raj Chetty and others (2011) document that
children randomly assigned to smaller classes from kindergarten to third grade and to higher-quality
classrooms were more likely to attend college and had higher earnings at age 27. Finally, Paul Gertler and
others (2013) show in a recent working paper that 1-hour weekly visits to parents of stunted toddlers over
2 years from community health workers in Jamaica raised the average earnings of participants’ children
by over 40 percent. These earnings gains reflect a tremendous increase in educational attainment, as the
treatment group was three times as likely to have some college education relative to the control group.
Indeed, a growing literature on the returns to early life interventions generally supports their
importance for human capital and health investments early in life, but the mechanisms for these effects
remain largely elusive.36 Similarly, the mechanisms underlying the relationship between family planning
and long-run outcomes remain unclear. Unlike educational or home-visit interventions, family planning
programs do not provide educational resources directly, nor do they teach parenting. Family planning
policies are, however, similar insomuch as they increase parents’ economic resources and time available
per child, both of which may facilitate children’s development and complement subsequent educational
and health investments in a dynamic manner (Cunha and Heckman 2007).
One simple way to assess the costs and benefits of investments in family planning programs is to
compare them with those of other national programs and policies aimed at increasing college attendance
and completion. Family planning programs in the 1960s cost an average of around $260 million per year
in 2010 dollars, and today the federal government spends around $300 million per year on Title X family
planning programs. One can use the lower confidence interval of the year 1 to 5 post-effects in figure 11
to make a conservative estimate for the impact of these programs on the number of individuals
completing 16 or more years of education: for the 1973 birth cohort, such a calculation suggests that
approximately 9,300 (0.003 × 3,098,683) more individuals completed college than would have otherwise.
Using today’s higher annual family planning expenditures together with this conservative estimate of
program benefits implies a cost of no more than $32,271 per individual induced to complete college. This
estimate may be too high due to the use of recent costs and the lower confidence interval to compute
36

See Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (forthcoming) for new evidence that the Perry program affected cognitive and personality
traits.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 30

benefits. Nevertheless, it implies family planning may be much cheaper than many other interventions to
increase educational attainment. Head Start, for example, costs around $133,333, and Upward Bound
$93,667, per student induced to attend college. (On the other hand, family planning could be more
expensive than other interventions such as the FAFSA application assistance program, which costs $1,257
per additional student enrolled; Dynarski and others 2011). Of course, using only college completion
ignores many of the other potential returns to family planning programs, which may extend beyond
increasing higher education. Overall, the results suggest that family planning programs provide a costeffective strategy for promoting opportunities and the longer-term prosperity envisioned by their early
proponents.

References
Alan Guttmacher Institute. 2000. Fulfilling the Promise: Public Policy and U.S. Family Planning Clinics. New
York.
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. “Human Capital Development before Age Five.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. 4b, edited by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card. Maryland Heights, Mo.: Elsevier.
Ananat, Elizabeth O., and Dan Hungerman. 2012. “The Power of the Pill for the Next Generation: Oral
Contraception’s Effects on Fertility, Abortion, and Maternal & Child Characteristics.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 94, no. 1: 37-51.
Ananat, Elizabeth, Jonathan Gruber, Phillip Levine, and Douglas Staiger. 2009. “Abortion and Selection.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 91, no. 1: 124–36.
Bailey, Beth L. 1999. Sex in the Heartland. Harvard University Press.
Bailey, Martha J. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women's Lifecycle
Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, no. 1: 289–320.
-----. 2009. “Erratum and Addendum.” Posted at the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Also available at wwwpersonal.umich.edu/~baileymj/Bailey_Erratum.pdf, September.
-----. 2010. “Momma’s Got the Pill: How Anthony Comstock and Griswold v. Connecticut Shaped U.S
Childbearing.” American Economic Review 100, no. 1: 98–129.
-----. 2012. “Reexamining the Impact of U.S. Family Planning Programs on Fertility: Evidence from the War on
Poverty and the Early Years of Title X.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4, no. 2: 62–97.
Bailey, Martha J., and Susan Dynarski. 2011. “Inequality in Postsecondary Education.” In Whither Opportunity?
Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances, edited by G. J. Duncan and R. J. Murnane. New
York: Russell Sage.
Bailey, Martha J., Melanie Guldi, Allison Davido, and Erin Buzuviz. 2011. “Early Legal Access: Laws and Policies
Governing Contraceptive Access, 1960-1980.” Working paper. University of Michigan. wwwpersonal.umich.edu/~baileymj/ELA_laws.pdf.
Bailey, Martha J., Brad J. Hershbein, and Amalia R. Miller. 2012. “The Opt-In Revolution? Contraception and the
Gender Gap in Wages.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4, no. 3: 225–54.
Bailey, Martha J., Brad J. Hershbein, and Melanie Guldi. Forthcoming. “Two Twentieth Century Transitions?
Implications for Human Capital.” In Human Capital and History: The American Record. Cambridge, Mass.:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bailey, Martha J., Olga Malkova, and Zoë McLaren. 2013. “The Long-Term Effects of Family Planning Programs
on Poverty.” Working paper. University of Michigan. wwwpersonal.umich.edu/~baileymj/Bailey_McLaren_Malkova.pdf.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 31

Becker, Gary. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press.
Becker, Gary, and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. “On the Interaction between Quantity and Quality of Children.” Journal
of Political Economy 81, no. 2: S279-88.
Becker, Gary, and Nigel Tomes. 1979. “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income and Intergenerational
Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy 87, no. 6: 1153-89.
-----. 1986. “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.” Journal of Labor Economics 4, no. 3, part 2: S1-39.
Becker, Gary, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Tamura. 1990. “Human Capital, Fertility, and Economic Growth.”
Journal of Political Economy 98, no. 5, part 2: S12-37.
Bound, John, and Sarah E. Turner. 2007. “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect Collegiate Attainment.”
Journal of Public Economics, 91, no. 5-6: 877-99.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. Undated. Regional Economic Information System (REIS), 1969-1989. Washington.
www.ciesin.org/datasets/reis/reis-home.html (accessed February 2009)
Bureau of the Census. June Current Population Survey: Fertility of American Women. (1990-2010). Washington,
DC: Bureau of the Census, 2012. http://www.census.gov/hhes/fertility/data/cps/ (accessed via
www.unicon.com, October 1, 2012).
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Melvin Stephens, Jr. 2006. “Abortion Legalization and Adolescent Substance Use.”
Journal of Law and Economics 49, no. 2: 481-505.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan. 2011.
“How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126, no. 4: 1593-1660.
Christensen, Finn. 2011. “The Pill and Partnerships: The Impact of the Birth Control Pill on Cohabitation.” Journal
of Population Economics 25, no. 1: 29–52.
Cohen, Susan A. 2011. “The Numbers Tell the Story: The Reach and Impact of Title X.” Guttmacher Policy Review
14, no. 2: 20–23.
Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman. 2007. “The Technology of Skill Formation.” American Economic Review 97,
no. 2: 31-47.
Cutright, Phillips, and Frederick S. Jaffe. 1977. The Impact of Family Planning Programs on Fertility: The U.S.
Experience. New York: Praeger Publishers.
DiCenso, A., G. Guyatt, A. Willan, and L. Griffith. 2002. “Interventions to Reduce Unintended Pregnancies among
Adolescents: Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials.” British Medical Journal 324: 1426–34.
Donahue, John J., III, and Steven D. Levitt. 2001. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 141, no. 2: 379-420.
Dynarski, Susan, Joshua Hyman, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. “Experimental Evidence on the Effect
of Childhood Investments on Postsecondary Attainment and Degree Completion.” Working paper. University
of Michigan.users.nber.org/~dynarski/Dynarski_Hyman_Schanzenbach.pdf (downloaded May 25, 2013).
Easterlin, Richard. 1978. “What Will 1984 Be Like? Socioeconomic Implications of Recent Twists in Age
Structure.” Demography 15: 397–421.
Enke, S. 1960. “The Economics of Government Payments to Limit Population.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change 8, no. 4: 339-48.
-----. 1966. “The Economic Aspects of Slowing Population Growth.” The Economic Journal 76, no. 301: 44-56.
-----. 1971. “Economic Consequences of Rapid Population Growth.” The Economic Journal 81, no. 324: 800-11.
Foote, Christopher L., and Christopher F. Goetz. 2008. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime: Comment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, no. 1: 407-423.
Freedman, Ronald, Arthur A. Campbel, and Pascal K. Whelpton. Undated. Growth of American Families, 1995.
Machine readable data file created by D. Capaldi, M. Knoll, and M. Pasaba under direction of Larry Bumpass
of the University of Wisconsin Center for Demography and Ecology and the staff of the University of

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 32

Wisconsin Data and Program Library Service. Distributed by the Inter-univeristy Consortium for Political
and Social Research, Ann Arbor, Mich. www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/AHRQMCC/studies/20000.
Garrow, David J. 1994. Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade. University of
California Press.
Gertler, Paul, James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, Arianna Zanolini, Christel Vermeersch, Susan Walker, Susan M.
Chang, and Sally Grantham-McGregor. 2013. “Labor Market Returns to Early Childhood Stimulation: A 20year Followup to an Experimental Intervention in Jamaica.” Working Paper no. 19185. Cambridge, Mass.:
National Bureau of Economic Research (May). www.nber.org/papers/w19185.pdf.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career and
Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 110, no. 4: 730–70.
Grossman, Michael, and Steven Jacobowitz. 1981. “Variations in Infant Mortality Rates among Counties of the
United States: The Roles of Public Policies and Programs.” Demography 18: 695–713.
Grossman, Michael, and Theodore Joyce. 1990. “Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions, and Birth Weight
Production Functions in New York City.” Journal of Political Economy 98: 983–1007.
Gruber, Jonathan, Phillip Levine, and Douglas Staiger. 1999. “Abortion Legalization and Child Living
Circumstances: Who Is the ‘'Marginal Child’?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, no. 1: 263–91.
Guldi, Melanie. 2008. “Fertility Effects of Abortion and Birth Control Pill Access for Minors.” Demography 45, no.
4: 817–27.
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Parental Education and Parental Time with
Children.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 3: 23–46.
Guttmacher, Alan. 1947. ”Conception Control and the Medical Profession: The Attitudes of 3,381 Physicians
toward Contraception and the Contraceptives They Prescribe.” Human Fertility 12 (March): 1–10.
Haines, Michael R. 2005. “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2000”
[Computer file]. ICPSR02896-v2. Colgate University and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research [producers], 2004; Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 2005-04-29), http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/00003.
Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz. 2010. “Analyzing
Social Experiments from the HighScope Perry Preschool Program.” Quantitative Economics 1, no. 1: 1-46.
Heckman, James J., Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter A. Savelyev. Forthcoming. “Understanding the Mechanisms through
Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.” American Economic Review.
Helmerhorst, Frans M., Toni Belfield, Regina Kulier, Nandita Maitra, Paul O’Brien, and David A. Grimes. 2006.
“The Cochrane Fertility Regulation Group: Synthesizing the Best Evidence about Family Planning.”
Contraception 74: 280-86.
Hock, Heinrich. 2008. “The Pill and the Educational Attainment of American Women and Men.” Working paper.
Florida State University.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Jacob A. Klerman, and Robert J. Willis. 1997. “The Economics of Fertility in Developed
Countries.” In Handbook of Population and Family Economics, vol. 1A, edited by Mark R. Rosenzweig and
Oded Stark. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Susan Williams McElroy, and Seth G. Sanders. 2005. “Teenage Childbearing and Its Life Cycle
Consequences: Exploiting a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources 40, no. 3: 683-715.
Jacobson, Mireille. 2004. “Baby Booms and Drug Busts: Trends in Youth Drug Use in the United States, 19752000.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 4: 1481-1512.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers.”
American Economic Review 83, no 4: 685-709.
Jaffe, Frederick S., Joy G. Dryfoos, and Marsha Corey. 1973. “Organized Family Planning Programs in the United
States: 1968-1972.” Family Planning Perspectives 5, no. 2: 73-79.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 33

Johnson, Lyndon B. 1965. “Address in San Francisco at the 20th Anniversary Commemorative Session of the
United Nations, June 25.” www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=27054#ixzz1siPmMTyN (full text
accessed March11, 2013).
Joshi, Shareen, and T. Paul Schultz. 2007. “Family Planning as an Investment in Development: Evaluation of a
Program’s Consequences in Matlab, Bangladesh.” Discussion Paper no. 951. Yale Economic Growth Center.
Joyce, Theodore. 1987. “The Impact of Induced Abortion on Black and White Birth Outcomes in the United States.”
Demography 24: 229–44.
Kearney, Melissa, and Phillip B. Levine. 2009. “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility and Sexual Behavior.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 1: 137–51.
Kramer, Michael S. 1987. “Intrauterine Growth and Gestational Duration Determinants.” Pediatrics 80, no. 4: 502–
11.
Lam, David. 2012. “Perspective Paper on ‘Population Growth’ for Copenhagen Consensus.” Working paper.
University of Michigan (April).
Levine, Phillip B., and David J. Zimmerman. 2010. Targeting Investments in Children: Fighting Poverty When
Resources Are Limited. University of Chicago Press.
Levine, Phillip B., Douglas Staiger, Thomas J. Kane, and David J. Zimmerman. 1999. “Roe v. Wade and American
Fertility.” American Journal of Public Health 89, no. 2: 199-203.
Levitan, Sar A. 1969. The Great Society’s Poor Law: A New Approach to Poverty. Johns Hopkins Press.
Malthus, Thomas R. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: John Murray.
Mellor, Jennifer M. 1998. “The Effect of Family Planning Programs on the Fertility of Welfare Recipients: Evidence
from Medicaid Claims.” Journal of Human Resources 33: 866-95.
Michael, Robert T., and Robert J. Willis. 1976. “Contraception and Fertility: Household Production under
Uncertainty.” In Demographic Behavior of the Household. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Miller, Amalia. 2011. “The Effects of Motherhood Timing on Career Path.” Journal of Population Economics 24,
no. 3: 1071-1100.
Miller, Grant. 2009. “Contraception as Development? New Evidence from Family Planning in Colombia.”
Economic Journal 120: 709-36.
National Research Council. 1965. “The Growth of U.S. Population: Analysis of the Problems and Recommendations
for Research, Training, and Service.” Publication no. 1279. Washington.
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). 2003. Natality Detail File, 1968-1988. Hyattsville, Md. Distributed
by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann Arbor, Mich.
www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/series/0036.
-----. 2008. Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1959- Hyattsville, Md. Distributed by the Inter-university Consortium for
Political and Social Research, Ann Arbor, Mich. www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACDA/series/00090.
National Research Council. 1965. “The Growth of U.S. Population: Analysis of the Problems and Recommendations
for Research, Training, and Service.” Publication no. 1279. Washington.
Nixon, Richard. 1969. “Special Message to the Congress on Problems of Population Growth.” July 18. Available at
The American Presidency Project. www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=2132.
Office of Economic Opportunity. 1969. The Need for Subsidized Family Planning Services: United States, Each
State and County, 1968. Washington: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1971. The Need for Subsidized Family Planning Services: United States, Each State and County, 1969.
Washington: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1974. The Need for Subsidized Family Planning Services: United States, Each State and County, 1971.
Washington: Government Printing Office.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 34

Pew Charitable Trusts. 2012. “Pursuing the American Dream: Economic Mobility across Generations.” Washington
and Philadelphia. Available at
www.pewstates.org/uploadedFiles/PCS_Assets/2012/Pursuing_American_Dream.pdf.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Kenneth Wolpin. 1986. “Evaluating the Effects of Optimally Distributed Public
Programs: Child Health and Family Planning Interventions.” American Economic Review 76, no. 3: 470-82.
-----. 1993. “Maternal Expectations and Ex Post Rationalizations: The Usefulness of Survey Information on the
Wantedness of Children.” Journal of Human Resources 28, no. 2: 205-29.
Rotz, Dana. 2011. “Why Have Divorce Rates Fallen? The Role of Women’s Age at Marriage” Princeton, N.J.:
Mathematica Policy Research (December 20). papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1960017.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and Matthew Sobek.
2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series. version 5.0. University of Minnesota.
https://usa.ipums.org/usa/.
Sah, Raaj K., and Javier A. Birchenall. 2012. “Coituses and Contraceptive Reliability: Some Results on Behavior
and Welfare.” Working paper. University of California, Santa Barbara (September 20).
www.econ.ucsb.edu/about_us/events/seminar_papers/sah.pdf (downloaded March 8, 2013).
Salehi-Isfahani, Djavad, M. Jalal Abbasi-Shavazi, and Meimanat Hosseini-Chavoshi. 2010. “Family Planning and
Fertility Decline in Rural Iran: The Impact of Rural Health Clinics.” Health Economics 19, no. S1: 159-80.
Schultz, T. P. 1973. “Explanations of Birth Rate Changes over Space and Time: A Study of Taiwan.” Journal of
Political Economy 81, no. 2: S238-74.
-----. 2008. “Population Policies, Fertility, Women’s Human Capital, and Child Quality.” In Handbook of
Development Economics, vol. 4, edited by T. Paul Schultz and John Strauss. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
-----. 1992. “Assessing Family Planning Cost-Effectiveness.” In Family Planning Programmes and Fertility, edited
by J. F. Phillips and J. A. Press. Oxford University Press.
Smock, Pamela, Peter Granda, and Lynette Hoelter. 2012. Integrated Fertility Survey Series, Release 6, 1955-2002.
[United States]. ICPSR26344-v6. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research [distributor], 2012-04-19. http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/26344.
Sonfield, Adam, and Rachel Benson Gold. 2012. “Public Funding for Family Planning, Sterilization, and Abortion
Services, FY 1980-2010.” Fact Sheet. New York: Guttmacher Institute.
Surveillance Research Program, National Cancer Institute. 2009. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) Program Populations (1969-1988)., Bethesda, Md.: National Cancer
Institute.www.seer.cancer.gov/popdata (accessed March 1, 2009.
Tone, Andrea. 1996. “Contraceptive Consumers: Gender and the Political Economy of Birth Control in the 1930s.”
Journal of Social History 29, no. 3: 485-506.
-----. 2000. “Black Market Birth Control: Contraceptive Entrepreneurship and Criminality in the Gilded Age.”
Journal of American History 87, no. 2: 435-59.
-----. 2001. Devices and Desires: A History of Contraceptives in America. New York: Hill and Wang.
Torres, Aida, and Jaqueline Darroch Forrest. 1985. “Family Planning Clinic Services in the United States, 1983.”
Family Planning Perspectives 17, no. 1: 30-35.
U.S. Department of Health and Economic Welfare (DHEW), Center for Family Planning Program Development
(Planned Parenthood-World Population). 1974. Family Planning, Contraception, and Voluntary Sterilization:
An Analysis of Laws and Policies in the United States, Each State and Jurisdiction (as of September 1971).
Report of the National Center for Family Planning Services, Health Services and Mental Health
Administration. Publication no. 74-16001. Rockville, Md.
Weinberg, Roy. 1968. “Laws Governing Family Planning.” Legal Almanac Series no. 18. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.:
Oceana Publications.
Westoff, Charles F., and Norman B. Ryder. Undated-a. National Fertility Survey, 1965. Distributed by the Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann Arbor, Mich.
www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/DSDR/series/220/studies/20002.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 35

-----. Undated-b. National Fertility Survey, 1970. Distributed by the Interuniversity Consortium for Political and
Social Research, Ann Arbor, Mich. www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/DSDR/series/220/studies/20003.
Willis, Robert J. 1973. “A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Behavior,” Journal of Political
Economy 81 (2): S14-64.
Wilmoth, John R., and Patrick Ball. 1992. “The Population Debate in American Popular Magazines, 1946-90.”
Population and Development Review 18, no. 4: 631-68.
-----. 1995. “Arguments and Action in the Life of a Social Problem: A Case Study of ‘Overpopulation,’ 1946-1990.”
Social Problems 42, no. 3: 318-43.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 36

Table 1. Estimates of the Effects of the Pill and Griswold on Child Unwantedness and Birth Timinga

Birth unwanted
or ill-timed
Independent variable

c

Birth
unwanted

Dependent variableb
Birth
ill-timed

Birth unwanted or ill-timed

1-1

1-2

1-3

1-4

1-5

d

0.027
(0.018)

0.045
(0.023)

0.014
(0.020)

0.031
(0.016)

0.045
(0.026)

PillSalesLegal × 1966-76e

0.0001
(0.018)

0.026
(0.022)

0.0086
(0.022)

0.017
(0.020)

Mean of dependent variable
No. of observations
R2

0.37
65,851
0.104

0.43
43,676
0.097

0.24
43,676
0.033

Sample of mothers

All

All

Sample of births

All

Second and
higher-order

PillSalesLegal × 1958-65

1-6

1-7

1-8

0.030
(0.023)

0.10
(0.055)

0.029
(0.080)

0.015
(0.025)

0.022
(0.024)

0.037
(0.038)

-0.11
(0.077)

0.19
43,676
0.103

0.40
27,175
0.098

0.45
36,627
0.095

0.35
7,035
0.131

0.31
2,312
0.175

All

All

Whites

Second and
higher-order

Second and
higher-order

Second and
higher-order

≥13 years of
education
Second and
higher-order

≥16 years of
education
Second and
higher-order

<13 years of
education
Second and
higher-order

Source: Author’s regressions using data from the Integrated Fertility Survey Series (Smock, Granda, and Hoelter 2012). See the online appendix for details on
the data sources and variable construction.
a. Coefficients are least-squares estimates of  using a restricted specification of equation 1 as described in the text. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
corrected for arbitrary within-state covariance are presented in parentheses.
b. The dependent variable in each regression is a dummy variable equal to 1 when the indicated condition is met, and zero otherwise.
c. Each independent variable reported is a dummy variable equal to 1 when a ban on contraceptive sales was in place in the state where the mother resided and
the birth occurred in the indicated period, and zero otherwise. The period 1950-57 is omitted.
d. Period after introduction of the Pill.
e. Period after Griswold when states with sales bans lifted these restrictions.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 37

Table 2. Estimates the Effects of the Pill and Griswold on Weight at Birtha
Dependent variable = logarithm of the share
of births at low birthweight
Independent variableb
PillSalesLegal × 1958-65

c

PillSalesLegal × 1966-76d

Mean of dependent variable
(not in logarithms)
No. of observations
R2
Sample

2-1

2-2

2-3

2-4

0.007
(0.007)
0.004
(0.016)

0.005
(0.007)
0.004
(0.012)

0.025
(0.017)
0.051
(0.031)

-0.009
(0.038)
-0.001
(0.059)

0.0776

0.0684

0.127

0.123

1,104
0.964
All births

1,102
0.936
White births

1,095
0.914
Nonwhite
births

368
0.899
Nonwhite
births, South

Source: Author’s regressions using data from the 1954-67 volumes of Vital Statistics and NCHS (2003).
a. Coefficients are least-squares estimates of  using a restricted specification of equation 1 as described in the
text. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors corrected for an arbitrary within-state covariance are in parentheses.
b. Each dummy variables equal to 1 when a sales of contraceptives were legal in the state where the mother
resided and the birth occurred in the indicated period, and zero otherwise. The period 1950-57 is omitted.
c. Period after introduction of the Pill.
d. Period after Griswold when states with sales bans lifted these restrictions.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 38

Figure 1. Incidence of Terms Related to Contraception in Google Books, 1900-2008a
Occurrences per million words or bigramsb

8
6
4
2

1914:
Margaret
Sanger
indicted for
pamphlet
containing
words “birth
control”

1923: Sanger
opens first
“legal” birth
control clinic in
New York
under health
auspices

1936:
U.S. District
Court strikes
down portions
of the federal
Comstock law

1957: FDA
approves
Enovid for
regulation of
menses

1960:
FDA
approves
Enovid as the
first oral
contraceptive

1965:
Griswold
decision;
family
planning
programs
begin under
the OEO

1970:
Title X begins
funding family
planning
services

Source: Author’s tabulations using http://books.google.com/ngrams.
a. FDA = Food and Drug Administration; OEO = Office of Economic Opportunity.
b. Words when only “contraception is used; bigrams when more than two words are used. A bigram is two consecutive words. Counts include both
capitalized and lowercase occurrences.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 39

Figure 2. Survey Responses Regarding Support for the Birth Control
Movement and Family Planning Programs, 1936-2012
Percent answering “yes”

100
85.5

84.4
80
68.3
60

40

Do you favor the birth control movement?

20

Do you believe birth control information should be
made available by government?
Do you believe birth control information should be
available?
Is birth control morally acceptable?

0
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Source: Author’s tabulations using Roper Center data. See the online appendix for further details
on the questions and the surveys.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 40

Figure 3. Federal Spending on Family Planning, 1965-2008a
Millions of 2010 Dollars

2500
Title X Appropriations

2000

Federal Outlays Excluding Medicaid
Federal Outlays Including Medicaid

1500

1000

500

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Sources: Office of Population Affairs budget data from www.hhs.gov/opa/about/budget,
accessed February 7, 2009, Sonfield and Gold (2012), and author’s calculations using data from
the National Archives Community Action Program and National Archives Federal Outlays Data
(Bailey 2012).
a.Title X appropriations differ from those in the inflation-adjusted table 14 in Alan Guttmacher
Institute (2000), because data in that table are deflated using the CPI for medical care whereas
here the CPI-U is used. Title X data for 1969 are unavailable.
b. Includes Title X and OEO appropriations.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 41

Figure 4. General Fertility Rates and Completed Childbearing over the Last Century
Births per 1,000 women

Lifetime births per woman

180

5

160

4.5

140

4

130

122.9

120

3.5
100
3

76.3
80
65

GFR white women
60
40
20

63.2

2.5

GFR all women
Census: Mean live births, all women ages 41-70 (right axis)

2

Census: Mean live births, ever-married women ages 41-70
June CPS: Mean live births, women ages 41+

1.5

June CPS: Mean live births, ever-married women ages 41+

0
1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Survey Year
1835 1845 1855 1865 1875 1885 1895 1905 1915 1925 1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985
Mother’s birth year

1

Sources: National Center for Health statistics, “Live Births, Birth Rates, and Fertility Rates, by Race: United States, 1909-2000,” available at
www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statab/t001x01.pdf, and Bailey, Hershbein, and Guldi (forthcoming) using data from the 1940-90 IPUMS of the decennial censuses and
the 1995-2010 June Current Population Surveys.
a. Rates are from surveys undertaken in the top horizontal scale.
b. Mean lifetime births is the mean self-reported number of children ever born for each birth cohort (bottom horizontal scale), measured between the ages of
41 and 70. Dashed lines are extensions of the series using the June Current Population Surveys for all women aged 41 and over.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 42

Figure 3. Differences-in-Differences Estimates of Fertility Effects of the Pill and the
Griswold Decisiona
Age-adjusted births per womanb
0.25

Births per 1,000 women per year

Pill diffuses more
rapidly in states
permitting its sale

4

0.15
2
Bans cease to be enforced,
states revise statutes

0.05

0

-0.05
-2

-4

-6

1965: Griswold v.
Connecticut
-0.15

Black market
distribution
makes
preexisting
sales bans
ineffective

Difference between states permitting
and restricting contraceptive sales:
GFR (left axis)
Series5
TFR (right axis)

1957: Pill
introduced
-8
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

-0.25

-0.35
1980

Source: Author’s calculations using data from the 1950-67 Vital Statistics volumes and NCHS (2003). See the
online appendix for details of the data sources and the regressions.
a. Each series plots weighted least-squares estimates of 1 from equation 1 using either the general fertility rate
(GFR) or the total fertility rate (TFR) as the dependent variable. Robustness checks are omitted and can be found in
Bailey (2010) for the GFR.
b. This scale is in TFR units as defined in footnote 22
c. Dashed lines indicate pointwise 95 percent upper and lower confidence intervals for the TFR estimates based on
heteroskedasticity robust standard errors corrected for an arbitrary covariance structure within states.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 43

Figure 6. Estimates of the Effects of the Pill and Griswold on Next-Generation Family Income,
Wages and Labor-Force Participationa
A. Log Family Total Income
Log pointsb

0.06

0.04
0.03
0.02

B. Log Income from Wages, Men
Log points

Older siblings
of affected
cohorts

Younger siblings
of affected cohorts

0.01

0.04
0.02

0
0

-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04

Before
the Pill

Pill
legal in
some
states

Remaining
states lift
bans

-0.02
-0.04

C. Log Hours Worked, Men
Log points
0.04

D. Log Weeks Worked, Men
Log points
0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0

0

-0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.02

Source: Author’s calculations using data from the 5 percent sample of the 2000 decennial census and the 2005–11
ACS (Ruggles and others 2010). See the online appendix for details of the data sources and the regressions.
a. Estimates are of the effects in adulthood of being born in a state with a ban on contraceptive sales, from the
specification of equation 2 described in the text. The 1950–53 birth cohort category is omitted, and error bars
represent 90 percent confidence intervals based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors corrected for an
arbitrary covariance structure within birth state. The sample consists of individuals born in the United States from
1946 to 1980 who are aged 20 to 60. Data are collapsed to birth cohort category × birth state × year of observation
cells and weighted by the population of each cell. In the 2000 census, income is measured for calendar 1999. In the
ACS, income is measured for the 12 months before the survey. The ACS surveys are conducted throughout the year,
and, to protect confidentiality, the month of the survey is not released. Each income observation is inflated to real
2012 dollars using the consumer price index. Income in the ACS is treated as earned entirely in the year before the
survey (see usa.ipums.org/usa/acsincadj.shtml). Weeks of work in the previous year are recorded in intervals in the
2008–11 ACS, so interval means are constructed here using the 2000–07 period when individual weeks worked are
reported. The cell means used in the estimation include zero hours or weeks worked when applicable.
b. Differences in log outcomes between states permitting and states restricting contraceptive sales. Normalized to
equal zero in 1950–53.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 44

Figure 7. Estimates of the Effects of the Pill and Griswold on Children’s Higher Educational
Attainmenta
A. Log(Share with ≥16 years education), Men
Log points
0.06
0.04

b

Younger
siblings of
affected
cohorts

Older siblings
of affected
cohorts

0.02

B. Log(Share with ≥13 years education), Men
Log points
0.06
0.04
0.02

0

0

-0.02
-0.04
-0.06

Before
the Pill

Pill
legal in
some
states

-0.02
Remaining
states lift bans

C. Log(Share with ≥16 years education), Women
Log points
0.06
0.04

-0.04
-0.06

D. Log(Share with ≥13 years education), Women
Log points
0.06
0.04
0.02

0.02
0
0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

Source: Author’s calculations using data from the 5 percent sample of the 2000 decennial census and the 2005–11
ACS. See the online appendix for details of the data sources and the regressions.
a. See figure 6 for details of the estimation.
b. Differences in log outcomes between states permitting and states restricting contraceptive sales. Normalized to
equal zero in 1950–53.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 45

Figure 8. Estimates of the Effects of Subsidizing Family Planning Services on
the General Fertility Ratea
Births per 1,000 women per year
4
Model 1: County and year effects

3

Model 2: County
County ++year
by×year
(CI dashed line)
year++state
state
yeareffects
effects
Model 3: County
Model 2 ++ year
Covariates
+ state(Demographic,
× year effectsREIS,
and Abortion
Providers,covariates
CI dashedbline)

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3

95% confidence interval, model 3c

-4
-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Years relative to first federal family planning program grant
Source: Author’s calculations using data from the National Archives, the Office of Economic
Opportunity (1969, 1971, and 1974), and hand-entered data by county from Vital Statistics;
Natality Detail microdata from NCHS (2003); and Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results
(SEER) data (Surveillance Research Program, National Cancer Institute 2009). See the online
appendix for details of the data sources and the regressions. (See Bailey 2012.)
a. The figure plots weighted least-squares estimates of the change in the difference in general
fertility rates between counties with and counties without federal family planning grants relative to
time zero (y in equation 2). The weights are the 1970 population of women aged 15 to 44.
Denominators for 1959–68 were constructed by linearly interpolating information between the
1950, 1960, and 1970 censuses; denominators for 1969–88 use the SEER data. Dashed lines plot
95 percent, pointwise confidence intervals for model 3 based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors that account for an arbitrary covariance structure within county.
b. The model adds 1960 county covariates interacted with a linear trend and controls from the
REIS data to model 2. See the text for details.
c. Pointwise confidence intervals based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors that account
for an arbitrary covariance structure within county.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 46

Figure 9. Estimates of the Effects of Subsidizing Family Planning Services on
Infant and Maternal Mortalitya
A. Infant Mortality Rate

B. Maternal Mortality Rate

Infant deaths per 1,000 births per year
2.0

Maternal deaths per 1,000 births per year
3

1.5

2

1.0
1

0.5

0

0.0
-0.5

-1

-1.0
-2

-1.5

-3

-2.0
-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant

Source: Author’s calculations using Multiple Cause of Death microdata, 1959–88, from NCHS
(2008) for the numerators, and hand-entered 1959–67 birth records from Vital Statistics and 1968–
88 Natality Detail microdata from NCHS (2003) for the denominators. See the online appendix for
details of the data sources and the regressions.
a. Effects are measured as changes in the differences in the indicated outcome between areas
receiving and areas not receiving federal family planning grants, relative to time zero. Dashed
lines indicate pointwise 95 percent confidence intervals. Estimates are for model 3; see the text
and notes to figure 8 for more details on the estimation; see the online appendix for details of the
data sources and regression output.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 47

Figure 10. Estimates of the Effects of Family Planning Programs on Next-Generation Family
Income, Wages and Labor-Force Participation
A. Change in Family Total Income
Percent
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

0.06
Cohorts born
before family
planning programs
begin

0.04
0.02
0

0

-0.02

-0.01
-0.02
-0.03

B. Change in Income from Wages, Men
Percent

Cohorts born after
programs begin

-0.04

-0.04
-0.06
-0.08

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant
C. Change in Hours Worked, Men
Percent
0.02

D. Change in Weeks Worked, Men
Percent
0.03
0.02

0.01

0.01
0
0.00
-0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.02

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant

Source: Author’s calculations using data from the 5 percent sample of the 2000 decennial census and the 2005–11
ACS. See the online appendix for details of the data sources and the regressions.
a. Estimates are of the effects in adulthood of being born in a Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) that had a
federally funded family planning program, from a specification of equation 2. Event time –4 to zero is omitted, and
error bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors corrected for
an arbitrary covariance structure within PUMA. The sample consists of individuals born in the United States from
1946 to 1980 who are aged 20 to 59. Data are collapsed to birth cohort category × PUMA × year of observation
cells. To minimize measurement error, estimates are unweighted and exclude Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York
(see Bailey and others 2013). The cell means used in the estimation include observations of zero hours or weeks
worked when applicable, so regressions are estimated in levels. For ease of interpretation, the results are rescaled by
dividing by the mean dependent variable in event years zero to 4. See the notes to figure 6 for details on income and
employment coding and the text for more information on the specification.

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 48

Figure 11. Estimates of the Effects of Family Planning Programs on Next-Generation
Educational Attainmenta
A. Change in Share with ≥ 12 Years of Education
Percent
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01

B. Change in Share with ≥ 13 Years of Education
Percent
0.05

Cohorts born
before family
planning
programs begin

Cohorts born after
programs begin

0.04
0.03
0.02

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

-0.01

-0.02

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant

C. Change in Share with ≥ 16 Years Education
Percent
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.04

Years relative to first federal family
planning grant
Source: Author’s calculations using data from the 5 percent sample of the 2000 decennial census and the 2005–11
ACS. See the online appendix for details of the data sources and the regressions.
a. See the notes to figure 10 for details of the estimation..

Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning – 49

