                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MIGRATION TO THE US AND MARITAL MOBILITY

                                       Rebekka Christopoulou
                                          Dean R. Lillard

                                        Working Paper 19495
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19495


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We gratefully acknowledge research assistance from Jeffrey Han and Duk Gyoo Kim and funding
from the Cornell Institute of the Social Sciences and the Cornell Population Program (small grant award,
fall 2010). We also wish to thank Daniel Lichter, Ahmed Jaber, and participants of the 10th IZA Annual
Migration Meeting for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Rebekka Christopoulou and Dean R. Lillard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Migration to the US and Marital Mobility
Rebekka Christopoulou and Dean R. Lillard
NBER Working Paper No. 19495
October 2013, Revised March 2014
JEL No. J1,J12,J15,Z1,Z13

                                           ABSTRACT

We combine survey data on British and German immigrants in the US with data on natives in Britain
and Germany to estimate the causal effect of migration on educational mobility through cross-national
marriage. To control for selective mating, we instrument educational attainment using government
spending on education in the years each person was of school-age. To control for selective migration,
we instrument the migration decision using inflows of immigrants to the US during puberty and early
adulthood. We find that migration causes men to marry up and women to marry down, but self-selection
into migration and marriage dampens down these effects.


Rebekka Christopoulou
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
235C Campbell Hall
Columbus, OH 43210
Christopoulou.1@osu.edu

Dean R. Lillard
Department of Human Sciences
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
lillard.13@osu.edu
1 Introduction
The decisions to marry and to migrate aect a wide range of outcomes of scientic and policy


interest, such as income inequality, female labor supply, the number of births and population


growth, and the distribution of family resources. In the extensive and largely independent eco-


nomics literatures that study marriage and migration, researchers recognize that both decisions


involve high degrees of self-selection based on a range of characteristics and, depending on this


selectivity, they may have diverse eects on the decision-makers. An important drawback of


the literature is that it examines marriage and migration independently, it does not account for


the interplay between the two and, therefore, it fails to accurately identify their causal eect on


socio-economic outcomes. To contribute evidence on this issue, we take education as a proxy


of social status and economic well-being and we ask whether a migrant is more likely to marry


a spouse of higher education than he would have if he had not migrated.


   Migration research in economics treats the decision to migrate as an investment that depends


on earnings dierentials across countries net of migration costs (Sjaastad 1962). By comparing


emigrants to non-migrants in the home country pre-migration, researchers have shown that this


decision process produces migrants with select skills and characteristics (Chiquiar and Hanson


2005, Ibarraran and Lubotsky 2007, McKenzie and Rapaport 2010, Fernández-Huertas Moraga


2011). In combination with the causal eects of migration, this selectivity entails dierential


socio-economic trajectories for migrants relative to the population in both the origin and des-


tination countries.   Empirical studies, however, rarely compare the post-migration outcomes


of migrants with outcomes of compatriots who did not migrate (e.g.         Abramitzky, Boustan,


and Eriksson 2012).    Instead, studies typically compare migrants' outcomes to those of the


native-born individuals or other co-ethnics who previously migrated to the host country. These


studies test the extent to which migrants integrate into the host society or whether children


of migrants are more or less upwardly mobile than children of natives. Much of this research


relies on US data (Borjas 1993, 1995, 1996, 2002, Card 2005), although more recent studies


have also used data from Australia (Chiswick, Lee and Miller 2005), Europe (Dustman, Glitz,


and Vogel 2010, Dustman and Theodoropoulos 2010) and Canada (Aydemir, Chen, and Corak


                                                2
2009). Depending on the nature of migrant selectivity, these studies estimate mixed eects of


migration on migrants' economic status.


   Marriage research in economics originates from the work of Becker (1974), who predicted


that individuals can gain higher social or economic status through marital sorting, depending on


whether mobility is measured on the basis of characteristics that are complements or substitutes


in household production.   For example, Becker argues that women are more likely to marry-


up in terms of wages relative to men because men tend to specialize in market production


and choose to marry women who specialize in home production (negative assortative mating).


In contrast, marital mobility in terms of education is uncertain, since education encompasses


characteristics that are both complements and substitutes in household production.        In his


extension of Becker's model, Lam (1988) argues that assortative mating (or homogamy) with


respect to wages depends on two dierent osetting forces. On the one hand, there are returns


to specialization in household production which generates a tendency for negative assortative


mating. On the other hand, joint consumption of household public goods generates a tendency


for positive assortative mating because there are returns to spouses having similar demand for


these public goods.   Empirical studies generally nd positive assortative mating on the basis


of education but, consistent with Lam's prediction, there is mixed empirical support for the


hypothesis of negative assortative mating on the basis of wages (Zimmer 1996; Nakosteen and


Zimmer 2001; Zang and Liu 2003; Nakosteen, Westerlund, and Zimmer 2004). Irrespective of its


direction, assortative mating is important not only because it determines the economic mobility


of the spouses but also because its eect extends to their ospring (Chadwick and Solon 2002;


Ermisch et al. 2006).


   Of course, researchers have long recognized that individuals may take the decisions to migrate


and marry jointly. For example, studies in sociology have observed that women from developing


countries often migrate to richer countries with a bigger supply of `good' potential spouses in


order to marry men living there (Constable 2004; Kim 2009), including compatriot men who


had previously migrated (Lievens 1999). Others examine whether migrants marry natives after


they arrive to assimilate more rapidly in the culture and society of their host country (Qian and




                                               3
Lichter 1991; Sassler 2005). Finally, a dierent set of studies discuss whether people, especially


women, marry a foreigner while still in their home country to make it easier to move to another


country - either because that country oers better labor market opportunities or because it oers


other benets such as better human rights (Watts 1983; Ortiz 1996; Piper 1999). More recently,


economic research has examined whether migrants dier from natives on how they select their


spouses.   Celikaksoy et al.   (2006) nd that immigrants assort positively on education, even


when they `import' their spouses from their country of origin.      Furtado and Theodoropoulos


(2011) nd that matching on education rather than ethnicity is more important for natives and


those immigrants who arrived as young children, especially whites. Furtado (2012) focuses on


second generation immigrants and shows that, when the distribution of educational attainment


diers by ethnicity, individuals trade similarities in ethnicity for similarities in education when


choosing spouses. Lafortune (2013) delves even deeper and shows that migrants who are forward


looking will invest in education depending on their expectations of the marriage market in the


host country.


   Albeit insightful, the above studies suer several shortcomings.      First, because they fail


to formally address either marital selectivity or immigrant selectivity or both, they cannot


identify the separate eects of the two decisions on the outcomes of interest. Second, because


they typically rely on cross-sectional data who are limited to people who are currently married,


they cannot determine whether people invested in education after they married so that their


education levels converged even when they were uncorrelated before marriage. Such behavior


might plausibly occur if having a partner makes it easier to nance education or if a partner


shares information about educational opportunities. Finally, because the studies only use data


from the country to which people moved, their evidence sheds no light on what is arguably the


most interesting counterfactual question - whether and to what degree would marital sorting


dier had immigrants never left their home country.


   In this paper, we aim to identify the causal eect of migration on marital mobility in terms


of educational attainment. We combine survey data from Germany and the UK with survey


data on German and British immigrants from the US. With these data we compare educational




                                                4
mobility through marriage among couples of natives living in the UK and Germany and couples


living in the US where one partner is a British or German immigrant and the other partner is a


US native. We estimate the probability that a migrant marries someone with more education,


correcting for both migration and spouse selectivity. To purge the eect of marital sorting, we


instrument for attained education using temporal variation in government spending on total


education during the years each person was of school-age. By doing this, we avoid counting as


marital mobility any correlation between the education of partners that arises because of how


people select a spouse or the correlation that is the consequence of post-marriage educational


attainment. To purge the eect of selective migration, we instrument the migration decision


using variation in the number of British and German citizens who migrated to the US during


the years each person was in puberty and early adulthood. These migrant inows serve as a


proxy for the extent of migration networks available to people who are deciding whether or not


to move. Our identifying assumption is that higher migration ows lower the cost of migration


but do not aect the probability of marrying a more educated US native.


   At the observational level, marital mobility on the basis of education is roughly the same


between migrant and non-migrant men, and it is somewhat higher for migrant women relative to


non-migrants, especially Germans. However, when we control for marital and migration selec-


tivity, mobility is higher for immigrant men than non-migrant men, and it is lower for migrant


women than non-migrant women. Our analysis suggests that these patterns arise because selec-


tivity diers by sex and migration status. First, we nd that unobserved characteristics related


to marital appeal favor migrant women and disfavor migrant men relative to their non-migrant


counterparts. These results are consistent with Becker's prediction that men specialize in mar-


ket production and women specialize in home production, assuming that this specialization


generates equivalent specialization in mating strategies (i.e. men value non-marketable spousal


traits and women value marketable traits).    Second, we nd that unobserved characteristics


related to the migration decision decrease the probability of marrying up for migrants relative


to their non-migrant counterparts. This result suggests that migrants exchange the education


of their US spouses for other benets, e.g. they may select to marry-down as a means to gain




                                               5
entry to the US. Finally, the causal eect of migration on mobility is consistent with the higher


availability of educated spouses in the US than in the UK and Germany, and with the fact that


British and German women marry later in life relative to their US competitors.


   The paper is structured as follows: section 2 presents the data and some descriptive statistics,


section 3 discusses the empirical strategy, and section 4 presents and discusses the results. A


nal section concludes the paper.




2 The Data
We draw data from the 1994-2010 monthly waves of Current Population S urveys (CPS); from


the 1994-2008 waves of the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS); and from the 1994-2009


waves of the version of the German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP) produced for the Cross


National Equivalent File (Frick et al. 2007). Since 1994 the CPS asks all respondents where


they were born and when they arrived in the US, which allow us to identify rst-generation


immigrants from Germany and the UK. All surveys ask respondents about their level of ed-


ucation, their socioeconomic characteristics (age, sex, race), and their relationship with other


household members. Before we conduct any analysis with these data, we examine whether the


probability of ever getting married diers by country and migration status. As Table 1 shows,


we nd that dierences are small and in line with the constancy of the marriage probability


worldwide
           1   and the classication of marriage as a cultural universal (Brown 1991).


   We pool data from all monthly CPS surveys and keep records for couples of rst-generation


immigrants and US natives. We combine the CPS data with comparable data from all BHPS


and SOEP couples who are both native-born. We exclude from our sample anyone who migrated


before age 18 to reduce the chance that a person migrated not because he chose to do so but


because his parents chose to migrate. We also exclude individuals surveyed when they were 21


or younger because our primary focus is on educational mobility and we want to reduce the

  1 Using data from the Demographic Yearbooks of the United Nations on 97 industrial and agricultural coun-
tries societies, Fisher (1989) reports that between 1972 and 1981, 93.1% of women and 91.8% of men were
married by age 49.




                                                    6
probability that a person was still in school.


   The CPS data do not include information on when couples married. Consequently, we cannot


dierentiate between immigrants who married before they came to the US and immigrants who


married after they arrived.      We do know, however, where each partner was born and where


each partner's parents were born. Thus, we can restrict our immigrant sample to include only


rst-generation immigrants from the UK or Germany who are married to a US native (i.e. a


US-born individual whose parents were also born in the US or in a country other than the UK


or Germany). We exclude other types of immigrants (e.g. those married to a rst- or second-


generation compatriot immigrant, or an immigrant from a dierent country) mostly because


the size of those samples are small.
                                          2   We also exclude these immigrants because they likely


took their migration decisions as a couple rather than as individuals. To model the educational


mobility of such couples requires a complex model of the migration decision which would allow


the migration of immigrant husbands and wives to be simultaneously determined. Of course,


it is also possible for British and German migrants to have married US natives before they


arrived in the US, as is the case of women who met and married U.S. servicemen stationed in


their home-country during and after World War II and entered the US as War Brides.
                                                                                                    3   In the


following section, we explain that our identication method addresses the potential bias that


this source of endogeneity might cause.


   Table 2 describes the demographic characteristics of couples by sex and migration status and


reports sample sizes. The data show that the distribution of education of husbands is broadly

   2 Among all British and German migrants in our sample, about 68% are married to US natives, 31% are
married to compatriots, and less than 1% are married to migrants from other countries.
   3 It is estimated that approximately 115,000 immigrants entered the US under the provisions of the War
Brides Act of 1945; the Alien Fiancees and Fiances Act of 1946; and the Soldier Brides Acts of 1946 and 1947
(INSUS 1950). These brides entered the country within a narrow time window (in the decade following the end
of WWII) and belonged to a narrow birth cohort. Based on a small survey of British war brides conducted in
1989, the average age of the brides at the time of marriage was twenty-three and the age of their US husbands
was twenty-ve (Virden 1996). These characteristics allow us to estimate an upper bound of the share of War
Brides in our data. Migrant women who arrived in the US between 1945 and 1955 and were younger than 36 at
the time of arrival comprise 15.8% of the total British females and 21.6% of the German females. More recent
data from the UK International Passenger Survey (IPS) indicates that, on average between 1982 and 2012, only
twenty-ve percent of British citizens leaving the UK between 1982 and 2012 said they were doing so primarily
to join or accompany their family or (co-ethnic or other) partner.   Most of them said that they migrated to
work. While the IPS does not report primary reasons by country of destination, the relative strength of the US
economy suggests that UK immigrants probably come to the US to work. The same logic applies to immigrants
from Germany.



                                                      7
similar to the distribution of education of wives, thus hinting the potential for marital sorting.


The data also show that migrants and their American spouses are generally more educated than


natives still living in the home country, suggesting that migrants are a more selected sample of


their native population in terms of education.


    As noted above, to correct educational mobility for marital selection we rely on variation in


public spending on education during the years each person was of primary and secondary school


age.
       4   We collect data on the amount local, state, and federal governments spent on education at


all levels as a percentage of GDP from Chantrill (2011a) for the UK, and from Chantrill (2011b)


for the US. For Germany we get the data from Diebolt (1997) for periods 1920-1937 and 1950-


1989 and from Eurostat for the period 1990-2009. For the war period 1939-1950 in Germany we


estimate public spending on education using out-of-sample predictions from a simple regression


of the German public spending on education on the US public spending on education.


    To correct the probability of migrating to the US for potential migrant selectivity we rely


on time-varying information on the number of immigrants who arrived in the US in the years


each person was age 16-21 and 22-30. We obtain this information from the US Yearbooks of the


Immigration and Naturalization Service. We measure the average inow during late puberty


and early adulthood because this is when people likely start to think about and potentially begin


to form plans to migrate. We separately measure inows for the earlier and later age-periods to


capture variation that occurs when people make their education and labor market participation


decisions, respectively.      We use ows rather than the stock of British immigrants in the US


because we could nd no consistently dened time-series data that measures the stock.


    To show how these data vary over time and age, we plot, in Figures 1 and 2 education


spending by country and inows of British and German migrants to the US. Figure 1 plots


the raw data series across calendar years and Figure 2 plots the data for our analysis sample


after they are assigned to each individual. Specically, Figure 2 orders individuals along the

   4 Ideally, one would like to use a more disaggregated measure, e.g.     by level of education or geographic
region/state.    Long time-series on such disaggregated variables are not available.   Snyder and Dillow (2011)
provide separate data series on public and private education spending in the US by level of education from 1970
to 2010. Using those data we nd that the correlation between total private and public spending and between
spending in primary/secondary schools and post-secondary institutions exceed 0.9.




                                                        8
horizontal axis by the age they were at the time of the survey and plots on the vertical axes


the mean spending during the years a person was of school-age and mean migration inows


to the US during the years a person was ages 16-21, and 22-30. Both instruments vary across


individuals of dierent ages and across individuals of the same age who were interviewed in


dierent calendar years.


    Finally, we include measures of the average per-capita GDP in the US, the UK, and Ger-


many during the years each respondent was a child, a teenager, and young adult. Apart from


predicting educational attainment, GDP is often used in the classic push-pull migration frame-


work to control for the eect of economic development on an individual's decision to migrate.


That approach posits that unfavorable (economic, political, and social) conditions in the home


country push people to the host country, while favorable conditions in the host country pull


people from their home country. We draw these data from Maddison (2006).


    Because we pool data from repeated cross-sections from the host (US) and home countries


(UK and Germany), we construct new sample weights so that our pooled samples are repre-


sentative of the population in the home country in the year of the interview.                      We construct


population weights with population data by year (of survey), age and sex from the the World


Health Organization mortality database.
                                                 5




3 Empirical strategy
The long route to identifying the interdependencies between migration and educational marital


mobility is to estimate, as jointly dependent, (i) the investment in education, (ii) the probability


of migration, (iii) the timing of migration, (iv) the probability of marriage, (v) the timing of


marriage, (vi) the choice of spouse based on education, and (vii) the choice of spouse based


on nationality. Because we could not nd the full set of data one would need to estimate this


structural system (especially data on the timing of marriage), we condense it to two equations


that model the probability to migrate and the joint probability of marrying and marrying a

   5 For  each    sex   s,     year  t,   and     age-group     k,   we   calculate   population     weights   as:
(populationstk /populationst )/(sample sizestk /sample sizest ).


                                                         9
native with higher education. A number of factors makes us condent that our model works


well to answer the questions of interest while at the same time it benets from simplicity. First,


as we showed in Table 1, while migrants are a bit less likely to have ever been married than


non-migrants, the dierence is less than two percentage points. This makes us condent that


dierences in the probability of marriage by migration status will not signicantly bias our


results.     Second, our instrument for marital mobility addresses both educational and ethnic


homogamy and nets out dierences in educational attainment that might have occurred either


after a person married or in anticipation of future migration.            Third, our instrument for the


probability of migration addresses its endogeneity with the probability of marriage, and it also


makes the relative timing of the decision to marry and migrate largely irrelevant. We provide


detailed explanations below.


      Let   Ei∗   be the latent variable that denotes the desired level of education of individual           i.
Ei∗   is continuous but unobservable.        We observe only the actual choice        Ei   of the individual


which is censored into      C   educational alternatives of increasing levels, with   c ∈ {1, 2, ..., C}.   The


observed censored variable is a function of the latent variable, such that:             Ei = c if ψc−1 <
Ei∗ < ψc , ψ0 = −∞, ψC = +∞.               Using the values of   Ei   we can dene marital mobility         Mi
to equal 1 if a person's education is less than the education of his/her spouse and 0 otherwise.


Formally, we set:                  
                                   
                                   1 if Ej > Ei
                                   
                            Mi =                      where j is the spouse of i.                           (1)
                                   
                                   0 if Ej ≤ Ei
                                   

      Our goal is to evaluate whether a person who migrated to the US and married a US native


is more or less likely to experience marital mobility than a person who did not migrate and


married a fellow non-migrant. That is, we want to know whether               P rob(M i = 1 | I i = 1) Q
P rob(M i = 1 | I i = 0), where I i = 1 if a person immigrated to the US. To answer that question
we model the joint probability of marrying and marrying a person with higher education, as


follows:




                                                      10
                                                             X
                              P rob(Mi = 1) = α0 + α1 Ii +         α2k Xki + i                       (2)
                                                               k

where   X   denotes   K   exogenous variables;   α   are parameters to be estimated; and       denotes a


normally distributed error term. We use a standard probit model to estimate equation (2), by


gender, on the pooled sample of migrants in the host country and non-migrants in the home


country. The value    α
                      b1   that we obtain is a `naive' estimate of the migration eect on mobility


which is potentially biased because of two types of selection.           Specically, the probability of


marrying-up may dier by migration status (i) if migrants select their spouses based on a


dierent set of unobserved characteristics, or they have a dierent degree of marital selectivity,


relative to non-migrants (dierential assortative mating bias); and (ii) if migrants self-select


into migration based on unobserved characteristics that aect their choice of spouse or their


own marital appeal (migration selection bias). To nd the causal eect of migration on marital


mobility, we need to remove both types of bias.


   The empirical literature that developed to test Becker's predictions on assortative mating


typically estimates the degree of marital sorting using earnings regressions from samples of


married couples. Controlling for observed factors and characteristics, such as schooling, age, and


work experience, the literature interprets the correlations of the ensuing residuals of the spouses


as indexes of marital selectivity. A set of studies use post-marriage earnings and characteristics


(Zimmer 1996, Zhang and Liu 2003), while others use pre-marriage earnings and characteristics


(Zimmer and Nakosteen 2001, Nakosteen, Westerlund, and Zimmer 2004).                    The purpose of


this latter approach is to net out the eect of post-marriage developments that may cause


spouse wages to converge or diverge. In the spirit of this approach, we estimate educational


attainment observed after marriage using variation from an instrumental variable which is not


only measured before marriage but it is also independent of one's expectation to migrate; i.e,


public spending on education averaged over the years each person was of school age.                  Our


choice of instrument relies on the premise that higher budgetary allocations are eective at


improving educational outcomes. Although international evidence does not always support this


assumption (see Hanushek 2003), recent research suggests that the relationship between public



                                                      11
education spending and educational outcomes is positive and statistically signicant in countries


with good governance (Rajkumar and Swaroop 2008). All three countries we study here fall


into this category. As is standard in the literature, we specify education spending as a share of


GDP while keeping GDP per capita constant, thus controlling for economic cycles.


   We estimate the following model of demand for education:



                                                          X
                                   Ei = θ0 + θ1 Yi +          θ2k Xki + φi                           (3)
                                                          k

where   Y   is the instrumental variable;   θ   denotes parameters to be estimated; and    φ   denotes a


normally distributed error term. The estimated residuals of (3) embody traits that inuence


not only the individual's potential for educational attainment but also his attractiveness to


potential spouses. For example, a large positive residual may reect a range of traits that are


visibly appealing such as exceptional ambition, mental and physical health, condence, favorable


socioeconomic family background, the ability to contribute to home production, and a range


of cultural or ethnic characteristics. The eects of such traits are not present in the predicted


values of (3) because these rely on variation in spending that is unrelated to characteristics


(other than education) that make an individual an attractive spouse.              As importantly, our


instrument is also independent of changes in educational attainment of either spouse which


happened due to marriage (e.g. by resources or information sharing between spouses), and of


investments in education of forward-looking individuals who anticipated access to a dierent


marriage market because they planned to migrate.


   Because    Ei   has an ordered form and the error in the latent model is assumed to be normally


distributed, we can estimate the parameters by ordered probit.               We run this regression on


separate samples by country of residence in the survey year. We do not estimate this equation


separately by sex or by immigrant status because we want to make sure that the resulting


predicted values    E
                    bi   draw from the same distribution and can be compared across spouses. We




                                                     12
use these values to dene a new measure of marital mobility:

                                              
                                              
                                              1 if E
                                                   bj > E
                                                         bi
                                       M
                                       ci =                                                        (4)
                                              
                                                   bj ≤ E
                                              0 if E    bi


   We then re-model the joint probability of marrying and marrying a person with higher


education using   M
                  ci   as the dependent variable, as follows:



                                                             X
                            P rob(M
                                  ci = 1) = β0 + β1 Ii +          β2k Xki + εi                     (5)
                                                              k

   As before, we estimate equation (5) by gender on the pooled sample of migrants and non-


migrants using probit regression. The value     βb1   that we obtain is now net of marital selectivity


eects, but it is still potentially contaminated with migration selection eects.


   Our last step is to address migrant selectivity by modeling the probability that a person


migrates. For this exercise, we use the network of previous immigrants as an instrument that


aects the migration decision but is orthogonal to marital mobility. We assume that the network


of migrants aects the migration decision because it is correlated with the cost of migration. It is


easier for newly arrived migrants to navigate a new culture if they can tap into a larger migration


network that may provide advice on getting a visa, travel information, housing and nancial


support, help with the host language, and help with navigating local government bureaucracies


and other services (Carrington at al., 1996; Bauer et al., 2002; Munshi, 2003). The network


of migrants is orthogonal to our measure of marital mobility because we only look at cross-


national marriages. We plausibly assume that the size of a given migrant community in the US


is not correlated with the probability that a migrant who belongs to that community marries


a US native who is more educated than the migrant himself.              Our instrument also addresses


potential simultaneity in migration and marriage that arises in those cases when marriage took


place in the country of immigrant origin and before the migration decision.            Those British


and German immigrants who met and married their US spouses in their home country (e.g.


the War Brides) are unlikely to have based their migration decision on networks of co-ethnic




                                                  13
migrants.
           6    Our instrument, therefore, safely separates the association between migration and


marital mobility that arises because migrants marry US spouses in order to migrate to the US


(migration selection eect) from the association that arises because migrants marry US spouses


as a result of migrating to the US (causal eect of migration).


    With    Z   denoting our instrument variable, we specify the probability of being a migrant as


follows:



                                                                  X
                               P rob(Ii = 1) = ϑ0 + ϑ1 Zi +               ϑ2k Xki + ϕi                               (6)
                                                                      k

    This allows us to re-model the joint probability of marrying and marrying a person with


higher education in two further ways:



                                                                   X
                               P rob(Mi = 1) = γ0 + γ1 Ibi +              γ2k Xki + νi                               (7)
                                                                      k



                                                                   X
                                P rob(M
                                      ci = 1) = δ0 + δ1 Ibi +             δ2k Xki + υi                               (8)
                                                                      k

    Using bivariate probit, we estimate equations (6) and (7), and equations (6) and (8), as sys-


tems of simultaneous equations with jointly determined errors, where                     γ   and   δ   are the respective


structural parameters.
                           7   Under instrument validity,        γ
                                                                 b1   and    δb1   capture the eect that being a


migrant would have on the probability of marrying a more-educated spouse if the migration

   6 For example, researchers have documented that the War Brides, who probably form the majority of migrants
in our sample who entered the US married, did not move into an existing immigrant population or settle in
ethnic enclaves.   Rather, they were welcomed by, and often moved in with, the families of their husbands.
The war brides did not rely on co-ethic immigrant networks even for help with basic practicalities of their
migration process. They received advice and assistance with paperwork by the American Red Cross and ofter
their transportation to the U.S. was arranged and paid by the U. S. government (Virden 1996).
   7 Alternative to using IV methods, one can also estimate our structural model with matching techniques.
We decided against using matching because we had very few proxy variables available. To be appropriate for
our empirical exercise, proxy variables should aect both the decision to migrate and the decision to marry a
spouse of a given education level, but they should not be aected by the decision to migrate (Rosenbaum and
Rubin, 1983).    Because migration likely aects many of the socioeconomic characteristics of individuals that
are measured post-migration (e.g. household size, income), only a few of the available variables can serve as
proxies; e.g., age and race. Relying on such proxies to carry out the matching estimation would likely violate
a key aspect of the strong ignorability assumption; i.e., that, after controlling for the proxies, marital mobility
should be independent of the selection into migration.       We also prefer IV estimation over matching because,
even when good proxies and good instruments are available, evidence suggests that the IV method outperforms
the matching method (see, for example, McKenzie, Stillman, and Gibson 2010).




                                                        14
decision solely depended on migration networks. The coecient        γ
                                                                     b1 is net of migration selectivity
eects, but it is still potentially contaminated with marital selection eects. The coecient            δb1
is net of both migration and marital selectivity eects and reects the causal eect of migration


on marital mobility.


   Linear combinations of the coecients in equations (2), (5), (7), and (8) provide estimates


of the degree and the direction in which marital and migration selectivity change the causal


eect of migration on marital mobility. Specically, dierences     b1 − βb1
                                                                    α          and   b1 − δb1
                                                                                     γ          approximate


the marital selection eect, while dierences   b1 − γ
                                                α    b1   and   βb1 − δb1   approximate the migration


selection eect. In both cases, the implied linear cross-model restriction is    b1 − βb1 − γ
                                                                                 α          b1 + δb1 = 0.
To test this restriction, we re-estimate (2), (5), (6) and (7), and (6) and (8) as a system of


equations, where we combine the parameter estimates and associated (co)variance matrices


into one parameter vector and one simultaneous (co)variance matrix.




4 Results

4.1 The migration eect on educational mobility through marriage
In Table 2 we showed that British and German migrants who marry US natives and live in the


US are generally more educated than British and German natives who never migrate and marry


non-migrants. Further, the US natives who are married to British and German migrants are also


more educated than the British and German natives who never migrate. To further examine


these patterns, in Table 3 we present indicators of assortative mating and marital mobility           (Mi )
by immigrant status and sex. The data show that the correlation of the educational attainment


between spouses is highest for German natives (0.57), and in all other cases it is lower and


roughly equivalent (about 0.39-0.46). However, women are more likely to marry more educated


spouses than men are, irrespective of their migration status. Specically, the marital mobility


rate for all migrant women and British native women is 37-40%, whereas the corresponding rate


for all migrant men and British native men is only 22-26%. For German natives the mobility


rates are relatively lower, consistent with the higher degree of assortative mating, but again



                                                15
women are more likely to marry more educated spouses than men are (with probabilities 0.24


and 0.20, respectively).


   To what degree are the above patterns due to assortative mating? To answer this question


we calculate new measures of assortative mating and marital mobility using the residuals and


the predicted values from the probit estimates of equation (3).         We estimate this equation


separately on the pooled CPS data of US natives and British and German immigrants, the


BHPS data of British natives, and the SOEP data of German natives.            Table 4 presents the


results. In all samples, respondents attained more education if, during the years they were of


school age, their government spent a larger share of GDP on education (holding GDP per capita


constant). The estimated eect is higher in the UK than in Germany and the US. However,


while attained schooling rises when governments spend more in either early or later schooling


years in Germany and the UK , in the US attained schooling is higher only when the government


spends more when people are of primary-school age.


   In Table 3 we use the residuals for each partner in a couple from (3) and show that their


correlation coecients are positive and sizable.    Recall that these residuals measure attained


education that is not explained by public education spending, thus the correlations suggest the


presence of positive assortative mating on the basis of education across all groups.       We also


use the residuals from (3) to compute net marital mobility   (M
                                                              ci )   (given by equation (4)), which


measures prevalence of people who married a more educated spouse after removing variation


in education predicted by public education spending. The results suggest that, if spouses had


not selected each other on the basis of traits correlated to their educational attainment, then a


larger share of migrant men and women, and of non-migrant women would have been married


to more educated spouses. By contrast, a smaller proportion of non migrant men would have


been married to more educated spouses. Among all groups, non-migrant British and German


women would be the most mobile through marriage, since 86 percent of them would marry


a more educated spouse.    Non-migrant British and German men would be the least mobile


through marriage, since only 15-16 percent of them would marry a more educated spouse.


   These patterns suggest that there may be gender-specic dierences in how migration aects




                                               16
marital mobility. To obtain clearer evidence on this, in Table 5 we explicitly test whether and


to what degree migration determines the marital mobility of British and German men and


women. Table 5 presents the coecients on the migration indicator from equations (2) and (5)


that are estimated on: (i) the sample of British immigrants who are married to US natives and


live in the US (from the CPS data) pooled together with the sample of British natives who


are married to compatriots and live in the UK (from the BHPS data); and (ii) the sample of


German immigrants who are married to US natives and live in the US (from the CPS data)


pooled together with the sample of German natives who are married to compatriots and live in


Germany (from the SOEP data). In the rst and third columns marital mobility is dened as


Mi   (raw) and in the second and fourth columns it is dened as   M
                                                                  ci   (estimated).


     In columns (1) and (3), when we do not adjust our mobility measure for the eect of marital


sorting, we nd that German migrants are more likely to marry up relative to their non-migrant


counterparts (though for German men the dierences are small), whereas British migrants are


as likely to marry up as their non-migrant counterparts. When we purge out the marital sorting


eect we nd that, marital mobility is strongly associated with migration and the eects are


similar for migrants from both countries. Men who migrate are much more likely to marry a


more educated woman while women who migrate are much less likely to marry a more educated


man. In other words, there is something about the way migrants select their spouses that induces


men to marry down and women to marry up. Had there been no marital sorting, migration


would favor all migrant men relative to non-migrant men and it would disfavor all migrant


women relative to non-migrant women. In fact, the size of this eect would be substantial. The


results suggest that if all British men had stayed in the UK, then only 15% of them would have


married up, whereas in the extreme case that all of them had migrated to the US then 68%


of them would have married up. The corresponding eects for German men are 16% and 89%


respectively. Conversely, if all British women had stayed in the UK, then 86% of them would


have been married to more educated spouses, whereas if all British women had migrated to the


US, only 59% of them would have been married to more educated spouses. The corresponding


eects for German women are equally sizable; 86% and 64% respectively.




                                               17
     We next attempt to disentangle whether the estimated migration eect on       M
                                                                                   ci   is due to the


act of migration per se or whether it is because individuals who migrate dier in unobserved


ways that aect their probability of marrying up. Table 6 reports results from the estimation


of simultaneous equations (6) and (7), and simultaneous equations (6) and (8), by seemingly


unrelated bivariate probit regression. As before, in the rst and third columns marital mobility


is dened as    Mi   and in the second and fourth columns it is dened as   M
                                                                            ci .

     The rst-stage regressions produce positive coecients on the instruments in both the British


and the German samples. The likelihood that an individual migrates to the US increases with


the mean annual inow of compatriot migrants to the US both over the time individuals were of


age 16-21 and over the time they were 22-30. Interestingly, for men the coecients on migration


inows measured over the age of 16-21 are signicantly higher than those on inows measured


over the age of 22-30 (which are not statistically dierent from zero), while the pattern for


women is the opposite, suggesting that men form their preferences about migration at earlier


ages than women. In all cases, the Wald test rejects the hypothesis that the migration decision


is exogenous to marital mobility. The only exception to this is when we dene marital mobility


as   Mi   in the British sample, but in this case we also nd that the eect of migration on marital


mobility is statistically insignicant.


     Interestingly, relying on exogenous variation in the migration decision does not signicantly


aect the estimated eect of migration on marital mobility in the British sample. Not only are


the migration coecients qualitatively robust across probit and bivariate probit models (Tables


5 and 6), but also the resulting marginal eects of migration on marital mobility remain very


similar in scale.    In contrast, instrumenting the migration decision does make a dierence in


most of the results from the German sample. The implication is that the dierence between the


naive and causal migration eects on marital mobility is driven mostly by marital selectivity in


the British sample, and by both marital and migration selectivity in the German sample.


     To facilitate comparison, Table 7 presents the estimated selection eects and tests of their


statistical signicance. Marital selection eects are negative for men and positive for women,


and in all cases sizable and statistically signicant.     Migration selection eects are negative




                                                  18
for both men and women, but they are weaker for the British relative to the Germans.                           In


fact, for the British    βb1 − δb1   is negative and signicant, but   b1 − γ
                                                                       α    b1   is positive and statistically


insignicant. However, as for all other groups, the dierence between the two is statistically


zero (the Wald test fails to reject the parameter restriction           b1 − βb1 − γ
                                                                        α          b1 + δb1 =0   in all cases).




4.2 Discussion of the estimated eects
Our results suggest that, because of the way they select their spouses, migrant men reduce


their probability of marrying up, while migrant women increase it.                  It follows that there are


sex and country-specic unobservable characteristics that drive marital selection, such that


they disfavor migrant men and they favor migrant women. Although it could be one of many


unobservables that t this prole, preferences of spousal traits are plausibly country and sex-


specic and oer an explanation for our results. Becker argued that men specialize in market


production and women specialize in home production and his argument is valid even today.
                                                                                                                  8

If this entails that husbands determine the social status of the family, then men can aord to


marry down without loss of socioeconomic status and can select their wives on the basis of other


traits, especially traits related to home production. For example, men may select wives who are


young, healthy, fertile, and can run a household. Correspondingly, if women cannot determine


the social status of the family, they will prefer husbands who are well-educated, ambitious,


and can earn a living. This gender dierence in mate selection preferences and the resulting


patterns of female hypergamy and male hypogamy has been extensively documented in the social


sciences (Hadeld and Sprecher 1995, Cashdan 1996). Evolutionary psychologists claim that


the dierence is inherent and serves family survival, while social learning theorists claim that it


appears in male-dominated societies and should fade as women gain equal rights to men.

   8 For example, the German government has, until relatively recently, set welfare and public support policies
according to a male breadwinner model. That is, the institutional structure in German provides strong nancial
and social incentives for couples to divide labor so that men specialize in market production and women specialize
in home production. Starting around 2000, German social policymakers began to reform institutions using a
dierent model (Meyer 1998). For information on the US, one can look at the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) - Child Development Supplement/Transition to Adulthood (CDS-TA) surveys. The CDS-TA surveys
interviews the person in the PSID household who identies herself/himself as the 'primary' care-giver (PCG) of
each child. Data from the 2002 and 2007 waves show that biological, adoptive, or step mothers comprise over
90 percent of self-identied care-givers.




                                                       19
   In either case, this dierence is consistent with our results because it implies that migrant


men are at a disadvantage in the US marriage market whereas migrant women are not. Speci-


cally, studies that examine the earning trajectories of immigrants in the US show that, although


they eventually assimilate fully in the native population, during their rst years in the US they


suer a large earnings penalty relative to equally experienced natives.     In fact, it may take


up to 20 years for this penalty to disappear (Lubotsky 2007).      As a result, migrant men are


less competitive in the US marriage market than in their home market and, thus, they marry


down relative to their non-migrant counterparts. The earnings penalty and the delay in nan-


cial maturity is less of a problem for migrant women because they are not typically expected


to be the primary bread-winners of the household.      Quite the contrary, migrant women may


possess advantageous traits which their US competitors do not possess. Researchers have often


documented a preference of US men for immigrant wives from the old world who retain tra-


ditional patriarchal family values, as opposed to US women who adopted materialism, liberal


individualism, and feminism earlier on (Honig 1998). Evidence that such preferences exist is the


presence of International Marriage Brokers (IMB) - an industry which specializes in facilitating


marriage between US native men and foreign women and is, essentially, the modern version


of the 'mail-order bride' industry that dates back to the 1800s. From this viewpoint, migrant


women are more competitive in the US marriage market relative to their home marriage market


and, thus, they marry up relative to their non-migrant counterparts


   Our results also suggest that, in the absence of migration selectivity, both migrant women


and migrant men are more likely to marry up relative to non-migrants. However, because of


the way they self-select into migration, migrant men and women reduce their probability of


marrying up. This implies that unobserved characteristics that drive selection into migration


(e.g.   cultural characteristics, risk preferences, and language skills) make migrants willing to


marry less educated US spouses in exchange for other favorable provisions. For example, US


spouses may provide access to US residency and accelerate their assimilation in the US native


community, e.g.    by helping them nding employment.       Furtado and Theodoropoulos (2009,


2010) show that, indeed, cross-national marriage increases employment rates for immigrants,




                                                20
and does so not only because of the legal status acquired through marriage but also through


native networks.   Our nding that migration selection eects are weaker for British than for


German migrants is consistent with this explanation. It is arguably more dicult for German


migrants to assimilate in the US than it is for British migrants, since British immigrants are


both culturally and linguistically more similar to US natives than German migrants. Likewise,


the natives' sentiments towards immigrants also depend on cultural and linguistic proximity.


For example, a nationwide poll in 1944 about which migrants the U.S. should allow to enter


the country showed that British immigrants were at an advantage, topping the list of preferred


foreigners with 68% positive votes. In that same poll, German immigrants ranked 7th, gathering


only 36% positive votes (Simon and Alexander 1993). Reports from German War Brides also


reveal that in the years following the end of WWII German immigrants faced discrimination


and were occasionally harassed as Nazis (Shukert and Schibetta 1988). In contrast, British


brides reported to have experienced hardly any discrimination after they arrived in the country


(Virden 1996).


   The aforementioned selection eects mask the causal eect of migration on marital mobility.


After we purge out the selection eects, we nd that the causal eect of migration is positive


for men and negative for women - a nding which, at rst sight, seems contrary to expectations.


One would expect that the causal eect of migration would be positive for all migrants because


mean educational attainment in the US has been consistently higher than in Germany and the


UK over the period that the individuals in our sample were moving to the US and getting


married. We show this clearly in Figure 3 using data from Barro and Lee (2012). The data


suggest that, by moving to the US, all migrants got access to a marriage market where the


average candidate spouse was more educated than in the home marriage market.


   The gender dierence in our causal estimates can be explained if the gap in the timing of


marriage diers between migrant and US native women. Because the surveys that we use for


the analysis provide no information on the timing of marriage, we obtained relevant information


from the US census.
                      9   The 1980 wave of the US census reports data on the age at rst marriage

  9 Available at the international online database of Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS).




                                                    21
and country of birth of each surveyed individual. Using these data, Figure 4 compares kernel


density estimates of the age at rst marriage across British and German migrants and US


natives and clearly shows that both migrant men and migrant women get married around two


years later than US natives and that US women marry in a narrower time window than all


others.   From Table 2, we also know that women marry older men and men marry younger


women.    From this it follows that, if there was no selectivity at all, migrant men could take


advantage of the higher availability of educated partners in the US because their target-group


of potential US wives would not decrease as they delayed their marriage. In contrast, migrant


women would miss the window of opportunity to marry up since their target group of potential


spouses would decrease both in size and in quality as they delayed marriage.


   The observed dierence in the age of rst marriage between migrants and US natives could


be either because of country-specic norms, or because the decision to migrate further delays


their marriage.   Data from the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)


Statistical Database suggest that, while both of them are true, country-specic norms seem


more important for women. These data show that in 1980 the mean age at rst marriage in the


UK was 23 for women and 25.3 for men. The corresponding numbers for British immigrants


from the IPUMS database are 23.4 for women and 26.2 for men. Similarly, in 1980 the mean age


at rst marriage in Germany was 23.4 for women and 26.1 for men. The corresponding numbers


for German immigrants from the IPUMS database are 23.5 for women and 25.8 for men. These


data suggest that migrant British women and migrant German men and women follow closely


the norms regarding the timing of marriage from their country of origin. Migrant British men


delay their marriage decision by approximately an extra year relative to non-migrants.




4.3 Tests of performance and robustness
Some aspects of our analysis may cause concern. First, although the benets associated with


educational attainment and, by extension, with educational mobility through marriage may


dier across countries, our analysis implicitly assumes that they are comparable. For example,


we assume that a German who has a high-school degree will be better o migrating to the US



                                              22
and marrying a US native with a post-secondary qualication than not migrating and marrying


a compatriot who also has a high school degree. In reality, whether or not this is true depends


on the monetary and non-monetary returns to a German high school degree relative to the


returns to a post-secondary qualication in the US. While we acknowledge this limitation, we


expect that, in our sample, sex-specic country dierences in the returns to education (monetary


and social returns combined) are not as prevalent across aggregate educational levels as they


are across types of education (e.g.         vocational vs.     general) and elds of specialization (e.g.


humanities vs. sciences) within aggregate educational categories. If these latter dierences are


not systematic, at the mean of each educational category they will tend to cancel out.


    To obtain supporting evidence on this we test the robustness of our estimates to two more


conservative measures of mobility.          First, we collapse the education categories from the ve


used so far down to three (primary, secondary, and higher) and re-calculate mobility using our


standard denition (i.e. we set mobility to equal one if education of spouse>education of self,


and zero otherwise). Second, we use the original ve educational categories but set mobility to


equal one if the education of the spouse is higher than the education of self plus the sample


variance in educational attainment.
                                          10   Both new measures of mobility are more restrictive and


thus more plausibly comparable across countries than the one we used in the baseline analysis.


We nd that the results are highly robust when we use these alternative measures. For brevity,


we conne ourselves to reporting the averages of the new mobility measures and the estimated


selection eects (the full set of results are available upon request). In Table 8 we show that,


while the size of the selection eects dier in absolute value, the results remain qualitatively


robust (though the estimates become noisier for German females).


    Our identication strategy may also cause some concern. The migration inows which we


use to identify migration selectivity are aggregations of individual behavior which (depending

  10 Using the sample variance in this way allows for equivalent shifts in raw and estimated mobility. Further,
because the variance of educational attainment is higher than one, the denition of raw mobility requires a gap
of at least one educational category between spouses. An individual with primary education is mobile if s/he
marries a spouse who has at least an upper secondary education, an individual with lower secondary education is
mobile if s/he marries a spouse who has at least post-secondary education; an individual with upper-secondary
education is mobile if s/he marries a spouse with at least tertiary education; and individuals with post-secondary
or tertiary education are never mobile.




                                                       23
on the age each individual migrated) may include the migrants in our sample.                       Because of


this, the predictive power of our instruments may reect exogenous correlated eects (Manski


1993, 2000).     That is, it may reect that the migrants in our sample and the migrants in


our instrument may decide to migrate because they have unobserved similar characteristics or


because they are exposed to the same institutional or contextual factors (`Manski's reection


problem'). To partly account for such unobserved common factors in the models reported thus


far, we control for ten or ve-year birth-cohort xed eects. Because our instruments vary by


year of birth, including single-year cohort dummies would entail perfect multicollinearity. As


a robustness test, we now switch to using a full set of age and survey-year dummies, which


correct for exogenous correlated eects to the extend that such eects vary across the age and


survey-year dimensions.


    For completeness, we re-estimate both the probit and the bivariate probit models using the


new xed-eects specication.         We present the resulting probit estimates in Table 9 and the


bivariate probit estimates in Table 10. In all cases, the estimates remain qualitatively robust.


Quantitative dierences are most apparent in the instrument coecients, which increase in


economic and statistical signicance in all cases apart from German males. In that sample, the


coecients on migration inows measured over the age of 22-30 become higher than those on


inows measured over age 16-21, which are now statistically equal to zero. These changes in


the instrument coecients also spill over to the eect of migration on marital mobility, which


becomes higher for women and somewhat lower for males.                   The most notable dierences are


in the sample of British women, where the migration eect on raw mobility becomes positive


and signicant, and in the sample of German females, where the migration eect on estimated


mobility remains negative but is now highly signicant. On the whole, however, the inclusion


of the xed eects does not alter the main patterns in the results.
                                                                              11

  11 The reason why we present the xed-eects specication as part of our robustness analysis and not as our
main result is a practical one. The xed-eects specication causes separation problems so that the bivariate
probit does not achieve convergence to a maximum likelihood.       For this reason, to estimate the xed-eect
specications in many cases we had to change the set of controls in our models (compare notes of Tables 5 and
9). Importantly, in all cases, when we include xed-eects we are unable to jointly estimate equations (2), (5),
(6) and (7), and (6) and (8), and thus to conduct the tests for the parameter restrictions. Similar problems with
bivariate probit estimations have been reported by other researchers (e.g. Freedman and Sekhon 2010).




                                                       24
   A further source of potential concern is that the bivariate probit regressions provide no


diagnostics for instrument performance. At times, economic studies that use bivariate probit


obtain diagnostics from 2SLS estimates (see, for example, Evans and Schwab 1995). While the


2SLS estimation provides the opportunity to thoroughly test the validity and explanatory power


of the instruments, it is not the appropriate method to use when the dependent variables are


binary. The incorrect assumption of linearity for a relationship which is in fact non-linear will


yield least squares estimates that have no known distributional properties (so that statistical


inferences are unreliable), are sensitive to the range of the data, may substantially mis-estimate


the magnitude of the true eects, and systematically produce probability predictions outside the


0-1 range. For these reasons, although we present 2SLS diagnostics, we do so with reservation.


   To test that our instruments can be plausibly excluded as direct determinants of educa-


tional mobility through marriage, we calculate the Basman/Sargan       X2   statistic under the null


that they are uncorrelated with the error term.       To test whether our instruments have weak


explanatory power, we calculate the   F   statistic under the null that the instruments are jointly


statistically insignicant. Finally, we calculate the Wooldridge's robust score test under the null


that the migration decision is exogenous to marital mobility, which is equivalent to the Wald


test in the bivariate probit regression. Table 11 presents the instrument coecients from the


rst-stage 2SLS estimates along with the diagnostic statistics. In all cases, the estimates are


qualitatively robust in comparison to the ones produced by the bivariate probit and the diag-


nostic tests generally corroborate the good performance of the estimations.       The Sargan test


results indicate that the instruments are valid, the F-statistic is always statistically signicant


(though for men low enough to suggest weak identication), and the Wooldridge test fails to


reject exogeneity.


   A number of patterns in these results add to our reservation about the linear probability


model.   First, the estimates suggest that if the mean annual inow of immigrants to the US


increases by 10,000 during the youth of British and Germans, then the probability that they


will migrate to the US increases by between 0.3 and 2.5 percentage points. Albeit plausible, the


OLS coecients appear to contradict those produced by the probit methods. For example, these




                                                 25
coecients are higher for British men than German men, while the bivariate probit estimates


suggest the opposite. It is, therefore, plausible that the least squares method fails to capture


important non-linearities and, thus, underestimates the true eect of migration networks on


the migration decision of German men.            In turn, this would also explain why the F-statistic


appears weak. Further inconsistencies between the linear and non-linear models appear in the


results of the exogeneity test. Unlike the Wald test of the bivariate probit, the Wooldridge test


produced after the 2SLS procedure fails to reject exogeneity of the migration decision in the


British sample when mobility is measured as           Mi ,   even though the migration eect on marital


mobility is statistically insignicant.
                                            12




5 Conclusion
In this paper we have tested whether the decision of British and German individuals to migrate


to the US and marry a US spouse provides them with better opportunities for educational


mobility through marriage.        Our analysis showcases that migration and marriage are jointly


determined decisions which involve complex selection mechanisms. We show that, by migrating


to the US, British and German migrants access a marriage market that oers more opportunities


for educational mobility through marriage relative to their respective marriage markets in the


home countries. However, this does not guarantee higher marital mobility rates for migrants


relative to non-migrants.


    A number of factors work against the positive prospects of the US marriage market. First,


migrant women take little advantage of the availability of more educated candidate husbands in


the US because they marry later than native US women. Thus, absent any selection eects, they


miss the window of opportunity to catch the `good' spouses, and they end up with the `lemons'.


Further, unobserved characteristics that drive marital sorting disfavor mobility for migrant men


and favor mobility for migrant women - a result that can be explained if men specialize in market

  12 Horrace and Oaxaca (2006) show that bias and inconsistency in the OLS estimators of the linear probability
model (LPM) increase with the share of LPM predicted probabilities that fall outside the unit interval. In the
models we report in Table 11, the sample share of the predicted probabilities that lie outside the unit interval
is 3.9% for British males, 1.4% for British females, 1.1% for German males, and 1.9% for German females.




                                                      26
production and select spouses with traits that help in home production, while women specialize


in home production and select spouses with traits that help in market production. Under this


scenario, migrant men who face an earnings penalty in the US are at a disadvantage in the


US marriage market, while migrant women who may possess competitive non-marketable traits


(e.g. more traditional values) may be at an advantage in the US marriage. In addition, we nd


that unobserved characteristics that drive selection into migration disfavor mobility for both


migrant men and women, suggesting that immigrants may be willing to marry-down in order to


marry-in. That is, they may exchange education of their US spouses for other benets, such as


help with assimilation in the US native community or access to US residence. The end-product


of the above eects is that migrating to the US and marrying a US native pays o (in terms of


educational mobility through marriage) for the Germans but not for the British.


   These results provide a basis for taking into account immigrant selectivity when designing


immigration policy. For example, if the objective is to encourage skilled immigration, policy-


makers may consider loosening the rules for granting legal status to migrant spouses of natives.


If the objective is the social integration of immigrants, policy-makers may consider programs


which could act as substitutes for native contacts, such as programs that help immigrants to


nd a job.


   Of course, our results cannot be generalized.   Our analysis has relied on immigrants who


marry natives in the host country and has overlooked those who marry co-ethnics. Marital and


migration selection eects are likely dierent for this latter group of immigrants, and would


be worth exploring. Our analysis has also relied on immigrants from two European countries


which dier in culture and language but are fairly similar in other important dimensions. For


example, travel and visa costs from Britain and Germany to the US are fairly similar. Moreover,


the economies of both countries have been growing at roughly similar rates in the same period


of time. In fact, their growth patterns have followed closely those of the U.S. Further work in


this area should examine immigrants from less developed countries and immigrants who face


varying entry costs.   Finally, because of data problems, our measure of marital mobility has


been one-dimensional. Although education is widely used as an key indicator of socio-economic




                                              27
status, monetary measures of well-being have more straightforward economic interpretation.


Thus, an interesting question for future research, given that appropriate data become available,


is whether the causal eect of migration on marital mobility is sensitive to alternative denitions


of mobility, e.g. in terms of income, wealth,or occupation.




References
 [1] Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012. "Europe's Tired,


    Poor, Huddled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migra-


    tion." American Economic Review, 102(5): 1832-56.



 [2] Aydemir A., Chen W, and Corak, M. 2009. "Intergenerational Earnings Mobility among


    the Children of Canadian Immigrants," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2):


    377-397.



 [3] Barro, RJ and JW Lee (2010),  A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World,


    1950-2010 , NBER Working Paper 15902



 [4] Bauer, Thomas, Gil S. Epstein, and Ira N. Gang. 2005. Enclaves, Language and the Loca-


    tion Choice of Immigrants, Journal of Population Economics, 18(4): 649-662.



 [5] Becker, G. 1974. A Theory of Marriage in Economics of the Family, edited by T. W.


    Schultz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 299-344.



 [6] Borjas, G. J. 1993. "The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants," Journal of Labor


    Economics, 11(1): 113-35.



 [7] Borjas, G.J. 1995.  Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality Revisited: What Hap-


    pened to Immigrant Earnings in the 1980s? Journal of Labor Economics, 13:20145.



 [8] Borjas, G. J., 1996. "The earnings of Mexican immigrants in the United States," Journal


    of Development Economics, 51(1): 69-98




                                                28
 [9] Borjas, G. J., 2002. "Home ownership in the immigrant population," Journal of Urban


    Economics, 52(3): 448-476.



[10] Brown, Donald (1991) Human Universals. Philadelphia, Temple University Press



[11] Card, D. 2005.  Is the New Immigration Really So Bad? , The Economic Journal, 115:


    300-323.



[12] Carrington, William J., Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath. 1996. Migration with


    Endogenous Moving Costs American Economic Review, 86(4): 909-930.



[13] Cashdan,    Elizabeth,   1996.   Women's   Mating   Strategies.   Evolutionary   Anthropology


    5:134143.



[14] Çelikaksoy, Aycan, Nielsen, Helena and Verner, Mette 2006. "Marriage migration:          just


    another case of positive assortative matching?," Review of Economics of the Household,


    vol. 4(3), pages 253-275.



[15] Chadwick, L. and Solon, G. (2002). Intergenerational income mobility among daughters,


    American Economic Review, vol. 92(1), pp. 33544.



[16] Chantrill, Christopher. 2011a, ukpublicspending.co.uk, accessed: 10/24/2011.



[17] Chantrill, Christopher. 2011b, usgovernmentspending.com, accessed: 10/24/2011.



[18] Chiquiar, D. and G. Hanson 2005.  International Migration, Self-Selection, and the Dis-


    tribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States. Journal of Political


    Economy, 113(2): 239 281.



[19] Chiswick, Barry R., Yew, Liang Lee, and Miller, Paul W. 2005.  A Longitudinal Analysis


    of Immigrant Occuptaional Mobility: A Test of the Immigrant Assimiltion Hypothesis.


    International Migration Review, 39(2): 332-353.



[20] Constable, Nicole. 2004. Cross-Border Marriages: Gender and Mobility in Transnational


    Asia, Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press


                                                29
[21] Diebolt, C. (1997): L'évolution de longue période du système educatif anglais: 19ème et


    20ème siècles in: Numéro de la revue spécial Economies et Societes, pp. 1-370.



[22] Dustmann, C., Glitz, A., Vogel, T. 2010. "Employment, wages, and the economic cycle:


    Dierences between immigrants and natives," European Economic Review, 54(1): 1-17.



[23] Dustmann C. and Theodoropoulos, N. 2010. "Ethnic minority immigrants and their chil-


    dren in Britain," Oxford Economic Papers, 62(2): 209-233.



[24] Ermisch, John, Francesconi, Marco and Siedler, Thomas. 2006. "Intergenerational Mobility


    and Marital Sorting," Economic Journal, vol. 116(513), pages 659-679.



[25] Evans W. N. and Schwab R. M. 1995. Finishing High School and Starting College: Do


    Catholic Schools Make a Dierence? The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 110, No.


    4, pp. 941-974.



[26] Fernández-Huertas Moraga, J. 2011. New Evidence on Emigrant Selection, The Review


    of Economics and Statistics, 93(1): 72-96.



[27] Fisher, H. 1989. Evolution of Human Serial Pairbonding. American Journal of Physical


    Anthropology, 78:331-354.



[28] Freedman David A. and Jasjeet S. Sekhon. 2010. Endogeneity in Probit Response Models.


    Political Analysis, 18(2): 138-150.



[29] Frick, J. R., Jenkins, S. P., Lillard, D. R., Lipps, O. and Wooden, M. 2007. The Cross-


    National Equivalent File (CNEF) and its Member Country Household Panel Studies.


    Schmollers Jahrbuch. 127 (4): 627-654.



[30] Furtado, D. 2012. Human capital and interethnic marriage decisions, Economic Inquiry,


    Volume 50, Issue 1, Pages 82-93



[31] Furtado, D., Theodoropoulos, N. 2009. I'll marry you if you get me a job: Marital assim-


    ilation and immigrant employment rates, International Journal of Manpower, Volume 30,


    Issue 1-2, Pages 116-126


                                             30
[32] Furtado, D., Theodoropoulos, N. 2010, Why does intermarriage increase immigrant em-


    ployment? the role of networks B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, Volume


    10, Issue 1, Article number 101.



[33] Furtado, D., Theodoropoulos, N. 2011. Interethnic marriage: A choice between ethnic and


    educational similarities, Journal of Population Economics, Volume 24, Issue 4, , Pages


    1257-1279



[34] Hanushek, Eric A. "The failure of input-based schooling policies." Economic Journal, 113,


    485: F64-F98.



[35] Hadeld, Elaine and Sprecher, Susan (1995). Men's and Women's Preferences in Marital


    Partners in the United States, Russia, and Japan. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology


    Vol. 26 No. 6, pp. 728750.



[36] Horrace, W. C. and R. L. Oaxaca. 2006. Results on the bias and inconsistency of ordinary


    least squares for the linear probability model, Economics Letters, 90(3): 321-327.



[37] Ibarraran P. & Lubotsky, D. 2007. "Mexican Immigration and Self-Selection: New Evidence


    from the 2000 Mexican Census," NBER Chapters, in: Mexican Immigration to the United


    States, pages 159-192, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.



[38] Immigration and Naturalization Systems of the United States (INSUS). 1950. Report of


    the Committee on the Judiciary (S. Res. 137), Report number 1515. Washington, D. C.:


    Government Printing Oce, p. 166-167.



[39] Kim, Andrew Eungi (2009): Global migration and South Korea: foreign workers, foreign


    brides and the making of a multicultural society, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 32:1, 70-92



[40] Lafortune, J. 2013. Making Yourself Attractive: Pre-Marital Investments and the Returns


    to Education in the Marriage Market, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,


    5(2): 151-178.




                                             31
[41] Lam, D. 1988. Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household Public Goods:


    Theoretical Results and Empirical Implications Journal of Human Resources, 23, 426-487.



[42] Lievens J, 1999, Family-forming migration from Turkey and Morocco to Belgium:        the


    demand for marriage partners from the countries of origin International Migration Review


    33, 717 - 744.



[43] Lubotsky, D. 2007. Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings,


    Journal of Political Economy, 115(5): 820-867



[44] Machin, Stephen J. and Stewart, Mark B. 1990. Unions and the Financial Performance


    of British Private Sector Establishments Journal of Applied Econometrics , Vol. 5, No. 4,


    pp. 327-350



[45] Maddison, A. 2006. The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Paris: OECD.



[46] Manski, C.F., 1993. Identication of endogenous social eects:    the reection problem.


    Review of Economic Studies 60 (3), 531542.



[47] Manski, C.F., 2000. Economic analysis of social interactions. Journal of Economic Perspec-


    tives 14 (3), 115 136.



[48] McKenzie, D. and H. Rapaport. 2010. "Self-Selection Patterns in Mexico-U.S. Migration:


    The Role of Migration Networks," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4): 811-821



[49] McKenzie, D., Stillman, S. and Gibson, J. 2010. How Important is Selection? Experimen-


    tal VS. Non-Experimental Measures of the Income Gains from Migration. Journal of the


    European Economic Association, 8: 913945.



[50] Meyer, Traute. 1998. Retrenchment, Reproduction, Modernization: Pension Politics and


    the Decline of the German Breadwinner Model. Journal of European Social Policy, 8(3):


    195-211.



[51] Munshi, K., 2003. Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the US Labor


    Market Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2): 549-599.


                                              32
[52] Nakosteen R. A., Westerlund O. and Michael A. Zimmer. 2004. Marital Matching and


    Earnings: Evidence from the Unmarried Population in Sweden, The Journal of Human


    Resources , Vol. 39, No. 4 (Autumn, 2004), pp. 1033-1044.



[53] Nakosteen R. A and Zimmer M. A. 2001. Spouse Selection and Earnings: Evidence of


    Marital Sorting, Economic Inquiry, Vol 39, No. 2, 201-213.



[54] Qian, Z. and Lichter, D.T. (2001). "Measuring Marital Assimilation: Inter-marriage among


    Natives and Immigrants." Social Science Research 30: 389-412.



[55] Ortiz V, 1996, Migration and marriage among Puerto Rican women International Migra-


    tion Review 30 460-484



[56] Piper N, 1999, Labor migration, tracking and international marriage:     female cross-


    border movements into JapanAsian Journal of Women's Studies, 5, 69-99.



[57] Rajkumar, A. S. and Swaroop, V. 2008. "Public spending and outcomes: Does governance


    matter?," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 86(1): 96-111.



[58] Rosenbaum, P. and D. Rubin (1983).  The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Obser-


    vational Studies for Causal Eects. Biometrika, 70: 4155.



[59] Sassler, Sharon. (2005). "Gender and Ethnic Dierences in Marital Assimilation in the


    Early Twentieth Century." International Migration Review 39 (3): 608-636.



[60] Simon, R. J. and S. H. Alexander. 1993. The Ambivalent Welcome: Print, Media, Public


    Opinion and Immigration. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.



[61] Sjaastad, Larry A. (1962), The Costs and Returns of Human Migration, Journal of Political


    Economy, 70(5): 80-93. 14



[62] Snyder, T.D., and Dillow, S.A. (2011). Digest of Education Statistics 2010 (NCES 2011-


    015). National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. De-


    partment of Education. Washington, DC.



                                             33
[63] Virden, J. 1996. Good-bye, Piccadilly: British War Brides in America. Urbana and Chicago:


    University of Illinois Press.



[64] Watts S J, 1983, Marriage migration, a neglected form of long-term mobility: a case study


    from Ilorin, Nigeria International Migration Review 17 682-698



[65] Zhang, Junsen and Pak-Wai Liu. 2003. Testing Becker's Prediction on Assortative Mating


    on Spouses' Wages Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Winter, 2003), pp. 99-110.



[66] Zimmer, M. 1996. Assortative Mating and Ethnicity in the Low Wage Population: An


    Examination of Spouses' Earnings Applied Economic Letters, 3, 311-315.




                                              34
Appendix: Tables and gures

Table 1: Share of ever-married population over age 40 by country, sex, and migration status
                                                    All             Males              Females              Source
   British immigrants in the US                    94.99            93.85               95.80                CPS
   German immigrants in the US                     94.46            91.75               96.00                CPS
   British natives in the UK                       93.67            92.89               94.34               BHPS
   German natives in Germany                       92.24            91.31               93.09               SOEP



                  Table 2: Weighted means and frequencies of selected variables
                                 Migrant/native couples in US                               Native couples
                            Migrant    US       Migrant       US                          in home country
                           husbands wives        wives husbands                        Husbands            Wives
 A. British
 Age                          44.0        42.2          54.6          56.5                48.1               46.0
 Non-whites                   .004        .020          .014          .039                .029              0.027
 Education completed
   primary                    0.71        0.48           2.44         1.28               19.06             22.77
   lower secondary            1.12       1.07            2.62         3.07                7.66              8.87
   upper secondary           20.87       23.40          39.44        25.32               27.10             28.92
   post-secondary            24.92       19.90          28.50        25.54               31.97             26.93
   higher                    52.38       55.15          27.01        44.79               14.21             12.52
 Household size               2.95        2.95          2.65          2.65                3.01              3.01
 Observations                1159        1159           1422         1422                34141             34141

 B. German
 Age                 55.9                 52.6          59.9          61.0                49.1              46.6
 Education completed
   primary            2.65                1.58           4.07         1.67                2.07              2.61
   lower secondary    3.34               4.68            3.36         4.98               44.63             42.78
   upper secondary   21.31               21.68          46.26        30.27               32.07             37.95
   post-secondary    28.42               26.08          28.73        32.50                9.46              9.03
   higher            44.28               45.97          17.58        30.58               11.77              7.62
 Household size       2.69                2.69          2.48          2.48                2.94              2.94
 Observations         507                 507           2115         2115                94815             94815
 Notes: We have created ve aggregated educational categories using 13 categories from the BHPS, 16 categories from the
 CPS, and years of completed education from the SOEP, to avoid small sex-specic cell sizes.




                                                           35
                    Table 3: Measures of assortative mating and marital mobility
                                           Migrant/native couples in US                           Native couples
                                             Migrant          Migrant                            in home country
                                          husband rel. to    wife rel. to                    Husband       Wife rel.
                                             US wife         US husband                     rel. to wife to husband
A. British
Correlation of education across spouses
  raw values                            0.42                             0.46                   0.44            0.44
  residuals from eq. (3)                0.30                             0.43                   0.39            0.39
Prob(mobility=1)
  raw values                            0.24                             0.40                   0.26            0.37
  based on eq. (4)                      0.71                             0.47                   0.15            0.86

B. German
Correlation of education across spouses
  raw values                            0.39                             0.41                   0.57            0.57
  residuals from eq. (3)                0.38                             0.32                   0.53            0.53
Prob(mobility=1)
  raw values                            0.22                             0.39                   0.20            0.24
  based on eq. (4)                      0.87                             0.69                   0.16            0.86
The residual of ordered probit were calculated as described by Machin and Steward (1990, pp. 346-347).




    Table 4: Ordered probit regression of educational attainment on education spending
                               CPS                                     BHPS                              SOEP
    Mean ed. spending:
      over age 5-17    0.041***                               0.133***                       0.062***
                       [0.005]                                [0.029]                        [0.012]
      over age 5-12              0.045***                                   0.073***                        0.026***
                                 [0.004]                                    [0.023]                         [0.010]
      over age 13-17             -0.004                                     0.061***                        0.035***
                                 [0.003]                                    [0.019]                         [0.009]
    Observations       3749217 3749217                        108426        108426           202029         202029
    Controls: mean GDP per capita over age 5-17, sex, age xed eects, ve-year birth-cohort xed eects.
    * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                            36
                                      Correcting for marital selectivity
                                  Table 5:
               Coecient on migration indicator from probit model of marital mobility
                                                   Males                         Females
                                          Raw         Estimated           Raw         Estimated
                                          mobility    mobility            mobility    mobility
A. British
Migrant                                             -0.043          1.942                      0.037           -1.723
                                                    [0.081]         [0.070]***                 [0.040]         [0.063]***
Estimated prob(mobility=1) if:
       Prob(being a migrant)=1                      0.24            0.68                       0.38            0.54
       Prob(being a migrant)=0                      0.26            0.15                       0.37            0.86

B. German
Migrant                                             0.207      3.103                           0.398      -1.032
                                                    [0.070]*** [0.118]***                      [0.035]*** [0.055]***
Estimated prob(mobility=1) if:
       Prob(being a migrant)=1                      0.26            0.89                       0.38            0.64
       Prob(being a migrant)=0                      0.20            0.16                       0.24            0.86
Notes: Regressions on the British sample control for race of self and spouse; age; household size; birth cohort dummies; and
average GDP per capita in the UK during age 16-21 and 22-30. Regressions on British females also control for age squared
and age of spouse. Regressions on the German sample control for age of self and spouse; household size; and birth cohort
dummies. Regressions on German males also control for average GDP per capita in Germany during age 16-21 and 22-30
and interactions between average GDP in the US during ages 16-21 and 22-30 and inows of German immigrants to the US
during that same age. Regressions on German females also control for average GDP per capita in the US during age 0-15
and 16-21 and average GDP in Germany during age 0-15. Huber/White robust standard errors are in brackets. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                              37
                         Table 6:Correcting for marital and migration selectivity
                   Selected coecients from bivariate probit model of marital mobility
                                                        Males                         Females
                                               Raw          Estimated         Raw         Estimated
                                               mobility     mobility          mobility    mobility
A. British
Second-stage: Prob(mobility=1)
Migrant                                                -0.055           2.513                   -0.161         -1.484
                                                       [1.073]          [0.210]***              [0.728]        [0.127]***
First-stage: Prob(being a migrant=1)
Mean inow of British migrants:
 over age 16-21                                        0.380            0.413                   0.168          0.160
                                                       [0.094]***       [0.100]***              [0.065]***     [0.056]***
   over age 22-30                                      0.114            0.157                   0.217          0.231
                                                       [0.095]          [0.105]                 [0.066]***     [0.071]***
Wald test of exogeneity                                0.0001           9.864                   0.075          5.292
                                                       (0.991)          (0.002)***              (0.784)        (0.021)**
Estimated prob(mobility=1) if:
  Prob(being a migrant)=1                              0.24             0.82                    0.31           0.59
  Prob(being a migrant)=0                              0.26             0.15                    0.37           0.85

B. German
Second-stage: Prob(mobility=1)
Migrant                                                1.494            3.975                   1.397      -0.926
                                                       [0.458]***       [0.264]***              [0.413]*** [0.722]
First-stage: Prob(being a migrant=1)
Mean inow of German migrants:
 over age 16-21                                        0.458      0.512                         0.027          0.042
                                                       [0.184]**  [0.173]***                    [0.049]        [0.049]
   over age 22-30                                      0.314      0.438                         0.109          0.113
                                                       [0.364]    [0.372]                       [0.035]***     [0.056]**
Wald test of exogeneity                                7.433      13.70                         4.868          0.023
                                                       (0.006)*** (0.000)***                    (0.017)**      (0.879)
Estimated prob(mobility=1) if:
  Prob(being a migrant)=1                              0.72             0.97                    0.75           0.67
  Prob(being a migrant)=0                              0.20             0.16                    0.24           0.86
Notes: Controls are as in Table 5. Huber/White standard errors are in brackets; probability values are in parentheses.




                                                            38
  Table 7: Test of statistical signicance of selection eects and parameter restrictions
                                                                  Males                     Females
                                                       Value        Wald-test      Value      Wald-test
A. British
Marital selection eect      b1 − βb1
                             α                         -1.985      298.9 (0.000)    1.760    647.7 (0.000)
                             b1 − δb1
                             γ                         -2.567      4.950 (0.026)    1.323    3.170 (0.075)
Migration selection eect    b1 − γ
                             α     b1                  0.011       0.000 (0.991)   0.198     0.080 (0.782)
                             β1 − δ1
                             b     b                   -0.571      13.46 (0.000)   -0.239    5.270 (0.022)
Parameter restriction        b1 − βb1 − γ
                             α          b1 + δb1       0.582       0.300 (0.584)   0.437     0.360 (0.550)

B. German
Marital selection eect      b1 − βb1
                             α                         -2.896       455.6(0.000)    1.431    508.6 (0.000)
                             b1 − δb1
                             γ                         -2.480      23.25 (0.000)    2.323    6.340 (0.012)
Migration selection eect    b1 − γ
                             α     b1                  -1.288      8.970 (0.003)   -0.998    6.240 (0.012)
                             β1 − δ1
                             b     b                   -0.872      17.09 (0.000)   -0.106    0.020 (0.879)
Parameter restriction        b1 − βb1 − γ
                             α          b1 + δb1       -0.416      0.830 (0.362)   -0.892    0.990 (0.320)
Note: Probability values of the Wald   X 2 test-statistic   are in parentheses.




                                                      39
  Table 8: Testing robustness to alternative denitions of educational marital mobility
                                                                  Males                      Females
                                                       Value       Wald test        Value     Wald test


Education categories: primary, secondary, higher

A. British
Marital selection eect      b1 − βb1
                             α                         -3.201      587.2 (0.000)     1.956    697.6 (0.000)
                             b1 − δb1
                             γ                         -3.631      7.850 (0.005)     1.766    3.380 (0.066)
Migration selection eect    b1 − γ
                             α     b1                  -0.018      0.000 (0.988)    -0.040    0.000 (0.966)
                             β1 − δ1
                             b     b                   -0.448      31.39 (0.000)    -0.229    2.560 (0.109)
Parameter restriction        b1 − βb1 − γ
                             α          b1 + δb1       0.430       0.130 (0.721)    0.189     0.040 (0.842)
Prob(mobility=1)             Migrants                   0.14                         0.25
                             Non-migrants               0.20                         0.30
B. German
Marital selection eect      αb1 − βb1                 -5.429      578.8 (0.000)     2.337    2155 (0.000)
                             b1 − δb1
                             γ                         -4.846      58.89 (0.000)     5.140    148.9 (0.000)
Migration selection eect    αb1 − γb1                 -1.214      5.390 (0.020)    -1.139    10.44 (0.000)
                             βb1 − δb1                 -0.631      3.420 (0.064)     1.664    82.63 (0.000)
Parameter restriction        αb1 − βb1 − γ
                                         b1 + δb1      -0.583      1.000 (0.317)    -2.803    47.72 (0.000)
Prob(mobility=1)             Migrants                   0.12                         0.29
                             Non-migrants               0.08                         0.13

Mobility=1 if education of spouse> education of self+                     Var (education of self )
A. British
Marital selection eect      b1 − βb1
                             α                         -0.729      16.66 (0.000)     3.454    8.450 (0.004)
                             b1 − δb1
                             γ                         -0.014      0.000 (0.991)     2.885    4.460 (0.034)
Migration selection eect    b1 − γ
                             α     b1                  -1.019      0.820 (0.364)    -0.132    0.110 (0.744)
                             β1 − δ1
                             b     b                   -0.306      1.030 (0.309)    -0.700    6.560 (0.010)
Parameter restriction        b1 − βb1 − γ
                             α          b1 + δb1       -0.713      0.350 (0.556)     0.568    1.420 (0.234)
Prob(mobility=1)             Migrants                   0.09                         0.11
                             Non-migrants               0.11                         0.17
B. German
Marital selection eect      αb1 − βb1                 -1.581      157.4 (0.000)     1.234    335.6 (0.000)
                             b1 − δb1
                             γ                         -1.681      12.25 (0.000)     1.836    35.00 (0.000)
Migration selection eect    αb1 − γb1                 -0.809      3.240 (0.072)    -1.681    41.96 (0.000)
                             βb1 − δb1                 -0.909      10.26 (0.001)    -0.909    10.26 (0.001)
Parameter restriction        αb1 − βb1 − γ
                                         b1 + δb1      0.100       0.050 (0.818)    -0.602    4.320 (0.038)
Prob(mobility=1)             Migrants                   0.08                         0.14
                             Non-migrants               0.03                         0.07
Note: Probability values of the Wald   X 2 test-statistic   are in parentheses.




                                                      40
               Table 9:Correcting for marital selectivity using age and year xed-eects
                Coecient on migration indicator from probit model of marital mobility
                                                  Males                             Females
                                         Raw          Estimated            Raw         Estimated
                                         mobility     mobility             mobility    mobility
 A. British
          Migrant                                -0.041           1.944                     0.049           -1.972
                                                 [0.077]          [0.066]***                [0.040]         [0.074]***
 B. German
          Migrant                                0.208      2.834                           0.390      -1.102
                                                 [0.071]*** [0.117]***                      [0.035]*** [0.043]***
 Notes: All regressions control for a full set of age dummies and year of survey dummies. The regressions on the British
 sample also control for the variables described in Table 5. Regressions on the German sample control for household size and
 average GDP per capita in Germany during age 16-21 and 22-30. Huber/White robust standard errors are in brackets. ***
 p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




    Table 10:     Correcting for marital and migration selectivity using age and year xed-eects
                   Selected coecients from bivariate probit model of marital mobility
                                                        Males                         Females
                                              Raw           Estimated          Raw         Estimated
                                              mobility      mobility           mobility    mobility
A. British
Second-stage: Prob(mobility=1)
Migrant                                                -0.441           2.338                   0.806          -2.126
                                                       [1.111]          [0.199]***              [0.368]**      [0.099]***
First-stage: Prob(being a migrant=1)
Mean inow of British migrants:
                  over age 16-21                       0.454            0.466                   0.224          0.200
                                                       [0.095]***       [0.099]***              [0.085]***     [0.087]**
                        over age 22-30                 0.270            0.304                   0.340          0.331
                                                       [0.108]**        [0.119]**               [0.117]***     [0.122]***
Wald test of exogeneity                                0.133            5.740                   3.927          6.755
                                                       (0.716)          (0.017)**               (0.047)**      (0.009)***
B. German
Second-stage: Prob(mobility=1)
Migrant                                                1.522            2.339                   1.474      -1.731
                                                       [0.460]***       [0.267]***              [0.384]*** [0.086]***
First-stage: Prob(being a migrant=1)
Mean inow of German migrants:
                 over age 16-21                        0.003            0.005                   0.069          0.070
                                                       [0.028]          [0.028]                 [0.018]***     [0.020]***
                        over age 22-30                 0.144            0.166                   0.149          0.171
                                                       [0.065]**        [0.069]**               [0.042]***     [0.040]***
Wald test of exogeneity                                7.648            5.917                   6.344          112.9
                                                       (0.006)***       (0.015)**               (0.012)**      (0.000)***
Notes: Controls are as in Table 9. Huber/White standard errors are in brackets; probability values are in parentheses.

                                                             41
              Table 11: 2SLS rst-stage regression of Prob(being a migrant=1)
                                                            Males                                    Females
                                                   Raw         Estimated                     Raw         Estimated
                                                   mobility    mobility                      mobility    mobility
A. British
Mean inow of British migrants:
                      during age 16-21 0.025                             0.025               0.016             0.016
                                       [0.008]***                        [0.008]***          [0.005]***        [0.005]***
                      during age 22-30 0.010                             0.010               0.021             0.021
                                       [0.008]                           [0.008]             [0.005]***        [0.005]***
F-test of joint instrument signicance 6.588                             6.588               14.66             14.66
                                       (0.001)***                        (0.001)***          (0.000)***        (0.000)***
Sargan test of overidentication       2.352                             0.097               0.495             0.007
                                       (0.125)                           (0.755)             (0.481)           (0.931)
Wooldridge's test of exogeneity        12.82                             614.9               25.57             43.61
                                       (0.000)***                        (0.000)***          (0.000)***        (0.000)***

B. German
Mean inow of German migrants:
                      during age 16-21 0.017                             0.017               0.003             0.003
                                       (0.005)***                        (0.005)***          (0.004)           (0.004)
                      during age 22-30 0.008                             0.008               0.009             0.009
                                       (0.006)                           (0.006)             (0.003)***        (0.003)***
F-test of joint instrument signicance 5.166                             5.166               27.22             27.22
                                       (0.006)***                        (0.006)***          (0.000)***        (0.000)***
Sargan test of overidentication       1.349                             1.277               2.345             0.694
                                       (0.245)                           (0.258)             (0.126)           (0.405)
Wooldridge's test of exogeneity        21.465                            229.6               25.00             5994
                                       (0.000)***                        (0.000)***          (0.000)***        (0.000)***
Notes: Controls are as in Table 4. Huber/White standard errors are in brackets; probability values are in parentheses.



                          Figure 1: Raw data used to derive instruments

                Spending on education (% of GDP)                               Inflows of migrants to the US
                                                               80000




             United States                                                                                     British
    7        United Kingdom                                                                                    Germans
             Germany
                                                               60000




    5
                                                               40000
                                                               20000




    3




    1
                                                               0




     1920       1940          1960     1980        2000           1920       1940       1960         1980       2000




                                                          42
Figure 2: Scatter plots of instruments and age




                     43
                                                          Figure 3: Educational attainment by country and sex

                                                         ϭϰ


                                                         ϭϮ



                      Average years of total schooling   ϭϬ


                                                          ϴ


                                                          ϲ
                                                                                                              US, males
                                                          ϰ                                                   US, f emales
                                                                                                              UK, males
                                                                                                              UK, f emales
                                                          Ϯ                                                   Germany, males
                                                                                                              Germany, f emales
                                                          Ϭ
                                                              ϭϵϱϬ ϭϵϱϱ ϭϵϲϬ ϭϵϲϱ ϭϵϳϬ ϭϵϳϱ ϭϵϴϬ ϭϵϴϱ ϭϵϵϬ ϭϵϵϱ ϮϬϬϬ ϮϬϬϱ ϮϬϭϬ


                                                                           Source: Barro and Lee (2010)




Figure 4: Kernel density estimates of age at rst marriage of US residents in 1980 by country
of birth
     .15




                                                                                                .15




                                                                     US, females                                                  US, males
                                                                     UK, females                                                  UK, males
                                                                     Germany, females                                             Germany, males
     .1




                                                                                                .1
     .05




                                                                                                .05
     0




                                                                                                0




           10       20                                          30         40         50              10     20          30          40        50
                   Age at first marriage or union                                                          Age at first marriage or union

           Source: IPUMS international online database. Notes: Kernel=epanechnikov, bandwidth=0.3.




                                                                                           44
