                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 LEFT, RIGHT, LEFT:
                     INCOME, LEARNING AND POLITICAL DYNAMICS

                                           John Morrow
                                           Michael Carter

                                        Working Paper 19498
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19498


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Jorge Aguero, Yasushi Asako, Brad Barham, Jeff Cason, Swati Dhingra,
Scott Gehlbach, Fabiana Machado, Aashish Mehta, Hiro Miyamoto, Shiv Saini and anonymous referees
for insightful comments as well as seminar participants at UW-Madison Development and Political
Economy Seminars, Universities of California at Davis and Riverside, University of Southern California,
the Midwest Economic Development Conference, the Midwest Political Science Association, the Delhi
School of Economics, Oslo University and the LSE. CEDLAS and The World Bank provided data
through SEDLAC. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by John Morrow and Michael Carter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Left, Right, Left: Income, Learning and Political Dynamics
John Morrow and Michael Carter
NBER Working Paper No. 19498
October 2013
JEL No. D31,D72,D83,P16

                                            ABSTRACT

The political left turn in Latin America, which lagged its transition to liberalized market economies
by a decade or more, challenges conventional economic explanations of voting behavior. This paper
generalizes the forward-looking voter model to a broad range of dynamic, non-concave income processes.
The model implies support for redistributive policies materializes rapidly if few prospects of upward
mobility are present. In contrast, modeling voters’ ideologically charged beliefs about income dynamics
shows a slow and polarizing shift toward redistributive preferences occurs. Simulation using fitted
income dynamics suggests that imperfect information better accounts for the shift back to the left,
and offers additional insights about political dynamics.


John Morrow
CEP, London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE UK
J.Morrow1@lse.ac.uk

Michael Carter
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
mrcarter@ucdavis.edu
                                                1. I NTRODUCTION

   Most Latin American countries had transitioned to market economies by the early 1990’s. The
largely center-right political leadership that instituted these transitions continued to win national
elections and persisted in power throughout the 1990s and into the early 2000’s. Since that time,
electoral politics have turned sharply left. Recent presidential elections have seen left-leaning
candidates defeat more conservative opponents in Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela.1 Not only have these elections ushered in
a political shift, they have in many instances been tightly contested by candidates offering funda-
mentally different economic visions. The goal of this paper is to provide a theoretical framework
to help us understand the economic forces that underlie these political dynamics.
   The influential body of political economy literature that focuses on economic inequality as a
force that determines both political institutions and voting patterns would seem to offer a window
into these political patterns (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006; Boix, 2003). However, the fact that
inequality measures tend to be remarkably stable over time makes it unlikely that inequality can
explain Latin America’s right-left voting dynamics. A recent paper by Robert Kaufman (2009)
confirms the inconvenient empirical fact that existing measures of economic inequality do a very
poor job of explaining both political institutions and voting patterns in Latin America.2
   Although we could abandon the search for economic explanations of contemporary voting pat-
terns, we instead take our cue from Benabou and Ok (2001) and Moene and Wallerstein (2001)
who model voters as forward-looking agents who look beyond current income inequality and focus
on how policies will influence their future economic prospects. From this starting point, we offer
the following contributions:

      • We analyze forward-looking political preferences under a wide variety of income dynam-
        ics, including concave dynamics that offer prospects for upward mobility (‘POUM’ as in
        Benabou and Ok), as well as empirically based dynamics which are neither concave or
        convex that offer no prospects of upward mobility (‘No-POUM’).
      • We also consider political dynamics when voters lack full information and must live and
        learn about the income dynamics that characterize their economy. This is particularly rel-
        evant to transition countries that have fundamentally altered their economic model.



1While the contemporary Latin American left cannot be defined by a shared economic model, this new left does share a
largely populist impulse and desire to shift resources and opportunity to those at the bottom of the income distribution.
For instance, Greene and Baker (2011) construct vote revealed leftism (VRL) from ideological ratings of presidents
and parliamentary parties in Latin America from 1996-2008, showing that the left has an economic policy mandate to
halt or partially reverse neoliberal economic policies.
2Fields (2007) makes this point even more strongly by showing how inequality can increase during the early stages of
a period of upward mobility that would surely dampen political preferences for redistribution.
                                                           2
      • We show that not only does the incorporation of learning provide a richer suite of possi-
        ble political dynamics, it also reveals that voters’ perceptions of the dead weight losses
        associated with redistribution can, in surprising ways, further fuel political instability.
      • To draw out the implications of our model, we estimate income distribution dynamics for
        two Latin American countries, Chile and Peru, and show that the learning, forward-looking
        voter model is broadly consistent with the recent political histories of both countries.
In their seminal paper, Benabou and Ok show that concave income distribution dynamics that offer
the prospect of upward mobility can account for surprising conservatism by voters below the mean
income who would benefit in the short run from redistributive policies.3 While this POUM model
has little to say about the right-left political dynamics observed in contemporary Latin America,
we show here that the non-concave income transition functions suggested by poverty trap theory,
which offer limited or no prospects of upward mobility can result in a surprisingly and increas-
ingly redistributive electorate.4 Specifically, we show that forward-looking political preferences
are determined by the smoothed envelopes drawn around income transition functions, where the
transitions themselves need not be concave or convex. This generalizes the connection between
redistribution and income beyond the usual concepts in the literature.
   In an effort to corroborate this theoretical intuition, we calibrate income dynamics for Latin
American countries. These reveal for some countries the sort of No-POUM dynamics that would
be expected to generate an increasingly pro-redistribution electorate. Surprisingly, applying these
dynamics to our full information, forward-looking voting model indicates that the demand for re-
distribution should have been stronger and should have occurred well in advance of the recent suite
of Latin American presidential elections. This result presents a puzzle that questions fundamental
assumptions about how economic voters perceive and react to their material prospects.
   We argue it is the assumption that voters have full information about their economy’s income
distribution dynamics that is most problematic, especially in transition economies where the elec-
torates have had little prior experience with liberalized market economies (e.g. Przeworski, 1991).5, 6

3Complementary endogenous explanations for anti-redistributive positions include disincentives for labor supply
(Meltzer and Richards, 1981), asset formation (Persson and Tabellini, 1994), inefficient levels of public goods (Alesina
and Rodrik, 1994), multidimensional policy spaces in which non-economic preferences conflict with pocketbook vot-
ing (Roemer, 2001). To highlight the roles of income dynamics and learning, we ignore the incentive effects of taxation
(see Piketty, 1995), but do account for the role of dead weight loss.
4Tucker (2006) shows that voting in the post-Soviet bloc reflects economic experiences: areas with poor outcomes
support “Old Regime” parties while good outcomes provide support for liberal “New Regime” parties.
5Accurate information in such environments can be exceedingly difficult to obtain. Feenstra et al. (2012) have found
the World Bank’s estimate of real GDP per capita is in need of substantial upward revision. Even in advanced market
economies, serious information gaps regarding economic conditions persist. Norton and Ariely (2011), for example,
show that Americans systematically overestimate existing income equality.
6Fernandez and Rodrik (1991) point out the importance of uncertainty in policy reform, although they explain why
policies might increase in popularity after implementation, rather than decrease as in Latin America. Van Wijnbergen
and Willems (2012) extend their approach with learning dynamics to explain why policies may decrease in popularity.
                                                           3
In such circumstances, voters have little choice but to fall back on priors about how such an econ-
omy might work.7 Edwards (1995), for example, largely credits the origins of the switch to liberal
economic policies within Latin America to the failure of all other alternatives, although he notes
that multilateral institutions influenced the “convergence of doctrinal views” through research,
analysis, lending practices and conditionalities.
   In Latin America, the shift to the liberal economic model was put forward on the grounds that it
would boost incomes and well being for all, including the lower half of the income distribution.8
Assuming that voters begin with this “POUM prior,” we go on to model voters as Bayesian learners
who experientially update their expectations based on their own stochastic income experience.
Leveraging the POUM and No-POUM distinction, we characterize “Left” vs “Right” Bayesian
beliefs about income dynamics. We show that this model of forward-looking, Bayesian voters
offers an empirically tenable explanation of the recent right to left political evolution in Latin
America. A key ingredient in this explanation is that dead weight loss induces political volatility
in uncertain environments. While increased dead weight loss reduces support for redistribution for
both right and left voters, the effect is proportionately stronger for right voters. This asymmetry
then amplifies political volatility in which learning is moving some fraction of the electorate left.
   The general tenor of this explanation is corroborated by some observers of transition economy
politics. Weyland (2002), for example, notes that support for the liberal economic policies intro-
duced in Latin America the late 1980s and early 1990s waned over time, especially as individuals
began to learn and reassess their future prospects. Similarly, Graham and Pettinato’s (2002) anal-
ysis of Peru and Russia identifies a numerically significant group of “frustrated achievers,” who
benefited initially from liberal reforms, but came to see little prospect for further advance and the
possibility of catching up with the consumption standards of those in the upper deciles of the in-
come distribution. These authors go on to note that this frustrated group shows waning support for
market-oriented policies and speculate that their political behavior will likely change accordingly.9
   Finally, evidence for the role of upward mobility in voting behavior has been mixed, and the
reach of the income based approach can be extended by modeling more general income dynamics.
Fong (2001) finds that variables reflecting personal benefit from redistribution are insignificant in
predicting redistributive preferences in the US. On the other hand, Checchi and Filippin (2004) find
experimental support that the POUM reduces chosen taxation rates and that longer time horizons

7Roemer (1994) models this process in a Downsian framework. In contrast, this paper conceptualizes beliefs about
empirically based income dynamics as a ‘ideological space’ which voters learn about through personal experience.
8See for example Williamson (1990) for a classic statement of the so-called Washington Consensus about the desir-
ability of liberal economic policies for Latin America.
9It is of course possible that people are fooled, or fool themselves, about the nature of income dynamics and vote
against their true economic interests. Survey research which assesses voter’s subjective expectations about prospects
has found “POUM captures hopes and expectations as well as realistic socioeconomic assessments” (Graham and
Pettinato, 2002). Additional possibilities are considered by Putterman (1996). Herrera (2005) careful studies how
economic information was mediated by larger sets of social relations in post-USSR Russia.
                                                         4
tend to decrease chosen rates under POUM. Beckman and Zheng (2007) find tentative support
for the POUM hypothesis using undergraduate surveys. At the international level, Wong (2004)
examines the GSS and World Values Survey for redistributive preferences and finds the expected
signs across incomes, but no evidence of the “tipping behavior” implied by median voter or POUM
models.
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a basic framework for
individual and aggregate income dynamics in the presence of transient shocks, and models political
support for redistributive policies by both myopic and forward-looking voters who enjoy full infor-
mation about the income dynamic process. Section 3 then introduces both concave (POUM) and
poverty trap (No-POUM) dynamics, and derives results on the political preferences of forward-
looking voters who may be fully informed or instead must learn about extant income dynamics
through experience. The analysis of Section 3 is applied to Latin American income dynamics in
Section 4. Section 5 shows this model of forward-looking Bayesian voters who confront a No-
POUM world can give rise to the political polarization and sudden political shifts that have been
observed in twenty first century Latin America. Section 6 concludes.


         2. F ORWARD - LOOKING VOTERS AND THE D EMAND FOR R EDISTRIBUTION

   This section lays out machinery needed to discuss changing patterns in majoritarian voting when
the electorate can choose among income redistribution schemes. The setting is a continuum of vot-
ers whose incomes evolve over time and fluctuate with idiosyncratic shocks each period. Voters
care only about maximizing the present discounted value of income from all sources, whether pub-
lic or private, and are thus “pocketbook voters.” We consider the fraction of the voter population
who rationally prefer income redistribution, which we term the demand for redistribution.
   In order to evaluate a particular redistributive policy, each voter considers three things: their
individual income path, the aggregate income path of the economy and the longevity of the policy.
Changes in the economy over time can thereby induce changes in voting patterns, and support for
a given policy is dependent on expected economic conditions. To help unpack these relationships,
this section defines income transitions, redistributive schemes and forward-looking demand for
redistribution. After developing baseline analytical results, this framework will be extended in the
next section to consider the role of beliefs under economic conditions which are more realistically
characterized by imperfect information.


2.1. Income Transitions. Individuals are indexed by i and have an initial income yi0 . The initial
income distribution F0 is assumed to be bounded and absolutely continuous. After the initial period
0, individual i’s income at time t is

(2.1)                                yit+1 = f (Eεit [yit ]) · εit+1
                                                   5
where f as an income transition function10 and εit is iid across individuals and periods with
Eεit [εit ] = 1. These assumptions imply that the expected income path for any individual is de-
terministic, since

             Eεit [yit ] = f Eεit−1 [yit−1 ] = f f Eεit−2 [yit−2 ] = f (t) (Eεi0 [yi0 ]) = f (t) (yi0 ) ,
                                                                 

while realized income is given by yit = f (t) (yi0 ) · εit .11
  When making decisions about the future, we assume individuals care only about present dis-
counted income, discounted at rate δ each period. We can therefore write each individual’s dis-
counted income stream over T periods as:
                        T              T
(2.2)                  ∑ δ t yit =     ∑ δ t f (t)(yi0) · εit .       (Discounted Income Stream)
                       t=0             t=0
                                                                                     T
Since E [εit ] = 1, expected present discounted income can be seen from (2.2) to be ∑t=0 δ t f (t) (yi0 ).
We now turn to policies which might redistribute this income.


2.2. Myopic Demand for Redistribution. Consider the political preferences of myopic, pocket-
book voters whose incomes evolve according to a known income transition function f as above.
Pocketbook voters choose policies which maximize their income, and for simplicity we assume
voters are risk neutral. Following the convention in much of the political economy literature (e.g.
Persson and Tabellini (2000), Roemer (2001)), we define redistribution schemes composed of a
flat tax τ and a lump sum transfer to all voters. Thus if a tax τ is enacted in period t, each voter i
receives income:

(2.3)                                          (1 − τ) · yit + τ · (1 − D) µt
            h         i
Here µt = E0 f (t) (y) denotes the mean income of the population at time t,12 and D ∈ [0, 1]
denotes any dead weight loss under the redistributive scheme.13 A myopic voter’s most preferred
policy τ ∗ must maximize expected income. Since at any period t 0 < t we have

                   Et 0 [(1 − τ) · yit + τ · (1 − D) µt ] = (1 − τ) · f (t) (yi0 ) + τ · (1 − D) µt ,

either τ ∗ = 1 (complete redistribution) or τ ∗ = 0 (laissez-faire).

10Formally, by income transition we refer to any positive, strictly increasing and continuous function defined on
bounded interval of the form [0, B].
11While the individual’s history of realized incomes does not matter for expected future income, this history will
matter when the individual does not know the true nature of the transition process and must deduce it from his or her
own lived experience. The next section considers ramifications.
12Hereafter, E [·] denotes the expectation at time 0 over initial incomes distributed F and all {ε }
                0                                                                      0            it i,t>0 .
13Under perfect information, dead weight loss serves no dynamic role, but will allow us to quantify the appropriate
level of loss that would provide majoritarian support for laissez faire in highly unequal economics. Under incomplete
information, dead weight loss has surprising implications for volatility, as we discuss in the last section.
                                                                  6
   Now consider a majoritarian vote taken between τ = 1 and τ = 0 at the beginning of period t
before idiosyncratic shocks are realized. A myopic voter i prefers τ = 1 to τ = 0 exactly when
E[yit ] = f (t) (yi0 ) ≤ (1 − D)µt , which means they expect to be below average income, less any
dead weight loss. Since f in increasing, all voters with initial incomes yi0 ≤ f (−t) ((1 − D)µt )
prefer τ = 1 to τ = 0. The fraction of such voters in the population is determined by the initial
distribution of income F0 to arrive at
                                                     
     Pr (Voter prefers τ = 1)= F0 f (−t) ((1 − D) µt )    (Myopic Demand for Redistribution).

2.3. Forward-looking Demand for Redistribution. Here we follow Benabou and Ok’s frame-
work of forward-looking voters who consider redistributive policies that last from period 0 through
period T . Over this time frame, define a voter’s discounted income stream under laissez-faire
                                                          T
(τ = 0) as gT (yi0 ). From Equation (2.2), gT (yi0 ) = ∑t=0   δ t f (t) (yi0 ) and the average of all vot-
                                                        T
ers’ discounted income streams is therefore µ T ≡ ∑t=0       δ t µt . Complete redistribution (τ = 1)
over this period would pay out µ T , less any dead weight loss, giving a discounted income of
(1 − D) µ T . Consequently, a voter prefers τ = 1 to τ = 0 from periods 0 through T if and only if
gT (yi0 ) ≤ (1 − D)µ T . Akin to the myopic case, the proportion of voters demanding redistribution
is
                                       −1
                                                   
   Pr (Voter prefers τ = 1)= F0 gT        (1 − D) µ T       (Forward Demand for Redistribution).

   This equation shows that the fraction of the population who wants redistribution takes into
                                                                           −1
account discounting and the evolution of income during the policy. gT              (1 − D) µ T is the
                                                                                              

forward-looking generalization of the term f (−t) ((1 − D) µt ) that determines the demand for redis-
tribution in the myopic voter case. Note that a voter who looks forward only one period (or who
considers a policy that will last only one year) has the same preferences as a myopic voter. The
next section develops a method to explore voter dynamics under any income transition function,
a family that is broad enough to encapsulate the processes implied by theories of both convergent
and divergent income distribution dynamics.


           3. P OLITICAL DYNAMICS UNDER F ULL AND I MPERFECT I NFORMATION

   This section first recaps the political implications of concave income dynamics which exhibit
Upward Mobility and have been studied in detail by Benabou and Ok (2001). We then consider the
political implications of more convoluted income dynamics which do not exhibit such convergence
(e.g. Banerjee and Newman, 1994), and fail to be concave or convex. Such NoPOUM dynamics
may fail to offer upward prospects and are the context for income and political dynamics in this
paper.
   In reality of course, perfect information is unlikely as income dynamics and the prospects for
mobility are complex and hard to understand, especially in economies which had fundamentally
                                                    7
altered their economic model.14 At the end of this section, we relax this assumption and consider
the behavior of voters who must learn about the true income dynamics from their own experience,
but vote over future policies based on ideological priors.15

3.1. Political Dynamics under Prospects of Upward Mobility. The Solow model of neoclassi-
cal economic growth relies on an assumption of diminishing capital returns and implies that poorer
nations will tend to catch up over time, or converge, with the incomes of richer nations.16 When
transported to the individual or microeconomic level, the Solow assumptions imply a process of
convergence among the population of a single country.


                           F IGURE I. POUM and No-POUM Income Transitions




               ( A ) POUM Income Dynamics                                   ( B ) No-POUM Income Dynamics


   Figure I(a) illustrates a typical income dynamic implied by accumulation under decreasing re-
turns. Note that this concave transition process, maps incomes in period t into incomes in period
t + 1, implies a unique long term or steady state income level, y∗ , at the point where f p (y) crosses
the 45-degree line. Under this transition process, individuals who begin with incomes below the
steady state level will converge towards it, while those who begin above the steady state level will
drop back towards it. Note that this sort of concave income process offers prospects of upward
mobility (POUM) to voters whose initial income levels are less than the steady state income level.
14This approach to modeling ideology as an idiosyncratic evolving process echoes Bates et al. (1998) as a means to
complement cultural and ideological political theories with rational choice.
15This specification naturally incorporates the possibility that repression or fear constricted the political space, leading
people to vote differently. Voters may fear possible retribution for revealing their ideological “type” because of political
policing (e.g. a potential return to dictatorship in early 1990’s Chile). In this case, the ideological space can be modeled
as constrained to an ideological spectrum which expands with “political thawing” and faith in democratic institutions
over time. This gradual expansion of publicly admissible views might also help explain large shifts.
16For an early review of both the theoretical and empirical controversies, see Romer (1994). A more recent review
with a theoretical emphasis is Azariadis and Stachurski (2005).
                                                             8
This Prospect of Upward Mobility for the poor to achieve convergence with the population at large
can serve to lessen preferences for redistribution.
   As shown in Section 2, the fraction of myopic voters who demand redistribution at time t is
F0 ( f (−t) ((1 − D) µt )). Whether this increases or decreases over time depends on f (−t) ((1 − D) µt ).
In a POUM world, the global concavity of f implies (through Jensen’s inequality) the demand
for redistribution is always decreasing over time. Similarly, if voters are forward-looking, the
fraction of the population that wants redistribution monotonically decreases as the duration of
a policy increases. Therefore in a POUM world with forward-looking voters, the demand for
redistribution decreases with time in two senses: as evaluations each single period and as policy
longevity increases. This is the type of behavior that Benabou and Ok (2001) deduce and discuss,
and these two aspects of POUM redistributive dynamics can be summarized as

Proposition (POUM Dynamics). Suppose f is concave. Then:
    (1) The demand for a single period of redistribution decreases over time.
    (2) The demand for redistribution over a T period horizon decreases in T .

  The obvious twin result which follows from Benabou and Ok is that if income dynamics are
convex, the demand for redistribution increases both over time and over longer policy periods.
However, empirical income dynamics are seldom so ideal as to satisfy pure concavity or convexity.

3.2. Political Dynamics under (No) Prospects of Upward Mobility. In contrast to Figure I(a),
individuals need not face uniformly decreasing returns in asset accumulation. The increasingly
well developed theory of poverty traps suggests a number of mechanisms that can trap households
at low living standards (see the reviews in Azariadis and Stachurski (2004) and Carter and Barrett
(2006)). Central to all of these theories of poverty traps is exclusion from financial markets.17 Put
differently, if households have access to loan markets and insurance instruments, then even when
confronted by locally increasing returns to scale and risk, they can successfully engineer a strategy
to obtain the assets needed to jump to a high level equilibrium. But absent access to those financial
markets, households below a critical initial asset level may remain stuck in a low level, poverty
trap equilibrium.
    The result of such poverty trap models is Figure I(b) which illustrates income transition dynam-
ics with multiple steady states.18 The non-concave income transition function, fn (y), has multiple
crossings of the 45-degree line and admits multiple equilibria: y∗H is the high income steady state;
y∗L is the low level steady state. Bifurcation occurs around the unstable equilibrium income level,
yb . Households with incomes in excess of yb will tend toward the high level equilibrium while those
17There is now a plethora of theory about why financial markets are often thin, missing and, or biased against low
wealth agents. For a recent contribution, see Boucher et al. (2007).
18For empirical examples see Lybbert et al. (2004) and Adato et al. (2006). Banerjee and Newman (2000) construct a
macroeconomic model of “dynamic institutional change” which implies non-concave income dynamics and exhibits
path dependence on the distribution of wealth.
                                                        9
that begin below this critical threshold will head towards the low level, poverty trap equilibrium,
y∗L . This implies no prospect of upward mobility (No-POUM) for voters below the threshold yb .
In contrast to an economy with a concave income transition function, economic polarization will
occur and inequality can deepen when income transitions are governed by a non-concave function
like fn (y).19
    The remainder of this section considers any income transition function, allowing for both f p and
 fn types of income transitions and then derives a general set of results with political implications.
We show that relaxing the assumption of concavity can generate rich pattens in the demand for
redistribution. We then provide a theorem showing how these new income transitions create both
increases and decreases in the demand for redistribution, even when the transition function is
neither globally concave nor convex.

3.3. Demand for Redistribution: What’s in the Envelope? While voter dynamics under POUM
are relatively straightforward, non-convexities under general income transitions lead to more com-
plex political dynamics. To better describe this complex process, we connect the changing demand
for redistribution to the upper and lower envelopes of an income dynamic. We first define the upper
envelope of f , f , as the smallest concave function everywhere above f . The lower envelope f is
defined as the largest convex function everywhere below f . Both types of envelopes are illustrated
in Figure II and defined in Equation (3.1).20

(3.1)        f (x) ≡ inf{h (x) : h is concave, h ≥ f },            f (x) ≡ sup{h (x) : h is convex, f ≥ h}.



                                   F IGURE II. Upper and Lower Envelopes




                     ( A ) POUM World                                             ( B ) No-POUM World

19Strictly speaking, this non-concave income transition function implies increasing polarization, not necessarily in-
creasing inequality, as Esteban and Ray (1994) discuss.
20This is equivalent to finding the envelope created by tracing all lines which are above, but do not cross f . In practice,
there are several efficient algorithms to construct such envelopes numerically, e.g. Jarvis (1973).
                                                            10
  Clearly for each y we have f (y) ≥ f (y) ≥ f (y) and necessarily f is concave and f is convex.
Two special cases stand out. When f is concave, f and f coincide. When f is convex, f and
f coincide. Therefore in a POUM world, f = f . We define the sets of incomes where f and f
exactly coincide as YP (as this is the domain of upward mobility). Similarly define the domain of
downward mobility, YN , as incomes where f and f coincide. The relationship of YP and YN to the
path of redistributive preferences is Proposition 1:

Proposition 1. If µt ∈ YP then the demand for redistribution decreases in period t relative to period
t − 1. Conversely, if µt ∈ YN then the demand for redistribution increases.

Proof. We consider µt ∈ YP as the other case is similar. We want to show that f (−t) (µt ) ≥
 f (−(t+1)) (µt+1 ). This holds iff µt+1 ≤ f (µt ) and by assumption f (µt ) = f (µt ). Therefore we
are done if we can show µt+1 = f (t+1) dF0 ≤ f (µt ). Since f ≤ f we know that f (t+1) dF0 ≤
                                      R                                                        R

    f ◦ f (t) dF0 so we need to show f ◦ f (t) dF0 ≤ f (µt ). In fact, this last inequality holds by Jensen’s
R                                   R

inequality since by construction, f is concave.                                                            

   Proposition 1 says that if the mean income next period µt lies in YP , the demand for redistribution
decreases. Conversely, if µt lies in YN , the demand for redistribution increases. In this sense, the
upper and lower envelopes of f are natural definitions of Right and Left income transitions based
on f . This also highlights the differences between POUM and No-POUM income dynamics. In
a POUM world, f is concave and equals f so all incomes (including µt ) are in YP . Therefore
the demand for redistribution is always decreasing (Figure IIa). In contrast, a No-POUM income
dynamic has both YP and YN regions. Depending on where µt lies the next period, the demand for
redistribution can either increase or decrease (Figure IIb).
   In a No-POUM world, the determination of whether the demand for redistribution is increasing
or decreasing depends simultaneously on the current period, the expected income transition and
the initial distribution of income. Although the demand for redistribution may be directly com-
puted, in general it is hard to derive a particular path analytically due to its dependence on the
range of possible income distributions. In the appendix, we illustrate this point with a concrete
example where small changes in F0 cause qualitative changes in the demand for redistribution over
time. The appendix also shows that for a large class of income dynamics, whether the demand for
redistribution is increasing or decreasing depends heavily on the initial distribution of income.
   In a POUM world, the demand for redistribution decreases with policy length, as discussed
above. However, in a No-POUM world, longer policy horizons may include relatively precipitous
drops in present discounted income for some segments of the population. In such cases, policy
longevity inspires increased demand for redistribution. The following proposition formalizes this
argument, the key condition being that mean incomes lie in the region of downward mobility, YN ,
for successive periods.

                                                     11
Proposition 2. Suppose for an income transition f , µt ∈ YN for all periods t. Then the demand for
redistribution increases in policy longevity. Conversely, if µt ∈ YP for all periods t then demand for
redistribution decreases.

Proof. By definition, gT = gT −1 + δ T f (T ) , so consider the intuitive result (see appendix):

Lemma. Suppose f and g are income transition functions. Then the myopic demand for redistri-
bution implied by the income transition f + g is between that implied by f and g.
                                                                 −1  T −1 
   It is therefore sufficient to show that f (−T ) (µT ) ≥ gT −1       E g     , or equivalently

                                     gT −1 ◦ f (−T ) (µT ) ≥ E gT −1 .
                                                                   
(3.2)

Now consider that µt ∈ YN for all t implies f −1 (µt ) ≥ µt−1 so µt ≥ f (µt−1 ). Recursing this
equation k times shows

(3.3)                                      µt ≥ f (k) (µt−k ) for all t, k ≥ 0.

Expanding gT −1 ◦ f (−T ) (µT ) and substituting in Equation (3.3) shows
                                  T −1                          T −1
        gT −1 ◦ f (−T ) (µT ) =          δ t f (t−T ) (µT ) ≥   ∑ δ t f (t−T ) ◦ f (T −t)   µT −(T −t) = E gT −1 .
                                                                                                              
                                  ∑
                                  t=0                           t=0

Which is precisely Equation (3.2), so demand for redistribution increases.                                           

   While these results are based on a deterministic income transition process, they generalize nat-
urally to the case in which the income transition function is stochastic and drawn from a family of
income transition functions { fθ (y)}θ ∈Θ , where an iid aggregate shock, θt determines the income
transition fθt faced each period.21

Proposition 3. Under aggregate shocks, the demand for redistribution will increase in policy
longevity when all possible mean incomes lie in the common domain of downward mobility of
all income transitions. Similarly, the demand for redistribution decreases if mean incomes lie in
the common domain of upward mobility.

Proof. See Appendix.                                                                                                 

   Our analysis so far has assumed that voters know the true income transition function and use this
knowledge to construct their forward looking income forecasts and vote accordingly. We now relax
this assumption by considering the role of voters’ beliefs, which though informed by experience,
may reflect ideological priors rather than incumbent economic conditions.

21Here we assume θ is a Borel measurable random variable with realizations θ ∈ Θ.
                                                                            t
                                                      12
3.4. Income Dynamics under Imperfect Information. To keep this problem manageable, we
assume voters face a known family of possible expected income transition functions { fλ (y)}λ ∈[0,1]
indexed by the parameter λ . The family of income transitions is assumed to be bracketed by two
extreme specifications, one representing a right perspective or vision of how the economy operates
 fR (at λ = 1) and the other a left perspective fL (λ = 0). Specifically, the right perspective is that
the laissez faire economy offers substantial prospects of upward mobility such that voters need not
support redistributive policies. In contrast, the left perspective is that the economy intrinsically
offers few prospects for upward mobility, requiring redistributive policies if significant fractions of
the electorate are to get ahead economically. We refer to these specifications as “ideologies,” using
this word to denote a model or understanding of how the world works.
   To analyze the connection from beliefs about economic prospects to voting behavior, we derive
conditions under which there is a monotone relationship from λ to demand for redistribution in
Proposition 4. Here, successively higher values of λ correspond to more exaggerated right ide-
ologies that promise greater upward mobility and imply less demand for redistribution. Higher
values of λ also imply greater ideological polarization, in that left and right positions become
more sharply differentiated. Proposition 4 characterizes which members of a family of income
transitions are more ideologically “Right”, in that they induce lower demand for redistribution.22

Proposition 4. Let { fλ (y)} be a family of income transitions. Assume each fλ (y) is strictly
increasing and twice continuously differentiable. Then demand for redistribution decreases in λ
for all income distributions if and only if ∂∂y ln ∂∂y fλ (y) decreases in λ .

Proof. See Appendix.                                                                                                 

   At any point in time t, the individual’s understanding of the economy can be represented by a
probability density πit (λ ) over possible values of λ while the true value of λ , labeled λ0 , is un-
known to voters. Note that this specification naturally describes someone with a left view of the
world as placing a large probability weight on low or left values of λ , whereas a right view of the
world would have probability weight near the right side of the spectrum or 1. We normalize the
true value of state of the world λ0 to be 1/2. This specification of how voters predict their future
income under incomplete information will be incorporated into our model of forward-looking vot-
ers. However, we first consider how the critical new element, the voter’s probability distribution
πit (λ ), is formed and evolves over time.
   Each voter i begins with a prior distribution πi0 (λ ) over possible values of λ . We also assume
that voters keep track of their idiosyncratic income histories Hit ≡ {yi0 , . . . , yit }. The history Hit
is used to update beliefs each period to a posterior belief πit (λ |Hit ) according to Bayes rule. In
22This result analytically characterizes families of income transitions, and generalizes the often used ’more concave
than’ ordering within the space of concave functions. However, here no particular fλ need be concave. Of particular
interest are families constructed by letting fλ at λ = 1/2 correspond to an arbitrary empirically derived function, thus
making ’real world’ income dynamics amenable to analysis.
                                                          13
our context, we can think of πi0 (λ ) as the initial ideological beliefs a voter has about the income
transitions they face, while πit (λ |Hit ) are the voter’s new ideological beliefs after t periods of
learning the true income dynamic.
   In order to make this learning process concrete, we will analyze it assuming an explicit structure
of the transient income shocks in Assumption 1.

Assumption 1. The income dynamic each voter faces satisfies the following:
    (1) The shock εit is distributed Uniform (1 − σ , 1 + σ ) for some σ ∈ (0, 1).23
    (2) Voters know the value of σ .
                                                                                              (t)
   Recalling the true state of the world is λ0 = 1/2, actual incomes are yit = f1/2 (yi0 ) · εit , so voters
receive some random fraction, εit , of their true expected income. Under Assumption 1, the mag-
nitude of σ determines whether fluctuations around the expected value are large or small, with a
larger σ obscuring the true income dynamic from voters.
   Now consider how voters update their beliefs under Assumption 1. Since for any true state of
                           (t)
the world λ , εit = yit / fλ (yi0 ) and each voter knows that |εit − 1| ≤ σ , voters know
                                                    (t)
(3.4)                                         yit / fλ (yi0 ) − 1 ≤ σ .

Equation (3.4) encapsulates the fact that a voter knows that realized income yit must be within the
                                     (t)
fraction σ of expected income fλ (yi0 ). Therefore any state λ for which Equation (3.4) fails to
hold cannot correspond to the true income dynamic. Eliminating these impossible states is exactly
what Bayes rule dictates as the updating rule. Accordingly, πit (λ |Hit ) is exactly πi0 (λ ) restricted
to all values of λ that satisfy (3.4) for the voter’s history Hit , normalized to integrate to one.
   Appendix D develops the mechanics of learning dynamics in more detail. Under imperfect
information, voting behavior is determined by each voter’s beliefs given their income history and
the expected redistributive transfer for each state of the world λ . A myopic voter (looking forward
only one period) prefers redistribution in period t when he believes expected transfers are positive:
                Z 1          Z                                                   
                                  (t+1)                 (t+1)
                     (1 − D) fλ          (y) dF0 (y) − fλ     (yi0 ) · πit (λ |Hit ) dλ ≥ 0.
                 0
                   |                       {z                       } |     {z      }
                               Expected Transfer|λ ,yi0                 Beliefs|Hit
This expression naturally generalizes to the case when policies persist and voters look forward
by more than one period. As this expression makes clear, evolving voter beliefs inserts another
dynamic element into the determination of political preferences.

3.5. Dead Weight Loss and Political Volatility. In the model of Bayesian voters faced with im-
perfect information just discussed, dead weight loss has a surprising role in generating potentially
23The distributional form of ε is not crucial, since the driving force for voting is convergence through learning to
                              it
a tight posterior around the true income transition state. Other distributions give similar results, but induce updating
rules that include weights from εit for each voter history that increase computational dimensionality.
                                                          14
radical political swings. At first glance, one might think that dead weight losses would uniformly
depress the demand for redistribution, but would have no effect on its volatility. But, as we now
explain, this volatility effect is systematic and explained by the asymmetric effect that D has on
a Right partisan with a strong belief in fR in comparison to a Left partisan with a strong belief in
 fL . Increases in D attrit support for redistribution much faster for a Right partisan than for a Left
partisan, creating a wider gulf to cross as voters learn. As individuals learn and their beliefs move
away from fR , their sensitivity to dead weight losses evaporates, further powering a large shift in
the population’s support for redistributive policies.
    In order to formalize this idea, let yeR = fR−1 ((1 − D) E0 [ fR ]) denote the income level of a
voter who is indifferent about a single period of redistribution under fR , and similarly let yeL =
 fL−1 ((1 − D) E0 [ fL ]) denote the income of a voter who is indifferent under fL . By definition, the
fraction of voters preferring redistribution under fL is F0 (e           yL ) while under fR the fraction is F0 (e
                                                                                                                 yR ).
The gap between these two fractions, F0 (e          yL ) − F0 (e yR ), is completely accounted for by the range
of possible beliefs held by voters, and quantifies potential political volatility. Under plausible as-
sumptions, ∂ [F0 (e  yL ) − F0 (e yR )] /∂ D > 0. Direct manipulation shows this inequality is equivalent
to Equation (3.5), which we verify step-by-step below while detailing our assumptions.

                           F00 (e
                                yL ) /F00 (e
                                           yR ) · (E0 [ fL ] /E0 [ fR ]) < fL0 (e
                                                                                yL ) / fR0 (e
                                                                                               
(3.5)                                                                                       yR )

   Our first assumption regards the income distribution. It is a stylized fact of real world income
distributions that the median is below the mean. Similarly, most real world income distributions
are unimodal, and the mode typically occurs below the mean. It follows that voters at or below this
unique mode would likely vote for redistribution, even allowing for substantial dead weight loss of
redistribution. This is Assumption 2.

Assumption 2. Voters at the unique mode of the income distribution prefer redistribution under
both fL and fR .

   Our second assumption is that income transitions deserve the labels of Right and Left, in that fL
implies greater demand for redistribution than fR , i.e. F0 (e   yL ) > F0 (e
                                                                            yR ). This assumption may be
satisfied in many ways, not least by constructing a continuum of Right-Left income transitions via
Proposition 4. We therefore assume that fR is no more pessimistic about average growth than fL ,
in that E0 [ fR ] ≥ E0 [ fL ]. With reference to our particular construction of Right and Left, E0 [ fR ] =
E0 [ fL ]. This is Assumption 3.

Assumption 3. Left voters prefer more redistribution that Right voters. In addition, average
growth under the Right transition is at least as high as under the Left transition.

   So far, these two assumptions guarantee the left hand side of Equation (3.5) is less than one.
Assumption 3 directly implies E0 [ fL ] ≤ E0 [ fR ], and also that yeL > yeR . Since the income distribution
is unimodal, the density of the distribution F00 is decreasing for all incomes above the mode. Since
                                                         15
by Assumption 2 the incomes yeL and yeR are above the mode, it follows that F00 (e    yL ) < F00 (e
                                                                                                  yR ).
Putting these together, we see (3.5) holds so long as fR (e 0         0
                                                              yR ) ≤ fL (e
                                                                         yL ). Figure III makes this
intuitive through a graphical analysis, which is a natural consequence of modeling Right and Left
transitions in terms of curvature. This is Assumption 4:

Assumption 4. At the income levels where Right and Left voters are (respectively) indifferent
about redistribution, Left income is increasing faster than Right income.


           F IGURE III. Changes in Right vs Left Income as Dead Weight Loss Increases




   In order to explain Assumption 4, we depict idealized transitions fR and fL in Figure III. This
figure supposes fR is concave while fL is convex, which is approximately true when fR and fL are
constructed as described above. Fix any future mean income µ above median income, and consider
the level of support for redistribution next period as dead weight loss D increases, depicted in
Figure III as a shift in the horizontal line µ to (1 − D) µ. As dead weight loss increases, the
fraction of the population supporting redistribution decreases under both fR and fL . Under fR , this
decrease is from F0 fR−1 (µ) to F0 fR−1 ([1 − D]µ) which in Figure III is larger than the drop in
                                                    

support under fL , from F0 fL−1 (µ) to F0 fL−1 ([1 − D]µ) . This asymmetric effect of dead weight
                                                         

loss holds because in the illustrated range, the concavity of fR implies fR is much flatter than fL ,
which is convex. A local characterization that fR is flatter than fL is fR0 (e
                                                                             yR ) ≤ fL0 (e
                                                                                         yL ), which is
                                                               24
precisely Assumption 4 and ensures that Equation (3.5) holds. Formally,

Proposition 5. Under Assumptions 2-4, the response of Right voters to dead weight loss is larger
than the response of Left voters.

   Proposition 5 summarizes that when ideologies are modeled as income dynamics, Right voters
intrinsically have more aversion to dead weight loss than Left voters. Dead weight loss further
24This assumption is stronger than needed to achieve Equation (3.5). It can be relaxed to the extent that average growth
is higher under fR than fL or that incomes are more concentrated at lower incomes, i.e. around yeR compared to yeL .
                                                          16
polarizes support for redistribution between Right and Left, and when voters update their beliefs
away from extreme priors, the effect will be to accelerate right-left (or left-right) political swings
beyond what would happen in the absence of dead weight loss.
   In the next two sections we quantify the political implications of this model based on estimates
of actual income dynamics in Latin America. We will explore whether the forward-looking voter
model, possibly augmented with Bayesian learning effects, can explain contemporary Latin Amer-
ican political dynamics.


                     4. T HE R IGHT-L EFT P OLITICAL S HIFT IN L ATIN A MERICA

  The prior section has shown that political dynamics for forward looking voters will depend on
both the income transition and the initial distribution of income. This section asks if these two
considerations can help us understand recent electoral dynamics in Latin America. Building on the
method of Shorrocks and Wan (2008),25 we first recover income distributions for several periods,
and then use these to calibrate income transition functions as the basis for the analysis of political
dynamics in Chile and Peru.

4.1. Income Distribution Dynamics in Chile and Peru. The analysis here relies on income
decile data from SEDLAC (CEDLAS and The World Bank, 2011). We first use this data to to
                                              
construct approximate income distributions F̂t for each period by fitting a monotone spline to
recover each distribution.26 In order to recover income dynamics fˆ (y), we consider all functions
which are composed of line segments spanning each income decile. Letting β denote a vector of
ten line slopes (one for each decile), we can write every admissible income dynamic fˆ (y) as fβ (y)
for some β . To calibrate fβ (y), we make use of the identity that if Ft (y) is the distribution of
expected incomes E [yit ], then

(4.1)                                          f (t) (y) =Ft−1 ◦ F0 (y)

which fixes the relationship between the annual distribution of income Ft (y) and the true income
dynamic f (y).27 Equation (4.1) combined with estimates of the income distribution each period,
                                                                             (t)
say F̂t , provides a basis to calibrate fβ (y) since Equation (4.1) implies fβ (y) ≈ F̂t−1 ◦ F̂0 (y)
     

for each observed period t.

25
  These authors use a parametric approach to back out income distributions from income decile data. Synthetic income
distributions generated by their method have surprising accuracy compared with known distributions.
26The SEDLAC income measures include monetary, non-monetary and transfer income in addition to imputed rent,
and we use the following country-year pairs: Chile (1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2003, 2006) and Peru (1997, 1998, 1999,
2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006).
27To see this identity, note that inverting both sides of f (t) (y) = F −1 ◦ F (y) shows F −1 ◦ F (y) = f (−t) (y), and
                                                                       t      0            0     t
                                                                                                   
                                                 (t)                            (−t)            (−t)
                   Ft (y) = Pr (yit ≤ y) = Pr f (yi0 ) ≤ y = Pr yi0 ≤ f              (y) = F0 f      (y) .

                                                          17
   Using these relationships, we then fit fβ (y) to best explain the recovered income distributions
                                                                       (t)
for each observed year, F̂t . To do this, we assume F̂t−1 ◦ F̂0 (y) = fβ (y) · ε(y) with the error term
                        
                                                                      −1
             lognormal (0, σ ). This implies that for each y, F̂t ◦ F̂0 (y) is distributed lognormal
ε(y) distributed

   (t)
  fβ (y), σ . Taking our cue from maximum likelihood estimation, let φ (y, µ, σ ) denote the log
normal likelihood for an observation y. We then maximize the log likelihood summed across all
years and incomes by finding β and σ to solve (4.2), with further details in the Appendix:
                                            Z                      
                                                         (t)
(4.2)                      max       ∑        ln φ  y, f β   (y), σ   dF0 (y).
                            β ,σ
                                 t observed

   Having calibrated fβ (y) to recover income dynamics fˆ(y) for Chile and Peru, we present the
results graphically in Figure IV. A benchmark of ten years is illustrated as this roughly corre-
sponds to two presidential election cycles in Latin American countries. Thus Figure IV shows the
calibrated income dynamic over ten years ( fˆ(10) ) for each country, with a 95% confidence band
illustrated in dashed lines. For both countries, the interval estimates are wide, signaling that it is
difficult to precisely recover income dynamics, both for us as econometricians and presumably also
for those individuals who were living that experience. In Section 5, we will explicitly model how
noise in the income distribution process affects voters’ ability to learn about income dynamics. For
the remainder of this section, we will treat the estimated dynamic patterns as known and use these
patterns to draw out the implications of the forward-looking voting model.
   As can be seen in Figure IV, the expected income dynamics for Peru show areas of convexity
for much of the income distribution and therefore exhibit No-POUM dynamics. In particular, note
that those who begin in the lowest five deciles are predicted to converge towards the initial median
income level. Those who begin from about the sixtieth to the eighty-fifth percentiles converge to an
intermediate income position equivalent to the starting level of the seventy-fifth percentile, while
those who begin above the eighty-fifth percentile grow rapidly towards ever higher income levels.
In contrast, the income dynamics for Chile show prospects for absolute, if not relative, mobility
for all deciles of the income distribution.




                                                  18
                        F IGURE IV. Calibrated Income Transition Functions




            ( A ) Chile 10-year Transition                    ( B ) Peru 10-year Transition


4.2. Predicted Political Dynamics Under Full Information. Using the recovered income tran-
sition functions for Peru and Chile, we now derive the electoral dynamics implied by our model
of voters who possess full information on the underlying income transition process. We consider
the historical time period covered by our income decile data (mid-1990s to the mid-2000s) and
consider policy longevities (degrees of forward-lookingness) of 1 to 10 years. Computing the de-
mand for redistribution across time and for varying policy lengths then follows the development
above. At any point in historical time, H, and for any degree of policy longevity, T , we calculate
the fraction of the electorate supporting different policies as implied by our model:
                                                T −1
                                                         
                                         ˜                T
       Pr (Voter prefers τ = 1)= FH ĝ                 µ̂       (Forward Demand for Redistribution)
                    T
where ĝT (yi0 ) ≡ ∑t=0 δ t fˆ(t) (yi0 ), µ̂ T ≡ E0 ĝT (yi0 ) and F˜H (y) ≡ F̂0 ◦ fˆ(−H) (y).
                                                             

   Figure V graphs the results of these calculations for Chile and Peru under the assumptions that
redistribution incurs no dead weight loss (D = 0) and that δ = .95. First, consider the myopic
(T = 1) demand for redistribution in each country. Over time, Chile shows a fairly linear pattern
in Figure IV(a), which implies fairly flat redistributive preferences over the period as calculated
in Figure V(a). In contrast, reflecting the non-concavities in its calibrated income dynamics, Peru
shows a pattern in which the myopic demand for redistribution increases over time.
   Figure V also allows us to see what happens over time when voters are forward-looking (and as
policy longevity increases). In the case of Chile, more forward-looking voters and longer-lasting
policies barely perturbs the demand for redistribution at any point in time. Peru again presents
                                                19
an interesting picture as more forward-looking voters support redistribution more strongly than do
myopic voters, increasingly so over historical time.


                          F IGURE V. Evolving Demand for Redistribution




        ( A ) % Demanding Redistribution: Chile              ( B ) % Demanding Redistribution: Peru


   While the contrast between Chile and Peru illustrates the importance of income transition dy-
namics for political dynamics, the calculated level of support for redistribution is remarkable high
for both countries, in all time periods and under any degree of forward-lookingness. Put dif-
ferently, the full information voter model predicts that there would have been strong support for
redistributive policies long before such support actually emerged. While there are many possible
explanations for the tardy arrival of support for more aggressively redistributive policies, one is
that voters perceived significant dead weight losses to redistribution. To explore this idea, we cal-
culate the level of dead weight taxation loss that would have been necessary to provide majoritarian
support for laissez faire policies in Chile and Peru under the assumptions used to generate Figure
V. These levels are 45-48% in Chile and 43-47% in Peru, and are exceedingly high in comparison
to existing estimates of dead weight loss (e.g. Olken (2006)), making it unlikely that dead weight
losses explain the mismatch between model prediction and reality.

     5. T HE R IGHT-L EFT P OLITICAL S HIFT IN L ATIN A MERICA U NDER U NCERTAINTY

   While the analysis so far is consistent with the left turn that took place in Latin America politics,
it cannot account for the timing of that shift, throwing into sharp relief the question as to why so
many voted for largely laissez faire policies prior to the early part of this century. The answer
                                                   20
cannot be found in the prospect of upward mobility as the recovered income transitions suggest
that there were not prospects of upward mobility for important segments of the electorate. Indeed,
forward-looking pocketbook voters with perfect information on the nature of income dynamics
would have supported redistributive policies sooner and more forcefully than they actually did.
   This section employs the imperfect information model of forward-looking, Bayesian voters to
analyze the right to left political shift observed across contemporary Latin America. To do this, we
first provide an empirically grounded approach for representing left and right political ideologies.
Second, we argue that economic crises of the 1980s put the left in disarray, and at the time of
reforms, voters adopted a POUM prior, since prior crises left no credible alternative to the emer-
gent neoliberal model. Applying these assumptions to Peru, we show that voter learning over the
course of a dozen years would be expected to generate up to a 27 percentage point shift in the elec-
torate towards preferring redistributive to free market policies, with those preferring redistribution
moving from a minority to a majority of the population.




5.1. Empirical Approximation of Left and Right Ideologies. In order to arrive at plausible
left and right ideological models of income dynamics, we construct two functions ( fR and fL )
that surround and exaggerate the true empirical income transition function, fˆ(y). We begin by
characterizing the right income transition model as one that offers greater prospects for upward
mobility and implies less demand for redistribution than does fˆ. For a given fR , we then residually
construct fL so that the true function can be expressed as a linear combination of the left and right
ideologies as specified in Equation (5.1):

(5.1)                              fλ (y) = (1 − λ ) fL (y) + λ fR (y).

   We now describe the construction of fR and fL from the empirical income transition fˆ(y). First
define f (y), the upper envelope of fˆ(y) (which is necessarily concave, thereby inducing POUM
                                                                                         
dynamics). Now consider the income transition C(y) ≡ f (y) − κ · y where κ ≡ E f (y) /E [y].
                                                         00
C(y) has the same curvature as f (y) since C00 (y) = f (y), yet implies no change in mean income
                       
as E [C(y)] = E f (y) − E [κ · y] = 0. We conceptualize the “Right Ideology” fR (y) by adding a
multiple of C(y) to the empirical income transition f (y) and subtracting the same multiple from
f (y) to arrive at the “Left Ideology” fL (y). We denote the constant that multiplies C(y) by ρ,
giving the following expressions for fR (y) and fL (y):
                                                                                  
(5.2)             fR (y) ≡ f (y) + ρ f (y) − κ · y , fL (y) ≡ f (y) − ρ f (y) − κ · y .

Increases in the constant ρ generally decrease the demand for redistribution under fR (y), in line
with the intuition that as ρ increases, more of the curvature from f (y) is present in fR . To illustrate
                                                                                    
this formally, note that for moderately large ρ, fR (y) ≈ f (y) + ρ f (y) − κ · y so appealing to
                                                   21
Proposition 4 we see
                       ∂ ∂    ∂           ∂ ∂    ∂                        
                           ln   fR (y) ≈      ln    f (y) + ρ f (y) − κ · y
                      ∂ρ ∂y ∂y           ∂ρ ∂y ∂y
                                         n      o                        2
                                           00         0         0
                                       = f (y)κ / f (y) + ρ[ f (y) − κ]       < 0.

Therefore our definition of fR implies lower demand for redistribution as ρ increases; a higher ρ
implies a more powerful POUM effect under fR .28
    Figure VI illustrates the application of this approach of constructing fR (y) and fL (y) in Chile and
Peru. The uppermost curve is fR (y), representing the effect of adding the curvature term ρ ·C(y) to
 f (y), while the bottom curve is fL (y) with the same term ρ ·C(y) subtracted from f (y). Referring
back to Equation (5.2), the parameter ρ determines the spectrum of possible income transitions
between fR (y) and fL (y) by making both of these bounding transitions more extreme. Using the
empirical income transition functions of Figure IV, we fix the constant ρ to be the large as possible
to capture the widest range of possibilities, subject to the constraint that both fR (y) and fL (y) are
increasing. These maximal values of ρ are 28.4 (Chile) and 43.2 (Peru). While these values for ρ
may seem large, any values used should allow for a large degree of ignorance about actual income
dynamics. In any case, we next introduce Bayesian learning dynamics, so that beliefs in these
maximal values of ρ will be adjusted in line with voters’ observed income dynamics.


                          F IGURE VI. Stylized Right and Left Income Ideologies




                          ( A ) Chile                                                     ( B ) Peru

28Alternatively, one may define f (y) ≡ f (y) + ρ  f (y) − g · y and f such that 1/2 f + 1/2 f = f to arrive at this result
                                 R                                      L               R       L
analytically. This makes no numerical difference in practice, but burdens the notation.
                                                             22
5.2. Learning and Political Dynamics under a POUM Prior. The final element needed to per-
mit analysis of Latin American political dynamics is a specification of voters’ initial beliefs about
income dynamics and the prospects for upward mobility at the beginning of the 1990s. To illustrate
the implications of our model, we take seriously the then common observation that there was an
exhaustion of credible political alternatives to a liberal economic regime. As Margaret Thatcher
famously intoned: “TINA–There Is No Alternative” to free markets. Thatcher’s statements moti-
vate what we call the TINA or POUM prior, meaning an initial set of beliefs, πi0 (λ ), that heavily
weight the right perspective on the income process and its promise of upward mobility. In the
numerical analysis that follows, we use a simple prior form which places exponential weight on
Right beliefs for voters in the initial period, namely πi0 (λ ) = 10e10λ / e10 − 1 . Although this is
                                                                                    

one particular prior, the results are fairly robust to any prior highly weighted to the Right ideology.
   With the POUM prior in hand, and the empirically grounded representations of Left and Right
ideologies in Figure VI, we are now in a position to numerically simulate political dynamics in
Chile and Peru. For the simulations, we assume that income process is noisy with an idiosyncratic
income shock parameter σ = 1/2, and that voters look forward ten years and have a discount rate
of 95%.29 Figure VII shows the simulated evolution of political preferences for Peru in the initial
period, six years later and twelve years later. The y-axis shows the percentage of the electorate
preferring redistribution by income percentile. The solid line in each figure is the full information
benchmark, showing what political preferences would have looked like had voters had perfect
information on the true income dynamic. The dashed line shows political preferences by decile
under imperfect information (and when voters begin with the POUM prior) and when there are
no dead weight losses associated with redistribution. The dotted line shows the same imperfect
information scenario but assumes that redistribution is associated with a 10% dead weight loss.30




29Necessarily, the variance recovered from our fitting of income transitions to country decile data is a lower bound
for the variance of idiosyncratic income shocks, since the decile data has been aggregated across individuals. σ = 1/2
satisfies this lower bound and is close to known estimates: see Musgrove (1979).
30Given the new insights above regarding the asymmetric effect of dead weight loss on Right versus Left voters,
modeling uncertainty about dead weight loss (e.g. Roemer, 1994) could produce even larger swings in the electorate.
                                                         23
          F IGURE VII. Demand for a 10 Year Redistributive Policy by Income Percentile




           ( A ) Peru: Year 0                       ( B ) Peru: Year 6                      ( C ) Peru: Year 12


   As can be seen, the preferences of fully and imperfectly informed voters are quite different,
although absent any dead weight loss the median voter would have preferred redistribution from
the outset. However, with a 10% dead weight loss, the median, forward-looking voter would have
initially voted against redistribution under the TINA prior.31 However, after six years of living
and learning from the actual income distribution process, the median voter, and most voters in the
lowest seven deciles of the income distribution would have favored redistributive policies. After a
dozen years, the preferences of most voters approach those that would hold under full information,
implying a major political shift from minority to majority support for redistribution.
   Figure VIII provides another look at the political dynamics implied by our model of forward-
looking, Bayesian voters. The vertical axis now displays the fraction of the electorate at each point
in time that is expected to vote for redistribution. Absent dead weight losses, over the 1997 to 2009
simulation period in Peru, the fraction voting for redistribution rises by some 22 percentage points,
again approaching the levels that would be expected under full information by 2010. With dead
weight losses, politics become even more volatile with a 27% shift over this 12-year period.
   These sharp swings in policy preferences are largely driven by swing voters’ reevaluation of their
prospects for upward mobility as they learn from the actual operation of the Peruvian economy. An
interesting contrast to these results is provided by undertaking a similar exercise for the Chilean
economy. The estimated Chilean income transition function of Figure VI(a) is one that shows
absolute upward income mobility for all classes, though not much relative improvement for the
initially lower income deciles. While simulated preferences for redistribution in the Chilean case
are strong, they remain quite stable over time, offering a vision of much more stable politics in
Chile than in a country with a polarizing income distribution process.
31It is difficult to ascertain what the level of dead weight loss is for these countries for this period. As a benchmark,
Olken (2006) estimates a dead weight loss of redistribution of 18% in Indonesia. As higher levels of dead weight loss
amplify our results (as shown theoretically above), we have chosen a conservative assumption of 10%.
                                                           24
              F IGURE VIII. Aggregate Demand for a 10 Year Redistributive Policy




                     ( A ) Chile                                         ( B ) Peru

                                         6. C ONCLUSION

   Adopting the perspective that voters are forward-looking and pay attention to income dynamics,
not just to their place in the contemporaneous income distribution, this paper has explored the
left-right-left shift in the politics of Latin American countries over the last three or four decades.
Two analytical innovations are key to this exploration. The first is a generalization of earlier work
on forward-looking voters. We here model political preferences under general families of income
distribution dynamics, not just under concave dynamics that offer prospects of upward mobility.
This generalization, motivated by empirical evidence of polarizing, non-concave dynamics that
offer no prospects of upward mobility for segments of the population, shows that preferences
for redistributive policies may increase, not decrease over time when voters are forward-looking.
The key message is that unlike a world which offers upward mobility to low income voters, the
dynamics of demand for redistribution are not a foregone conclusion and may manifest in volatile
political patterns. This points to evaluating the relationship between income dynamics and political
choices in light of the conditions voters face on a country-specific basis.
   However, detailed analysis of the case of Peru suggests that there would have been initially
strong support for redistribution had voters been fully informed about the nature of the income
distribution dynamics, making it extremely hard to account for the elections in Peru and elsewhere
in Latin America in the 1990s that brought conservative candidates to power. This observation
motivates this paper’s second innovation, namely its modeling of voters as Bayesian learners who
update their understanding of income distribution dynamics based on their own lived experience.
                                                  25
Given that most voters in Peru (and other countries which saw a transition to a market economy
in the late 1980s and early 1990s) had little prior experience with the new economic model, we
assume that they initially adopted a prior probability distribution that put substantial weight on
an ideological position that attached strong prospects for upward mobility to the region’s new
economic model. Numerical simulation of political preferences as voters received noisy draws
from the true (calibrated) income distribution process shows that a substantial shift from strong
right political majority to a strong left political majority over the course of about a dozen years.
Somewhat surprisingly, political volatility is actually increased when the electorate believes that
redistributive policies carry dead weight losses. We show that the additional political volatility
created by dead weight loss is to be expected under fairly weak assumptions.
   Latin America of the 1990s is not only the region to have transitioned to a market economy.
While there can certainly be no claim that the precise voting dynamics derived here for Peru apply
to other countries, the information deficit and voting dilemma confronted by the Peruvian elec-
torate has had its reflection in a much larger number of countries that have transitioned to political
democracy and market economies. Modeling the evolving political preferences of voters in these
regions as forward-looking, Bayesian learners offers insights into the complex and often unstable
voting patterns observed in these other regions.




                                           R EFERENCES

ACEMOGLU , D. AND J. A. ROBINSON (2006): Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democ-
  racy, Cambridge University Press.
A DATO , M., M. R. C ARTER , AND J. M AY (2006): “Exploring poverty traps and social exclusion
  in South Africa using qualitative and quantitative data,” The Journal of Development Studies,
  42, 226–247.
A LESINA , A. AND D. RODRIK (1994): “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 109, 465–90.
A ZARIADIS , C. AND J. S TACHURSKI (2005): “Poverty Traps,” Handbook of Economic Growth,
  1, 295–384.
BANERJEE , A. V. AND A. F. N EWMAN (1994): “Poverty, Incentives, and Development,” Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 84, 211.
——— (2000): Occupational Choice and the Process of Development, MIT Press, vol. 1.
BATES , R. H., R. U. I. DE F IGUEIREDO , AND B. R. W EINGAST (1998): “The Politics of Inter-
  pretation: Rationality, Culture, and Transition,” Politics & Society, 26.
B ECKMAN , S. R. AND B. Z HENG (2007): “The Effects of Race, Income, Mobility and Political
  Beliefs On Support For Redistribution,” in Inequality and poverty: papers from the Society for
  the Study of Economic Inequality’s inaugural meeting, JAI Press, vol. 14, 363.
                                                  26
B ENABOU , R. AND E. A. O K (2001): “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution: The
   Poum Hypothesis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 447–487.
B OIX , C. (2003): Democracy and Redistribution, Cambridge University Press.
B OUCHER , S. R., M. R. C ARTER , AND C. G UIRKINGER (2007): “Risk Rationing and Wealth
   Effects in Credit Markets: Theory and Implications for Agricultural Development,” American
   Journal of Agricultural Economics, 90, 409–423.
C ARTER , M. R. AND C. B. BARRETT (2006): “The economics of poverty traps and persistent
   poverty: An asset-based approach,” The Journal of Development Studies, 42, 178–199.
C HECCHI , D. AND A. F ILIPPIN (2004): “An Experimental Study of the POUM Hypothesis,”
   Research on Economic Inequality, 11, 115–136.
E DWARDS , S. (1995): Crisis and reform in Latin America: from despair to hope, World Bank.
E STEBAN , J. M. AND D. R AY (1994): “On the Measurement of Polarization,” Econometrica, 62,
   819–851.
F EENSTRA , R. C., H. M A , J. P. N EARY, AND D. S. R AO (2012): “Who Shrunk China? Puzzles
   in the Measurement of Real GDP,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
F ERNANDEZ , R. AND D. RODRIK (1991): “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the Presence
   of Individual-Specific Uncertainty,” The American Economic Review, 1146–1155.
F IELDS , G. S. (2007): “How much should we care about changing income inequality in the course
   of economic growth?” Journal of Policy Modeling, 29, 577–585.
F ONG , C. (2001): “Social preferences, self-interest, and the demand for redistribution,” Journal
   of Public Economics, 82, 225–246.
G ASPARINI , L., M. H ORENSTEIN , E. M OLINA , AND S. O LIVIERI (2008): “Income Polariza-
   tion in Latin America: Patterns and Links with Institutions and Conflict,” Oxford Development
   Studies, 36, 461–484.
G RAHAM , C. AND S. P ETTINATO (2002): Happiness and hardship: Opportunity and insecurity
   in new market economies, Brookings Inst Pr.
G REENE , K. F. AND A. BAKER (2011): “The Latin American Left’s Mandate: Free-Market
   Policies and Issue Voting in New Democracies,” World Politics, 63, 43–77.
H ERRERA , Y. M. (2005): Imagined Economies: The Sources of Russian Regionalism, Cambridge
   University Press.
JARVIS , R. (1973): “On the identification of the convex hull of a finite set of points in the plane,”
   Information Processing Letters, 2, 18–21.
K AUFMAN , R. (2009): “The Political Effects of Inequality in Latin America: Some Inconvenient
   Facts,” Comparative Politics, 41, 359–79.
LYBBERT, T. J., C. B. BARRETT, S. D ESTA , AND L. D. C OPPOCK (2004): “Stochastic wealth
   dynamics and risk management among a poor population,” The Economic Journal, 114, 750–
   777.

                                                 27
M ELTZER , A. H. AND S. F. R ICHARDS (1981): “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government,”
   The Journal of Political Economy, 89, 914.
M OENE , K. O. AND M. WALLERSTEIN (2001): “Inequality, Social Insurance, and Redistribu-
   tion,” The American Political Science Review, 95, 859–874.
M USGROVE , P. (1979): “Permanent household income and consumption in urban South America,”
   The American Economic Review, 69, 355–368.
N ORTON , M. I. AND D. A RIELY (2011): “Building a Better America–One Wealth Quintile at a
   Time,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 9–12.
O LKEN , B. A. (2006): “Corruption and the costs of redistribution: Micro evidence from Indone-
   sia,” Journal of Public Economics, 90, 853–870.
P ERSSON , T. AND G. TABELLINI (1994): “Is inequality harmful for growth?” The American
   Economic Review, 600–621.
——— (2000): Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, MIT Press.
P IKETTY, T. (1995): “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics, 110, 551–584.
P RZEWORSKI , A. (1991): Democracy and the Market: Political and Economic Reforms in Eastern
   Europe and Latin America, Cambridge University Press.
P UTTERMAN , L. (1996): “Why have the rabble not redistributed wealth,” Property Relations,
   Incentives and Welfare. St. Martin’s Press. New York, 359–89.
ROCKAFELLAR , T. R. (1970): Convex analysis, vol. 28, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
   Press.
ROEMER , J. E. (1994): “The strategic role of party ideology when voters are uncertain about how
   the economy works,” American Political Science Review, 327–335.
——— (2001): Political competition: Theory and applications, Harvard University Press.
ROMER , P. M. (1994): “The Origins of Endogenous Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
   8, 3–22.
S ANTISO , J. (2006): Latin America’s Political Economy of the Possible: Beyond Good Revolu-
   tionaries and Free-marketeers, MIT Press.
S HORROCKS , A. AND G. WAN (2008): “Ungrouping Income Distributions,” Arguments for a
   Better World: Essays in Honor of Amartya Sen, 1, 414–435.
T UCKER , J. A. (2006): Regional Economic Voting: Russia, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, and the
   Czech Republic, 1990-1999, Cambridge University Press.
VAN W IJNBERGEN , S. AND T. W ILLEMS (2012): “Learning Dynamics and the Support for Eco-
   nomic Reforms: Why Good News Can Be Bad,” Working Paper.
W EYLAND , K. G. (2002): The Politics of Market Reform in Fragile Democracies: Argentina,
   Brazil, Peru, and Venezuela, Princeton University Press.


                                               28
W ILLIAMSON , J. (1990): “What Washington means by policy reform,” Latin American adjust-
 ment: how much has happened, 7, 7–20.
W ONG , W. K. (2004): “Deviations from Pocketbook Voting: Evidence and Implications,” Unpub-
 lished Manuscript.
W RIGHT, E. O. (2000): Class Counts, Cambridge University Press.


       A PPENDIX A. E XTENSIONS TO S TOCHASTIC FAMILIES OF I NCOME T RANSITIONS

   Consider a family of income transition functions { fθ (y)}θ ∈Θ , where for each individual i, an iid
random draw θit ∈ Θ determines the income transition fθit faced each period.32 The implications
for redistribution under the family { fθ (y)}θ ∈Θ mirrors Proposition 2. For a family of income tran-
sitions to imply increased demand for redistribution under a one period policy, it is sufficient that
the expected income transition Eθ [ fθ (y)] has a domain of downward mobility, YN , that contains
the mean income in period 1. When taxation policy instead lasts for T periods, the demand for
redistribution will increase with policy length, so long as the mean income each period lies in the
domain of downward mobility, YN , that corresponds to the mapping of expected incomes from
period t to t + 1.
   A special case of random income transitions is to consider aggregate shocks θt ∈ Θ which occur
simultaneously to all individuals in the economy. In this case, patterns in the demand for redis-
tribution can again be characterized in terms of mean incomes and upper and lower envelopes.
To illustrate this characterization, note that for any sequence of random draws θ T ≡ {θ1 , . . . , θT }
there are realized income transitions fθ1 , . . . , fθt with corresponding average incomes µt θ T ≡
                                                                                                    
                              
E fθt ◦ fθt−1 ◦ . . . ◦ fθ1 (y) and domains of downward and upward mobility {YN (θt )} and {YP (θt )}.
Now take any fixed history of aggregate shocks θ T , and suppose voters knew this history ahead of
time. By arguments similar to those above, the demand for redistribution would increase in policy
longevity so long as

                                      µt θ T ∈ YN (θt+1 ) for each t.
                                            
(A.1)

Since the sequence of aggregate shocks θ T is in fact random, a sufficient condition to characterize
the demand for redistribution is to make Equation (A.1) hold for each history. This is implied by
the following assumption:
                  All Possible   [           \             Common Domain of
                                    µt θ T ⊂
                                          
                               =                  YN (θ ) =
                 Mean Incomes θ T            θ ∈Θ
                                                            Downward Mobility
Therefore we have a result similar to those above, summarized as Proposition 3.
                                                                                                      h          i
32We additionally assume standard measurability and boundedness assumptions, e.g. sup E f (t) (y, θ ) < ∞, so
                                                                                     θ ,t y
that the definitions of the discussion above are well defined in this setting. Although of theoretical interest, we will not
appeal to these assumptions in the rest of the paper, and minimize our treatment accordingly.
                                                            29
                    A PPENDIX B. R ECOVERY OF S IMPLE I NCOME DYNAMICS

   As developed above, we fit a class of income transitions fβ (y) defined by piecewise line seg-
ments spanning each income decile. Specifically, these line segments span the midpoints between
each income decile (with endpoints defined by incomes at zero and twice the tenth income decile).
The years used to determine the midpoints are roughly in the middle of our data sample years: 2001
in Chile and 1998 in Peru. The values of β which maximize Equation (4.2) for each country are
reported in Table B.1, while the 95% confidence band for incomes graphed in Figure IV are based
on the likelihood maximizing values σPeru = 0.0943 and σChile = 0.0540. The parameter values
of ρ and g which determine Right and Left income transitions are ρChile = 28.42, ρPeru = 43.16
and κChile = 1.02, κPeru = 1.009.

                             TABLE B.1. Income Transition Parameters

                                  Slope of Income Transition in each Decile
                     1       2       3       4     5       6       7       8            9      10
        Chile 1.035 1.025 1.028 1.024 1.022 1.023 1.020 1.021 1.024 1.025
        Peru 1.032 0.979 1.004 0.998 0.976 1.014 1.000 0.980 1.031 1.023


       A PPENDIX C. D EPENDENCE OF REDISTRIBUTIVE DEMAND ON INITIAL INCOME

C.1. Fragility of Redistributive Dynamics. Consider an income distribution F0 composed of
three equally sized groups with incomes Y1 ,Y2 ,Y3 where 0 < Y1 < Y2 < Y3 < Y . Then µt = ∑(1/3) ·
 f (t) (Yi ) and so clearly depends on the initial distribution of income F0 interacting with the evolution
of group incomes f (t) (Yi ). Now also suppose f has three fixed points YTrap < YEscape < Y where
for y < YEscape , f (t) (y) −→ YTrap and for y > YEscape , f (t) (y) −→ Y . In this case all groups are
going to either YTrap or Y . To fix ideas, assume Y1 < YEscape < Y3 so the Y1 group converges
to YTrap while Y3 converges to Y . Clearly Y1 prefers the complete redistribution scheme r1 while
Y3 prefers r0 . This leaves open the middle class of “swing voters” Y2 . If Y2 > YEscape then the
middle class eventually climbs the income ladder to Y and joins the (now majoritarian) voting
block of Y3 . Otherwise, if Y2 < YEscape there is a thinning of the middle class and swing voters
eventually join with Y1 , implying the median voter prefers redistribution. Note the fragility of the
eventual voting outcomes: a small income difference δ in Y2 can push Y2 + δ to be greater or less
than YEscape . This eventually results in a large fraction p2 of swing voters to switch their vote as
income evolves. Similar consequences can arise if voters lack perfect information about F0 or f so
that small changes in beliefs can give rise to large changes in redistributive preferences.

C.2. The Same Income Transition Often Can Imply Both Increase and Decreasing Redis-
tributive Demand. A broad class of dynamics can exhibit either increasing or decreasing demand
for redistribution. The deciding factor for redistributive dynamics, even for a fixed dynamic, is the
                                                    30
initial distribution of income. This emphasizes the interrelationship between “Upward/No Mobil-
ity” in the dynamic role of income transitions and the “existing order” in the role of the income
distribution: political implications cannot be drawn without considering both:

Proposition. Suppose f is bounded and define f (∞) (y) ≡ limt−→∞ f (t) (y) as an individual’s income
after an arbitrarily long period of time. Let µ ∞ be the least possible per capita income under f (∞)
and let µ ∞ be the highest possible per capita income under f (∞) .
                             h        i
    (1) (POUM Forever) If µ ∞ , µ ∞ intersects the interior of YP , there is an initial distribution of
        income where the demand h for redistribution
                                         i             always decreases.
    (2) (No-POUM Forever) If µ ∞ , µ ∞ intersects the interior of YN there is an initial distribution
        of income where the demand for redistribution always increases.

Proof. Formally, we have µ ∞ ≡ infF0 f (∞) dF0 and µ ∞ ≡ supF0 f (∞) dF0 where the infimum and
                                       R                             R

supremum are taken over bounded, absolutely continuous initial income distributions. µ ∞ and µ ∞
are both in [0, ∞) as for any fixed F0 , f is bounded so f (∞) dF0 = limt−→∞ f (t) dF0 by bounded
                                                         R                    R

convergence, and clearly each f (t) dF0 ∈ [0, sup f ].
                                 R

   Wehwill consider
               i      the POUM case as the other case is similar. By hypothesis, there is some
µ ∗ ∈ µ ∞ , µ ∞ and an open set V such that µ ∗ ∈ V ⊂ YP . Fix ε > 0 such that µ ∗ ± ε ∈ V and
fix λ such that µ ∗ = λ µ ∞ + (1 − λ ) µ ∞ (note this forces λ ∈ [0, 1]). Now define, for any initial
income distribution G, µtG ≡ f (t) dG. By definition of µ ∞ and µ ∞ we may choose initial income
                               R

distributions F and F where

                          lim µtF < µ ∞ + ε/2    and     lim µ F   > µ ∞ − ε/2.
                         t−→∞                           t−→∞ t

It follows that there is a T such that for all t ≥ T , µtF < µ ∞ + ε and µtF > µ ∞ − ε. This implies
                       h                    i
 λ µtF + (1 − λ ) µtF − λ µ ∞ + (1 − λ ) µ ∞ < ε for all t ≥ T . Since λ µ ∞ + (1 − λ ) µ ∞ = µ ∗ and
F̃ ≡ λ F +(1 − λ ) F is an admissible initial income distribution, we see µtF̃ − µ ∗ < ε for all t ≥ T .
By construction, this implies µtF̃ ∈ V ⊂ YP , so by Proposition 1, the demand for redistribution is
always decreasing when the initial distribution of income is F0 (y) ≡ F̃( f (T ) (y)).           


      A PPENDIX D. D EMAND FOR R EDISTRIBUTION UNDER I MPERFECT I NFORMATION

    In general, neither fL nor fR need reflect reality but rather idealized versions of what Left and
Right ideologues might represent in a manifesto. Clearly the relative strength of a voter’s beliefs
in these world views will influence voting behavior. In order to emphasize the role of beliefs
πit (λ |Hit ) in deriving a voter’s expected income, we now illustrate the decisions of a pocketbook
voter who is also a Bayesian learner.
    If a voter knows the true value of λ , namely λ0 , then beliefs πi0 (λ ) put a point mass of 1 on
λ0 . This is the perfect information case, and as above expected income in period 1 would be given
                                                   31
by E[yi1 |Hi0 , πi0 ] = fλ0 (yi0 ). However, each voter does not know λ0 with certainty but has a non-
degenerate prior density πi0 (λ ) over possible values of λ . Now consider a voter in period 0 with
income yi0 . The voter’s expected income in period 1 is a weighted average of expected income
over plausible values of λ , namely E[yi1 |Hi0 , λ = λ0 ] = fλ (yi0 ) weighted by πi0 (λ ). Specifically,
                                        Z 1                                  Z 1
                 E[yi1 |Hi0 , πi0 ] =         E[yi1 |Hi0 , λ ]πi0 (λ )dλ =         fλ (yi0 )πi0 (λ )dλ .
                                         0                                    0
More generally, at the end of periods 1 to t, a voter updates his prior πi0 (λ ) to a posterior πit (λ )
using their history Hit = {yi0 , . . . yit }. Therefore expected income in period t + 1 is
                                         Z
                                                  (t+1)
(D.1)           E[yit+1 |Hit , πi0 ] =          f    (yi0 ) ·             π (λ |H )                dλ .
                                                |λ {z }                   | it {z it }
                                              Expected Income|λ History Dependent Beliefs Over λ

Equation (D.1) highlights the two dynamic factors which influence a voter’s beliefs about expected
income. The first element, expected income given λ is the true state of the world, is deterministic as
under perfect information. The second element, a voter’s ideological beliefs, evolve as information
is collected in the form of the idiosyncratic income history Hit .
   Since each possible value of λ corresponds to an economy wide income dynamic, a voter’s
beliefs also impact expectations about mean income next period. Given that fλ is the true income
                                                    R (t+1)
dynamic, mean income in period t + 1 is µt+1 |λ ≡ fλ        (y)dF(y). Thus, a voter with an income
history Hit and prior πi0 believes mean income in period t + 1 is
                                                 Z 1
                       E[µt+1 |Hit , πi0 ] =       [µt+1 |λ ] · πit (λ |Hit )dλ
                                                  0
                                                Z 1 Z
                                                                           
                                                         (t+1)
(D.2)                                         =        fλ       (y)dF(y) πit (λ |Hit )dλ .
                                                  0

After accounting for any dead weight loss D, a voter will prefer redistribution if and only if
E[(1 −D)µt+1 |Hit , πi0 ] ≥ E[yit+1 |Hit , πi0 ]. From Equations (D.1) and (D.2) this means voters prefer
redistribution when
                 Z 1            Z                                    
                                     (t+1)                (t+1)
(D.3)                   (1 − D) fλ          (y)dF(y) − fλ       (yi0 ) ·πit (λ |Hit )dλ ≥ 0.
                  0
                     |                         {z                     }
                                   Expected Transfer|λ
Equation (D.3) shows that a voter prefers redistribution when, given their history Hit , they believe
the expected transfer from redistribution will be positive. Note that two voters with the same initial
incomes need not have the same redistributive preferences: whether Equation (D.3) holds depends
on each voter’s income history through their beliefs πit (λ |Hit ). This implies the popularity of
redistributive policies varies in a nontrivial way across initial incomes. Preferred policies for each




                                                           32
voter over redistribution in period t + 1, conditional on their history Hit , are summarized as
                                      Z h                                i
                                                             (t+1)
            Prefer Redistribution:        (1 − D)µt+1 |λ − fλ      (yi0 ) πit (λ |Hit )dλ ≥ 0,
                                      Z h                                i
                                                             (t+1)
             Prefer Laissez Faire:        (1 − D)µt+1 |λ − fλ      (yi0 ) πit (λ |Hit )dλ ≤ 0.

A clear connection from ideological beliefs to demand for redistribution is given by:

Assumption. Increases in λ imply expected income improves relative to transfers
    (t)
(d fλ (yi0 )/dλ ≥ d (1 − D) µt |λ /dλ ) for all swing voters defined as yi0 where
                  h                                                    i
                    (−t)                         (−t)
             yi0 ∈ fR ((1 − D) µt |λ = 1) , fL ((1 − D) µt |λ = 0) (Swing Voters)

  This Assumption says that as λ increases (moves to the Right), each voter believes his expected
          (t)
income fλ (yi0 ) increases relatively more than expected transfers (1 − D) µt |λ . Furthermore, we
only require this to hold for voters who might potentially change their vote: the votes of both
             (t)                                                    (t)
destitute ( fλ (yi0 ) < (1 − D) µt |λ for all λ ) and well-to-do ( fλ (yi0 ) > (1 − D) µt |λ for all λ ) are
                                                                                      (t)
unaffected by belief. Crucially, the expected transfer (1 − D) µt |λ − fλ (yi0 ) is decreasing in λ . It
follows that voter j tends to prefer less redistribution than voter i when voter j’s beliefs π jt are “to
the Right” of a voter i’s beliefs πit . To make this precise, assume that π j stochastically dominates
                                                                                              (t)
πi and i and j have the same initial incomes. Since for each fixed λ , (1 − D) µt |λ − fλ (yi0 ) =
                    (t)
(1 − D) µt |λ − fλ (y j0 ) and this equation is decreasing in λ , the dominance of π j over πi implies
             Z h                           i              Z h                          i
                                   (t)                                         (t)
(D.4)            (1 − D) µt |λ − fλ (y j0 ) π jt (λ )dλ ≤     (1 − D) µt |λ − fλ (yi0 ) πit (λ )dλ
               |             {z            }                |             {z           }
                   Expected Transfer|λ                          Expected Transfer|λ
(D.4) shows that the “Right” voter j believes they will receive a lower net transfer from redistribu-
tion than the “Left” voter i. Therefore voter j tends to prefers less redistribution than voter i. This
result is summarized as Proposition 6.

Proposition 6. Suppose the Assumption above holds. If voters i and j are identical except voter
j’s beliefs π jt stochastically dominate voter i’s beliefs πit , then j prefers less redistribution than i.

   Proposition 6 shows that the further to the ideological Right a voter is, the less redistribution they
prefer. In this framework, one would expect that the speed of learning would be related to both
the variability of income signals and the gap between left and right predictions for an individual’s
future income position.33 These expectations imply a rich set of testable implications about the
evolution of political preferences and voting.

33Voters may of course learn about additional aspects of the economy besides income mobility, which could influence
political preferences. In particular, we have not modeled the effect of learning the level of dead weight loss present in
any prospective redistributive policy, although Proposition 5 suggests the impact this added dimension would have.
                                                           33
                                         A PPENDIX E. P ROOFS

Lemma. Suppose f and g are income transition functions. Then the myopic demand for redistri-
bution implied by the income transition f + g is between that implied by f and g.

Proof. Formally, we wish to show that

                           ( f + g)−1 (E [ f + g]) ∈ f −1 (E [ f ]) , g−1 (E [g]) .
                                                                                
(E.1)

Since f and g are strictly increasing, composing each side with f + g shows (E.1) holds iff

                  E [ f ] + E [g] ∈ E [ f ] + g ◦ f −1 (E [ f ]) , E [g] + f ◦ g−1 (E [g]) .
                                                                                         
(E.2)

Subtracting E [ f ] + E [g] from both sides of Equation (E.2) shows the equation holds iff

                           0 ∈ g ◦ f −1 (E [ f ]) − E [g] , f ◦ g−1 (E [g]) − E [ f ] .
                                                                                    
(E.3)

This always holds, since considering the two terms on the RHS of (E.2) have different signs, since

                sign g ◦ f −1 (E [ f ]) − E [g] = sign f −1 (E [ f ]) − g−1 (E [g]) ,
                                                     

                sign f ◦ g−1 (E [g]) − E [ f ] = sign g−1 (E [g]) − f −1 (E [ f ]) .
                                                     

                                                                                                         

Proposition 7. Let { fλ (y)} be a family of income transitions. Assume each fλ (y) is strictly
increasing and twice continuously differentiable. Then demand for redistribution decreases in λ
for all income distributions if and only if ∂∂y ln ∂∂y fλ (y) decreases in λ .

Proof. We want to show that for all ∆ > 0
                                 Z                Z          
                              −1               −1
(E.4)                        fλ       fλ dF ≥ fλ +∆    fλ +∆ dF

for all bounded distributions F, iff ∂∂x ln ∂∂x fλ (x) decreases in λ . Let h be defined by h ≡ fλ +∆ ◦ fλ−1
                                                                                  R           R
and since fλ +∆ is strictly increasing, Equation (E.4) is equivalent to h ( fλ dF) ≥ h ◦ fλ dF. It
therefore follows from standard lines of argument (e.g. Rockafellar (1970)) that Equation (E.4)
holds for all F iff h is concave. Direct inspection shows
                                                 2                                        3
(E.5)           h00 = fλ00+∆ ◦ fλ−1 / fλ0 ◦ fλ−1 − fλ0 +∆ ◦ fλ−1 · fλ00 ◦ fλ−1 / fλ0 ◦ fλ−1 ·

Therefore h00 exists and is continuous by inspection. We conclude h is concave iff h00 ≤ 0. Equation
(E.5) shows h00 ≤ 0 iff fλ00 / fλ0 ≥ fλ00+∆ / fλ0 +∆ , i.e. ∂∂y ln ∂∂y fλ (y) decreases in λ .    




                                                     34
