NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IN THE SHADOW OF A GIANT:
MEDICARE'S INFLUENCE ON PRIVATE PHYSICIAN PAYMENTS
Jeffrey Clemens
Joshua D. Gottlieb
Working Paper 19503
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19503

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
Previously circulated as "Bargaining in the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare's Influence on Private Payment
Systems." We gratefully acknowledge support and data provided by the National Institute on Aging
under grant P01AG031098 to the National Bureau of Economic Research, and the Institute for Humane
Studies. Jean Roth and Mojan Ramanujan generously assisted our navigation of health care claims
data. Clemens further thanks the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. Gottlieb further
thanks the NIA for a training fellowship provided under grant T32-AG000186-23 to the NBER, the
Taubman Center for State and Local Government, and PWIAS. We are grateful to Tímea Laura Molnár
for excellent research assistance. We thank David Auerbach, Laurence Baker, Paul Beaudry, Prashant
Bharadwaj, Kate Bundorf, Amitabh Chandra, Julie Cullen, David Cutler, Liran Einav, Jeff Emerson,
Patrick Francois, Nancy Gallini, Ed Glaeser, Roger Gordon, David Green, R.B. Harris, Dan Kessler,
Thomas Lemieux, Kevin Milligan, Arnie Milstein, Karthik Muralidharan, Joe Newhouse, Sean Nicholson,
Ryan Oprea, Carolin Pflueger, Marit Rehavi, Dan Sacks, Paul Schrimpf, Jonathan Skinner, Amanda
Starc, Francesco Trebbi, Danny Yagan, conference and seminar participants, and especially our discussants
Mike Dickstein, Mike Geruso, Jon Kolstad, and Neale Mahoney for helpful comments and conversations.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jeffrey Clemens and Joshua D. Gottlieb. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare's Influence on Private Physician Payments
Jeffrey Clemens and Joshua D. Gottlieb
NBER Working Paper No. 19503
October 2013, Revised January 2015
JEL No. H44,H51,H57,I11,I13,L98
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate Medicare's influence on private insurers' payments for physicians' services. Using
a large administrative change in payments for surgical versus medical care, we find that private prices
follow Medicare's lead. A $1 change in Medicare's fees moved private prices by $1.16. A second set
of Medicare payment changes, which generated area-specific reimbursement shocks, had a similar
effect on private sector prices. Medicare's influence is strongest in areas with concentrated insurers,
small physician groups, and competitive physician markets. The public sector's influences on system-wide
resource allocation and costs extend well beyond the share of health expenditures it finances directly.

Jeffrey Clemens
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu
Joshua D. Gottlieb
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997 - 1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
Canada
and NBER
joshua.gottlieb@ubc.ca

The United States spends 3.5 percent of GDP, or more than $573 billion annually, on
physician care and similar medical services.1 The workings of the markets and public programs that allocate this care thus have substantial welfare implications (Chandra, Jena and
Skinner 2011). When prices signal relationships between production costs and consumers’
willingness to pay, they steer markets towards efficient outcomes. But most medical services are purchased through insurance, which purposefully severs consumers from the price
mechanism (Gaynor, Haas-Wilson and Vogt 2000, Baicker and Goldman 2011).2
We ask how physicians and private insurers determine the prices that insurers pay on
their beneficiaries’ behalf. Using two sources of administratively induced price variation, we
show that the fee schedules set by Medicare, the federal insurer of the elderly and disabled,
exert a predominant influence over private insurers’ payment rates. We show that changes in
Medicare’s prices move both relative payments across services and average payments across
geographic areas. Further, we find that Medicare’s influence varies significantly across markets. Consistent with intuition, theory, and past work (Dunn and Shapiro 2012, Dafny,
Duggan and Ramanarayanan 2012), more concentration among insurers and less concentration among physicians are associated with lower reimbursement rates in the cross-section.
In the context of our natural experiments, we find that these same two conditions predict
stronger linkages between Medicare and private payments.
Policy makers increasingly recognize the relevance of provider payments to the health
system’s performance (Cutler 2011). Our results highlight Medicare’s centrality as a large,
public player. Specifically, they imply that private payment arrangements amplify Medicare’s
capacity to steer resources across both physician specialties and geographic areas. Resulting

1

This figure comes from the “Physician and Clinical Services” line of the National Health Expenditure
Data for 2012 (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 2013), inflated to 2013 dollars using the
CPI-U. The non-physician part of this category includes freestanding outpatient clinics and some laboratories.
2
Researchers who focus on the contributions of technology to health expenditure growth also acknowledge
the key role of insurance in isolating consumers from the costs of this new technology (Weisbrod 1991,
Chandra and Skinner 2011).

2

resource reallocations can shape the system’s long run evolution through their effects on
incentives for entry and innovation.
Our results also contribute to a longstanding question in the public and academic debates
over hospital pricing. Both researchers and policymakers have considered the extent to which
health care providers engage in cost-shifting (Dranove 1988).3 The cost-shifting hypothesis
suggests a negative relationship between public and private prices for health care services,
especially in the face of government payment cuts.4 This theory draws heavily on the idea of
revenue or income targets, which may be necessary to cover large fixed costs. It is frequently
invoked to mitigate concerns about public sector payment cuts.5 We show that prices for
physician services exhibit the opposite relationship, which we term cost-following. Our evidence thus advises against evaluating physician payment policies under the presumption
that private markets will offset changes in public insurers’ payments. Instead, the private
sector amplifies these changes.
Our empirical analysis draws on details of how Medicare sets physicians’ fees. In the
absence of exogenous shocks to Medicare’s payments, we would be concerned that private
and Medicare prices would naturally covary because of changes in productivity or demand.
We use two overhauls of Medicare’s administrative payment mechanisms to overcome this
concern. First, we exploit a sharp reduction to Medicare’s payments for surgical procedures
relative to other medical services that occurred in 1998. Because the price change varied
substantially in dollar terms across services, our identification comes from payment changes
3

For overviews of the extensive cost-shifting literature (including Cutler 1998, Kessler 2007, Wu 2010,
Robinson 2011), see Frakt (2011, 2013). Foster (1985) and Dranove (1988) highlight that cost-shifting
behavior will tend to be inconsistent with profit maximization, making it more plausible in the hospital
context than among the physician groups we study. Recent work in the hospital setting finds evidence
against cost shifting from price shocks (White 2013, White and Wu 2013).
4
Note that the empirical work in some papers, including Dranove, Garthwaite and Ody (2013), interprets
the concept of cost-shifting differently than we do here. Dranove et al. (2013) find private price reductions
in response to a wealth shock, rather than a public sector pricing shock.
5
Frakt (2011) and Dranove et al. (2013) present numerous examples of this phenomenon, ranging from
ProPAC (1992) through the recent Supreme Court decision in National Federation of Independent Business
v. Sebelius (2012).

3

both between medical and surgical services and within each of those two categories.
To study these changes, we construct a novel link between databases of Medicare and
private sector claims. We use these claims to construct a rich panel of public and private
prices that vary across years, states, and 2,194 individual medical services.6 Using these
data, we estimate that a $1 decrease in Medicare’s payment for a surgical service led on
average to a $1.16 decline in private payments for that service. Private prices moved in sync
with Medicare’s relative payments; the response emerged in full during the year following
the implementation of Medicare’s administrative change. The private prices show no pretrends prior to the Medicare payment changes, supporting the view that these shocks were
exogenous for our purposes.
We next study a set of across-the-board payment changes that varied across geographic
areas. We again find a positive relationship between Medicare’s reimbursements and private
prices. Over the medium to long run, we estimate that a $1 decrease in Medicare’s fees led
to a $1 decrease in private payments. Private sector responses to these broad-based rate
changes appear to unfold over several years.
We present a stylized model of physician price-setting to elucidate these results. In
our model, the doctor can choose at the margin between treating Medicare patients at a
fixed, exogenous reimbursement rate, or treating those with private insurance, who exhibit
downward-sloping demand. The physician’s optimal pricing is a markup over her outside
option, which is determined by Medicare’s payment rate. The markup depends in turn on
how elastic demand is for that doctor. The model thus predicts that variation in the demand
elasticity, such as that associated with provider or insurer competition, should influence how
Medicare’s rates affect private prices.
Motivated by this model, we next analyze heterogeneity in Medicare’s effect on private
6

The services we consider are defined quite precisely. A 20-minute office visit is distinct from a 30-minute
office visit, and coronary artery bypass grafts (CABG) are counted differently depending on the number of
grafts and whether arterial grafts are used in addition to venous grafts.

4

prices across geographic and specialty markets. Medicare’s influence is particularly strong in
areas with relatively concentrated insurance markets and with relatively competitive provider
groups, both of which are likely to imply more elastic demand for the physician. These
relationships must be interpreted with the usual caution afforded to analyses of treatment
effect heterogeneity, as our variation in market characteristics is not quasi-experimental.
Nonetheless, these relationships are robust to flexible controls for the relationship between
the Medicare price change and various regional economic and demographic characteristics.
The heterogeneity in private responses to Medicare is consistent with a variable mark-ups
version of our physician pricing model.
To better understand the magnitude of Medicare’s effects on private prices, and to explore
our findings at a more practical level, we turn to the institutional details of physician-insurer
contracting. Industry participants report that insurers make simple, take-it-or-leave-it offers
to small provider groups.7 These offers involve fixed fee schedules based in large part on
Medicare’s payment menu, perhaps with a constant markup. Linking physician payments to
Medicare’s relative values involves a tradeoff. On the one hand, such contracts incorporate
any inefficiencies embedded within Medicare’s menu. On the other hand, capitalizing on
Medicare’s familiar pricing schedule reduces the complexity of contract negotiation and bill
processing, which are substantial in this setting (Cutler and Ly 2011). When insurers interact
with small physician groups, the latter consideration is relatively likely to outweigh the
former. Empirically, we find that high prevalence of small physician groups predicts relatively
strong transmission of Medicare’s relative prices.
Our results show that Medicare strongly influences both aggregate health expenditures
and the relative valuations placed on physicians’ services. Effects on average prices imply

7

In Appendix A we present industry participants’ own descriptions of these negotiations. Anecdotally,
Medicare’s relative values are prevalent in private insurers’ default physician payment menus (see Appendix
A). This is not limited to traditional insurance arrangements and includes some health maintenance organizations (see, e.g., Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas 2010)

5

that Medicare has substantial effects on health sector inflation and thus, to a non-trivial
degree, overall price inflation (Clemens, Gottlieb and Shapiro 2014). Furthermore, the payment spillovers we estimate have additional implications for the health system’s long-run
performance and the political economy of payment reform.
The connection between private payments and Medicare’s relative valuations is particularly relevant to health system performance. A hefty literature has demonstrated how medical care prices influence future entry (Dezee et al. 2011), investment decisions (Acemoglu
and Finkelstein 2008, Clemens and Gottlieb 2014), and innovation.8 It is beyond this paper’s
scope to determine optimal absolute or relative price levels. Instead, we analyze how private
reimbursements are set in practice.
When insurers rely directly on Medicare’s pricing menu, they amplify both the costs of
Medicare’s inefficiencies and the potential gains from payment reform. Newhouse (2002),
Cutler (2011) and many others note that Medicare’s reimbursements are unlikely to be efficient.9 For example, absent an implausibly large and sudden shift in patient needs or medical
technology, Medicare’s relative payments for surgical and non-surgical services cannot have
been optimal both before and after the change we analyze. More generally, prices purposefully set on an average cost basis can only be optimal by chance.10 Despite these inefficiencies,
our evidence shows that Medicare’s relative values influence a wide swath of private sector
payment contracts. We provide documentary evidence that this includes payments within

8

Acemoglu and Linn (2004), Finkelstein (2004), Blume-Kohout and Sood (2013), Budish, Roin and
Williams (2013), and Clemens (2013) show that innovation responds to potential market sizes, which affect
the return to practice more generally.
Beyond entry, investment and innovation, other aspects of health care supply—such as drug choice
(Jacobson, Earle, Price and Newhouse 2010, Alpert, Duggan and Hellerstein 2013), imaging and relatively
elective procedures (Clemens and Gottlieb 2014)—also respond to payment rules. Glied and Graff Zivin
(2002) show that changes in physician’s financial incentives when treating one set of patients affect the
doctors’ behavior throughout their practice.
9
We think of optimal pricing as setting the reimbursement rate equal to the health benefit of a marginal
treatment, as valued by society.
10
The appropriate average cost is hard even to define conceptually in the presence of fixed costs, since it
depends on the quantity of care, which itself responds to payment rates.

6

health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and other network-based plans.
The co-movement of public and private prices unambiguously worsens the returns to
specialties experiencing Medicare payment cuts. Between its direct effects ($2.6 billion)
and private sector spillovers ($7.6 billion), we estimate that the surgical-medical pricing
change reallocated $10.2 billion annually across providers and types of services. The specific
context of surgical versus nonsurgical payments remains relevant today. Similar debates
over the value of preventive care relative to curative therapy, and of interventional relative
to non-intensive treatments, are lively in both academic and policy spheres.11
Our analysis of changes to Medicare’s geographic adjustments also has substantial implications for the incomes of urban and rural practices. Absent private sector spillovers, the
geographic payment overhaul would have redistributed $282 million annually from urban
to rural physicians. Accounting for spillovers brings the total to $1 billion per year. This
is more than three times as large as the formal subsidies spent under federal legislation to
support rural hospitals through the Critical Access Hospital program.
The paper proceeds as follows. In section 1, we present institutional background on
Medicare payments and describe our first empirical strategy. We estimate the effects of
this change in section 2. We then examine our second set of Medicare payment shocks,
which affected Medicare’s payments across the board to certain geographic areas, in section
3. This section also illustrates our results’ implications for the extent to which Medicare
shapes sector-wide resource allocation. Section 4 presents a stylized model of physician
payments in order to understand the underlying economics, and section 5 shows that private
sector pricing is broadly consistent with the model. Motivated by the model, section 6
demonstrates heterogeneity in Medicare’s effects across markets depending on the degrees
of competition across physician groups and insurers. We consider the institutional details
11

On prevention, see for example Cohen, Neumann and Weinstein (2008), Cohen and Neumann (2009)
and Baicker, Cutler and Song (2010). On intensity of care, see for example Fuchs (2004), Skinner, Staiger
and Fisher (2006), Chandra and Staiger (2007), and Doyle (2011).

7

underlying physician-insurer contracting and explore their implications in section 7. Section
8 concludes.

1

Estimating the Effects of Changes in Medicare’s Reimbursement Rates
To estimate Medicare’s influence on private sector pricing, we exploit two large, admin-

istrative changes in its reimbursement rates. While these payments are set according to
administrative rules, these rules can be changed by Congress or Medicare’s administrators
in Washington (the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS). Such changes
deliver variation in payment rates that may be independent of patient demand and technological change or other supply-side market pressures. Our identification strategies rely on
two changes that significantly altered Medicare’s payments. In this section we describe our
first source of identification, namely a change in Medicare’s payments for surgical services
relative to non-surgical services. In section 3 we explain our second source of identification,
which is an overhaul of Medicare’s system of geographic adjustments. Before discussing the
details of these changes, we briefly describe the institutions that determine prices in public
and private markets for health care services.

1.1

How Are Private Medical Payments Set?

Public and private payments for health care services are set through very different mechanisms. In the physician setting we study, public rates are set through an administrative
apparatus mandated to set payments according to the resource costs of providing care. In
the world of private health insurance, payment rates are set on markets with varying degrees
of competition (Dafny et al. 2012).
U.S. private sector health care prices are largely unregulated.12 Rather than being set
12

Some exceptions apply to this statement. For instance, all hospital payment rates in Maryland are set

8

according to measured resource utilization, as in Medicare, they are agreed upon through
negotiations between insurance carriers and the providers with whom they contract.13 Negotiated prices are often unknown to final consumers and can vary substantially, for ostensibly
similar services, across both providers and insurers (Dunn and Shapiro 2012).
Existing research sheds light on some of health care prices’ determinants. Cutler, McClellan and Newhouse (2000) find significant differences between the prices negotiated by HMOs
and traditional health insurance plans. Price variation also stems from producer heterogeneity, with more attractive hospitals commanding higher prices (Ho 2009, Moriya, Vogt and
Gaynor 2010, Gowrisankaran, Nevo and Town 2013, Lewis and Pflum forthcoming). Robust
insurance-market competition increases payments to physicians and hospitals (Town and
Vistnes 2001, Dafny 2005, Dafny et al. 2012), while competition among provider networks
reduces them (Dunn and Shapiro 2012). Most closely linked to our setting, Showalter (1997)
finds a positive cross-sectional relationship between state Medicaid fees and private insurers’
physician payments.

1.2

A Large Shock to the Relative Prices of Outpatient Services

Since 1992, Medicare has paid physicians and other outpatient providers through a system of centrally administered prices, based on a national fee schedule. This fee schedule,
known as the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS), assigns relative values to more
than 10,000 distinct billing codes according to the resources CMS believes the services to
require. Medicare scales these relative valuations by multipliers called “Conversion Factors”
(CF). Our first natural experiment involves a large, administrative change in the CFs associated with surgical and non-surgical services. Because input costs vary across areas, the fee
by a state government board.
13
When serving self-pay patients (generally meaning the uninsured), prices are simply set by the provider
as in traditional markets for goods and services, and consumers can choose which firm receives their business. In these transaction, however, the threat of personal bankruptcy filings leads to substantial price
renegotiations after treatment has taken place (Mahoney 2012).

9

schedule further adjusts payments to partially offset such differences. Our second natural
experiment exploits an administrative change in this system of geographic adjustments.
For service j, supplied by a provider in payment area i, the provider’s fee is approximately:

Reimbursementi,j,t = Conversion Factor (CF)t,c(j) × Relative Value Units (RVU)j,t
× Geographic Adjustment Factor (GAF)i,t .

(1)

The Conversion Factor is a national adjustment factor, updated annually and generally identical across broad categories of services, c(j). In the early 1990s, wrangling over payments
across specialties led to the institution of separate CFs for surgical procedures and other services. Surgeons argued that slower growth in the use of procedures relative to other medical
services should be rewarded. Congress implemented this plan, and CMS first distinguished
between the CFs for surgery, primary care, and other services in 1993.14
From 1993 to 1995, payments for surgical procedures grew relative to payments for other
services. 1995 to 1997 marked a period of relative stability, with an average bonus of 15.5
percent for surgical RVUs relative to primary care and other non-surgical RVUs. Because the
Conversion Factors are set nationally, the surgeons’ relative price bonus was constant across
geographic regions. These unequal payments for equal RVUs spawned political discontent
among non-surgeons. In 1998, this 15.5 percent bonus was eliminated through a budgetarily neutral merger of the CFs.15 This administrative change generated large and sudden
changes to Medicare payments. We take advantage of these changes to identify spillovers
from Medicare reimbursement rates to private insurance payments.
Figure 1 shows how the surgical and non-surgical Conversion Factors evolved over this
time period. As the graph shows, the two CFs evolved in parallel from 1995 through 1997.
In 1998, they were merged together. The CF merger thus resulted in large changes to
14
15

We owe our knowledge of this political history to Newhouse (2002).
62 Federal Register 59048, 59102 (1997).

10

relative payments for broad categories of services that were not associated with changes in
beneficiary demographics or other determinants of demand. Within these broad categories,
it also generated variation in the dollar value of payment shocks across services.
To take two illustrative examples, consider Medicare’s payments for a coronary artery
bypass grafts (CABG) and a cardiac stress tests with nuclear imaging (SPECT). In 1997,
Medicare’s fee for CABG averaged $1,428.16 In 1998, the average fee fell to $1,283, or by
just over 10 percent. In 1997, SPECT generated an average Medicare fee of $475. Because
SPECT is a test rather than a surgical procedure, its fee rose to $513 (an increase of 8
percent).17

1.3

Estimation Strategy

This section summarizes our strategy for estimating the effects of Medicare’s administrative price changes on private sector reimbursement rates. We harness a rich linkage
between databases of Medicare and private sector claims, which allows us to construct a
novel panel of public and private price data that vary across years, areas, and individual
service codes. The data set is uniquely suited for assessing how Medicare’s menu influences
average market-by-service payments from private insurers.18
We use the aforementioned CF shock to construct an instrument for Medicare’s payments.
As detailed below, our baseline approach expresses these shocks in level terms, giving our
estimates an interpretation similar to a pass-through coefficient. The levels specification is
suggested by practitioner characterizations of physicians’ contracts (e.g. Gesme and Wiseman
2010, Mertz 2004), which regularly emphasize a linear benchmarking relative to Medicare’s
rates, for instance according to
16

This example refers specifically to CPT code 33533.
Specifically, CPT code 78465.
18
The private sector claims do not longitudinally follow the payments associated with identifiable
physician-insurer pairs. Our analysis harnesses some of the least aggregated moments of these data that can
be assembled into a panel.
17

11

P Private = b · P Medicare + other factors.

If this characterization of physician contracts is correct, the parameter of interest, b, must
be estimated using the levels of Medicare payments as opposed to logs.19 Nevertheless we
also present a log-log analogue of the framework outlined below. Results from the level and
log specifications are very similar.
Stage 0: Compute the Instrument: Predicted Price Change
Using Medicare payment data from 1995 to 1997, we compute each service’s average
price, P Medicare j,pre , prior to the policy change. We then construct a variable that captures
the price change implied by the 1998 CF merger.




 −0.104 · Surgicalj

PredChgMedicare
= P Medicare j,pre · 

j
+ 0.05 · Non-Surgicalj

(2)

where the factors −0.104 and 0.05 are the average changes in the nominal Conversion Factors
for surgical and non-surgical services, respectively.
Stage 1: First Stage
, as an instrument for the actual
We then use this predicted price change, PredChgMedicare
j
Medicare reimbursement rate. Specifically, we run the following first stage regression:
Medicare
= π · PredChgMedicare
· Post1998t + Xj,s,t ψ + µj
Pj,s,t
j

+ µj,s

19

j

·

s

+ µt,s

t

·

s

j

+ µs

+ ej,s,t

We are grateful to Michael Dickstein and Neale Mahoney for making this point.

12

s

+ µt

t

(3)

at the service (j), by state (s), by year (t) level.20 We weight observations by the number of
times the service was performed in 1997.21 Because there could be persistent idiosyncratic
changes in the market for a service, and the payment changes vary at that same level, we
cluster standard errors by service codes.22
Equation (3) represents a linear formulation of Medicare prices with respect to the predicted policy-driven shock. We expect to estimate a coefficient of π̂ = 1 in the absence of
measurement error and correlated reimbursement changes. We control for service, state, and
year fixed effects as well as full sets of service-by-state (

j

·

s)

and state-by-year (

s

·

t)

effects.
The most important elements of the vector of additional controls (Xj,s,t ) are indicators
that capture major payment changes for relevant services. Specifically, our first stage most
cleanly tracks the policy change of interest when we control separately for major mid-1990s
payment changes associated with cataract surgery.23 We further include controls, defined in
section 1.4, for the types of insurance plans associated with the services in our data.
Stage 2: Second Stage
Medicare
\
The Medicare price predicted in equation (3), Pj,s,t
, then serves as an instrument for

actual Medicare prices in the following second stage equation:
20

Medicare
While we construct Pj,s,t
at the service-by-year level, we use service-by-state-by-year observations
to maintain consistency through subsequent analysis of heterogeneity in Medicare’s effects across services
and states. Appendix D.1 shows that our results remain similar when using national level observations.
21
With the regression estimated in levels, weighting by the 1997 service count accounts appropriately for
the surgical payment shock’s budgetary neutrality. When we run specifications on log prices, we weight each
service by its service count times its assigned number of relative value units.
22
Our results are robust to using larger clusters, such as 1-, 2-, or 3-digit Betos codes, and to clustering
at the state level. See footnote 54 below.
23
Cataract surgery has long been viewed as a procedure provided in excess and, in an effort to reduce
its usage, was subjected to significant payment reductions in the years leading up to the 1998 price shock
on which we focus. With cataract surgery accounting for a non-trivial fraction of Medicare’s payments for
surgical services, we find that “dummying out” these earlier payment reductions allows us to cleanly track
the natural experiment of interest. Alternative specifications, including those that either do nothing to
account for the cataract-surgery reductions or that drop cataract surgery from the sample, generate similar
estimates of the effect of Medicare payment changes on private sector prices. In the first stage, however,
these alternative specifications have inferior ability to track the 15 percent reduction in the surgical CF.

13

Private
Medicare
\
Pj,s,t
= β · Pj,s,t
+ Xj,s,t φ + νj

+ νj,s

j

·

s

+ νt,s

t

·

s

j

+ νs

s

+ νt

t

+ εj,s,t

(4)

Our use of the predicted Medicare prices as an instrument is valid under the following assumptions. First, the predicted change PredChgj,s,t must be reflected in the actual Medicare
prices in the first stage equation (3). Second, the shock used to generate these predicted
prices must be conditionally independent of other sources of change in private sector payment rates, as captured by the error term εj,s,t . These include technology shocks, demand
shocks, and other changes in market conditions. We use the large, one-time nature of the
payment shocks to investigate the potential relevance of threats to identification as carefully
as possible. Most importantly, we check for the presence of pre-existing trends in both Medicare and private payments by graphically presenting parametric event study estimates from
the following two equations:
Medicare
=
Pj,t

X

γt ·

t

· PredChgMedicare
+ Xj,s,t ψ + µj
j

s

+ µt,s

t

· PredChgMedicare
+ Xj,s,t α + υj
j

s

+ υt,s

j

+ µs

s

+ µt

t

t6=1997

Private
Pj,s,t

+ µj,s j ·
X
=
δt ·

t

·

s

+ uj,s,t

(5)
j

+ υs

s

+ υt

t

t6=1997

+ υj,s

j

·

t

·

s

+ vj,s,t .

(6)

If pre-existing trends in either public or private payments are correlated with PredChgMedicare
,
j
they will be apparent in the estimates of δt and γt for years prior to 1997. Estimates for 1998
and beyond will trace out the dynamic effects of Medicare’s payment shocks. For Medicare
itself, the post-1997 coefficients in equation (5) should hew closely to 1.

14

1.4

Health Care Price Data

We study the public sector’s influence on private sector health care prices by linking
health insurance claims data across the two environments. In both settings, providers request
reimbursement by submitting claims to the relevant third-party payer. For Medicare claims,
we use a 5 percent random sample of the Medicare Part B beneficiary population for each
year from 1995 through 2002. Part B, formally known as Supplementary Medical Insurance,
is the part of Medicare that covers physician services and outpatient care. The data contain
service-by-service reports of the relevant care purchased by Medicare for these beneficiaries.
For pricing purposes, they include the Health Care Procedure Coding System (HCPCS)
code for each service along with Medicare’s payment (the “allowed charge”). We construct a
measure of Medicare’s payment rates by aggregating claims to compute the average allowed
charge for a service at the code-by-year level.
We measure private sector prices similarly, using private insurance claims data from the
ThompsonReuters MarketScan database (also known as “MedStat”). Private insurers use
procedure codes that overlap substantially with the HCPCS system. MarketScan obtains
these codes, along with service-level payment rates and additional information, from large
self-insured employers’ claims records. The data are thus sufficient to allow us to estimate
how the service-specific payments negotiated between insurers and providers vary across
space and over time. We aggregate these claims and compute the average allowed charge at
the code-by-state-by-year level.
Our baseline estimation sample includes 2,194 individual HCPCS codes that satisfy two
criteria. First, they must be linked across the Medicare and MarketScan databases. Second,
we require that our panel be balanced in the following sense: a state-by-service pair is
only included in the sample if it appears in each year from 1995 through 2002. Appendix C
provides further detail on these primary data sources and the comprehensiveness of our merge
procedure. Summary statistics describing Medicare and private sector prices across services
15

and states are shown in Table 1, separately for surgical and non-surgical services. In this
sample, the average surgery price is $239 in Medicare and $374, or nearly 60 percent higher,
in the private market. The average non-surgical service is reimbursed $114 in Medicare and
$125 in the private sector. Both the public and private price data represent in excess of 100
million underlying services.
We observe private sector prices from a range of insurance plan types. In 1996, 38
percent of Medstat service claims came from Major Medical or Comprehensive Insurance
(CI) plans, 52 percent from less generous Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) plans, and
10 percent from even more restrictive Point of Service (POS) plans. By 2006, 8 percent of
Medstat service claims came from CI plans, 59 percent from PPO plans, 12 percent from POS
plans and roughly 27 percent from other less generous plans including Health Maintenance
Organizations (HMO) and Consumer-Driven Health Plans (CDHP). The data thus reflect
a national trend away from comprehensive coverage towards forms of coverage designed to
control costs.
To ensure that our results are not affected by changes in the composition of plans included
in our data, we construct a variable to measure the types of plans covered. While changes
in this composition are largely captured by the state-by-year fixed effects that we include
throughout the analysis, one might still be concerned that different types of plans tend to
procure different services for their beneficiaries. To control for this, we construct a variable
called “Plan Type Payment Generosity” by first regressing payments on plan type indicators.
Using the resulting coefficients and changes in the plan type composition, we generate predicted payments that we aggregate to the state-by-year-by-service level. We also construct
a control for plan generosity based on patient cost sharing. This variable, “Service Specific
Cost Sharing,” is constructed at the state-by-year-by-service level by dividing out-of-pocket
payments by the total payments made to providers for the service. Because changes in plan
types unfolded relatively smoothly over time, we would expect any associated concerns to
16

reveal themselves in the event study estimates of equation (6).
Despite the changes in coverage types that we observe, data from the Community Tracking Study reveal that these changes in plan design had little impact on insurers’ methods
for paying physician groups. Between 1995 and 2004, the fraction of physicians’ revenues
associated with capitated, as opposed to fee-for-service, payments declined from 16 percent
to 13 percent (CSHSC 1999, 56; 2006, 4-29). This reflects the fact that many managed
care arrangements ultimately pay physicians through relatively traditional fee for service
arrangements. While our estimates will be internally valid to plans for which payments
are uniformly fee-for-service, Medicare’s influence extends to alternative arrangements. For
example, many insurers’ provider newsletters make explicit their use of Medicare’s relative
values within HMO plans (e.g. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas 2010, Anthem Blue
Cross and Blue Shield 2012a). These are non-trivial applications, as the HMO Blue Texas
plan advertised having 38,000 physicians in its provider network as of 2009 (Blue Cross and
Blue Shield of Texas 2014).24

2

Empirical Effect of Medicare Prices on Private Prices
Panel A of Figure 2 illustrates the raw correlation between public and private prices.

Public and private payments are tightly related in the cross-section, with Medicare paying roughly 40 percent less than private insurers for identical services. Despite substantial
variation in private payments both across and within geographic markets, average Medicare
payments predict 89 percent of the variation across services in the average private payment.
Changes in public and private prices over time are also tightly related, as illustrated in Panel
24

While the details of physician payment within HMOs have not been systematically studied, additional
sources confirm that their payments regularly take on fee for service structures (Marton, Yelowitz and
Talbert 2014). Because the Medstat data do not report reliable per-service payments for HMO-style plans,
however, we are unable to incorporate such plans into our primary analysis. Notably, however, our analysis
does incorporate alternative “managed care” arrangements including preferred provider organizations (PPOs)
and point-of-service (POS) plans when payments are made and recorded on a fee-for-service basis.

17

B. Appendix Figure D.1 shows analogous graphs using cross-state variation.
Figure 3 plots event study estimates of the effect of Medicare payment changes using
equations (5) and (6). First stage results, marked on the graph with “×” symbols, show
that the predicted service-level price changes translate almost one-for-one into observed
Medicare payment rates. There also appears to be a slight upward drift associated with
gradual increases in Medicare’s payments for primary care relative to other services. While
this drift makes it important to look closely to the dynamics of private responses, and to
check robustness after controlling for a surgery-specific trend, these results give us confidence
in our specification of the shock.
The figure also plots reduced form estimates of the shocks’ impact on private sector
prices. Changes in private prices were uncorrelated with the payment shocks during the
years preceding the shock, providing evidence against potentially confounding pre-existing
trends driven by changes in technology, demand, or other market conditions. From this
point forward, a $1.00 increase in Medicare’s predicted payment led, on average, to a $1.30
increase in private payments. The private sector response emerges in full during the year of
Medicare’s payment change. Changes in technology, demand, and other market conditions,
which tend to evolve more gradually, appear quite unlikely to explain the observed change
in private prices.
In Table 2, we summarize these results in single coefficients using the framework described
by equations (2) through (4). Column 1 reports the first-stage estimates of equation (3).
We find π̂ to be 1.1, which is quite close to 1. The cluster-robust F statistic for testing the
null hypothesis that our instrument is weak is 288, which easily satisfies the robust weak
instruments pre-test threshold of Olea and Pflueger (2013).25
Medicare
Private
Column 2 shows the reduced form results we obtain when we replace Pj,s,t
with Pj,s,t
25

Their Table 1 reports a critical value of 23.11 for the effective F statistic (which, with one instrument,
is equal to the cluster-robust F statistic) to reject the null hypothesis of a two-stage least squares bias above
10% of the OLS bias with one instrument in the presence of heteroskedasticity.

18

as the outcome variable in (3). The coefficient of 1.29 suggests that a one dollar predicted
change in Medicare prices translates into a $1.29 change in private sector prices. Column
3 reports the IV estimate of equation (4), which rescales the private sector change by the
actual Medicare response (from column 1). The result is our baseline estimate, which implies
that a one dollar change in Medicare payments led to a $1.16 change in private payments.
Columns 4 through 6 run comparable specifications in which public and private prices are
expressed in logs.26 The instrument in these specifications is a binary indicator for surgical
services performed during or after 1998. Column 4 shows that Medicare’s elimination of
the surgery-specific conversion factor is associated with a decline of 0.22 in the log relative
payments for surgeries, which is moderately larger than that called for by the payment
reform. The reduced form estimate of the policy change’s impact on private prices is −0.11.
Column 6 reports the IV estimate, showing that, on average, a 10 percent change in a
Medicare payment resulted in a 4.8 percent change in the relevant private payment. This is
reconciled with the $1.16 from column 3 by the fact that average private payments, and in
particular payments for surgical services, are higher than the average Medicare payment.27
Appendix Table D.1 provides evidence of the robustness of our finding that Medicare
prices pass through into the private sector. Column 1 repeats the baseline IV estimate from
column 3 of Table 2. Columns 2 and 3 show that the results are not sensitive to dropping
our controls for the generosity of the insurance plans represented in the sample.28 Column
26

Appendix D.3 examines the effect of Medicare price changes on private sector price dispersion.
Table 1 shows that Medicare pays $239 on average for surgical services and $114 for non-surgical. Its
surgical payments fell by 10 percent, or $24, while medical reimbursement rates increased by 5%, or $6. So
the difference fell by $24 − $6 = $18. As private non-surgical reimbursements average $125, and surgical fees
average $374, identical percentage changes to the private sector would have required a $41 decline in surgical
fees and a $9 increase in medical payments, or a $30 (= $39 − $9) relative change. But the private sector
cost-following coefficient of 1.16 that we have estimated means that Medicare’s

 $18 relative change only led
to a $21 (= 1.16 × $18) relative change in the private sector. Since ln 1 + $21
$30 ≈ 0.5, this is the coefficient
we estimate in logs in column 6.
28
These controls are more strongly predictive of private payments in specifications that do not include
full sets of state-by-year effects, but even then have little impact on our baseline estimate. State-by-year
effects account for most of the variation in plan design contained in the MedStat data.
27

19

4 shows that our baseline estimate is modestly sensitive to the inclusion of controls for
mid-1990s payment changes targeted at cataract surgery; omitting these controls reduces
the magnitude of the cost-following coefficient from 1.2 to 1.0. Column 5 removes the
service weights, which reduces the estimate to around 0.7.29 Column 6 includes a control
for the number of Relative Value Units (the quantity metric that appears in equation [1],
Medicare’s payment formula) assigned to each service. Minor updates to RVU assignments
strongly predict Medicare’s allowable charges, which they impact formulaically (coefficient
not shown). Controlling for these updates has little impact on our baseline result. Finally,
column 7 shows that the baseline is robust to controlling directly for a linear trend in private
payments for surgical procedures relative to other services. As shown in Figure 3, there is
no such trend in private payments.30

3

Across-The-Board Payment Shocks
In this section, we analyze payment changes that altered reimbursements across the board

in an area. The last term of equation (1), which presents Medicare’s payment formula, describes adjustments in payments across areas. While the Conversion Factor is set nationally,
the Geographic Adjustment Factor (GAF) varies across payment regions. It is intended
to capture differences in input costs, which are estimated using Census and other data on
area-level rents, wages, and malpractice insurance premiums.
We analyze the effects of GAF changes driven by an administrative re-shuffling of the
areas across which these adjustment are made. Through 1996, payments were differentiated
29

Accounting for the reductions to payments for cataract surgery improves our ability to correctly track
the reduction in payments for surgical procedures relative to other services. Cataract surgery exerts a
significant impact on our regressions because it is a very high volume service. Changes in service-specific
Part B payments are, in general, implemented in a budgetarily neutral fashion. Appropriately estimating
the first stage thus requires weighting each service by its baseline frequency. The unweighted first stage
underlying the specification reported in column 5 does a poor job of tracking the Medicare payment change.
30
When we run comparable analyses on national-level data, the results are very similar. Service-by-year
analogues of Tables 2 and D.1 are shown in Appendix Tables D.2 and D.3.

20

across 210 payment areas, as shown in the top panel of Appendix Figure D.2. In 1997,
the federal government consolidated these 210 payment areas into the 89 regions shown in
the figure’s middle panel. In states where consolidations occurred, the merger of urban and
rural areas resulted in budgetarily neutral declines in urban payments and increases in rural
payments. We analyzed these payment shocks previously in Clemens and Gottlieb (2014),
which provides additional institutional background.
These geography-based changes differ somewhat from the relative price changes we examined in the previous section. If physician specialties provided exclusively either surgical or
non-surgical services, these payment changes would be nearly equivalent conceptually. The
relative price changes would have implied across-the-board declines in payments for surgical specialties and increases in payments for non-surgical specialties. But in practice, most
specialties provide significant quantities of both surgical and non-surgical services. General
practitioners, for example, experienced an average payment increase of 2.4 percent. If they
provided no surgical services, the increase would have been 5 percent.31 General surgeons saw
their average payment decline by 3.9 percent, while cardiac surgeons experienced a decline
of 7.6 percent. An exclusive provider of surgical services would have experienced a 10.4 percent decline. The price changes analyzed in the previous section thus confronted physicians
with changes in both their average and relative payments. In contrast, the geography-based
shocks that we now analyze affect the average payment level while leaving relative prices for
different services nearly unchanged.32
As in the previous section, our parameter of interest is a scalar mark-up of private
relative to Medicare payments. We express the Medicare payment changes in dollar terms by
31

Within the Medicare data, roughly 16 percent of the services provided by general practitioners were
surgical procedures, which experienced an average payment decrease of 10.4 percent, while roughly 84 percent
were non-surgical services, which received an average payment increase of 5 percent.
32
Equation (1) is a slight simplification of Medicare’s full payment formula, and the full version shows that
the administrative change would induce slightly different proportional price changes for different services in
the same area. Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) provide further details. But these differences across services
are small relative to the differences these payment shocks generated across geographic areas.

21

multiplying the changes in the geographic indices by the average pre-consolidation payment
associated with each service in the sample. We denote the resulting area-specific shocks by
Payment Shocka,j and estimate the following equations:
Medicare
=
Pj,a,t

X

βt · Payment Shocka,j ·

t

+ γj

j

+ γa

a

+ γt

t

t6=1996

Private
Pj,a,t

+ γj,a j · a + γs(a),t s(a) · t + ζ ′ Xa,s(a),t + εj,a,t
X
=
βt · Payment Shocka,j · t + δj j + δa a + δt

(7)
t

t6=1996

+ δj,a

j

·

a

+ δs(a),t

s(a)

·

t

+ ζ ′ Xa,s(a),t + εj,a,t .

(8)

For this analysis, we construct the data set at the service-by-year-by-payment locality level,
using the 210 payment localities that existed prior to their consolidation. The specifications
include full sets of service, area, and year fixed effects as well as full sets of service-by-area
(

j

·

a)

and state-by-year (

s(a) ·

t)

effects.33 As all payment area consolidations took place

within a state, states are the lowest level of geography at which we can flexibly control for
variation over time. The state-by-year effects capture the effects of any potentially relevant
changes in state policy, for example in Medicaid reimbursements or eligibility rules. Our
robustness analysis explores the relevance of trends correlated with payment area characteristics, such as the extent to which they are rural or urban.
If pre-existing trends in public or private payments are correlated with PredChgMedicare
,
j
they will be apparent in the estimates of βt for years prior to 1997. Estimates for 1997 and
beyond will trace out the dynamic effects of Medicare’s payment shocks. For Medicare itself,
the post-1997 coefficients in equation (5) should hew to 1.

33

The analysis sample is balanced at the service type-by-payment area level, making the γj,a a standard
set of fixed effects at the level of the panel variable.

22

3.1

Effects of Across-the-Board Payment Changes

The results of estimating equations (7) and (8) appear in Figure 4 and Table 3. The figure
shows both the first stage and reduced form estimates. The first stage estimates show that
our coding of the payment shocks effectively tracks the policy change. A one unit increase
in the payment shock is associated with a one dollar increase in Medicare’s allowed charge.
The reduced form estimates plot the private sector response to these public payment
changes. The effect of these across-the-board payment changes appears to unfold over several
years. As with shocks to relative prices across services, an increase in public payments results
in an increase in private payments. Averaging the point estimates across 1997 and subsequent
years, a one dollar increase in public payments is associated with a one dollar increase in
private payments.
Table 3 summarizes this result in a single coefficient by shifting from the event study
framework to a parametric difference-in-differences estimator. The table shows that the
baseline result is robust to several potentially relevant specification changes. These include
replacing the full set of locality-by-service fixed effects with separate sets of service fixed
effects and locality fixed effects, adding interactions between year indicators and proxies for
the extent to which the localities are rural or urban, and replacing the full set of state-byyear effects with separate year and locality effects. While precision falls substantially in the
last of these specifications, the results are similar throughout.

3.2

Implications for the Allocation of Health Expenditures and
Long-Run Entry Incentives

The price changes analyzed in this and the preceding sections have histories linked to
perennial payment policy debates. Vigorous, decades-long debates consider both the value
of surgical versus medical treatment and the allocation of resources between urban and rural
areas. In this section, we conduct an extrapolation exercise similar in spirit to the one that

23

Hurst, Keys, Seru and Vavra (2014) conduct to study the consequences of geographically
heterogeneous mortgage subsidies. Our findings imply that Medicare’s decisions on physician
pricing are far more consequential than previously recognized.
Consider first the Congressional decision to merge the surgical and non-surgical conversion factors. This change affected the payments for $69.2 billion of medical care in 1998 alone
(the first year after the change). By reducing surgical payments by an average of 10.4 percent
and increasing medical payments by an average of 5 percent, Congress mechanically shifted
$2.6 billion in payments from medical treatment to surgical treatment. Our estimates from
section 2 show that the private sector responded by doing more of the same. Extrapolating
our estimates to the relevant private physician payments yields an estimate that the private
sector magnified this reallocation by a factor of 3.9. In total, we estimate that the merger
of surgical and non-surgical Conversion Factors reallocated roughly $10 billion in annual
spending from surgical to medical care. We detail this calculation and discuss caveats about
external validity in Appendix E.
The consequences of Medicare’s across-the-board, geographic payment changes are similarly magnified. The payment reductions experienced by adversely affected urban areas
averaged 1.7 percent of their Medicare Part B reimbursements.34 The change thus mechanically reallocated roughly $282 million between urban and rural areas in 1997 alone. In this
context, our estimates (applying the coefficient of 1.0 from column 2 of Table 3) imply a
private sector spillover 2.5 times Medicare’s direct effect. In total, we estimate that the
consolidation of payment localities reallocated $1 billion between urban and rural physicians
per year.35
One way to benchmark the magnitudes of these reallocations is by comparison with

34

This is the weighted average of the change in the Geographic Adjustment Factor (GAF) for these 333
counties, when weighted by spending in each county.
35
As in the previous paragraph, all amounts are inflation-adjusted to 2013 dollars. Appendix E also
discusses the caveats associated with this calculation.

24

similarly motivated but more directly financed programs. For example, the Critical Access
Hospital (CAH) program is a prominent means through which Medicare subsidizes rural
health care. By obtaining CAH designation, rural hospitals may claim higher payments
than they would otherwise be entitled to receive. Unsurprisingly, rural hospitals lobby
fiercely to maintain their access to these designations.36 In 2010, CAH subsidies amounted to
approximately $300 million (MedPAC 2012). Our findings imply that the CAH’s magnitude
is on par with the locality consolidation’s direct effects and less than half the size of its
private payment spillovers.37
Our findings thus illuminate a previously unexplored channel through which Medicare
steers health-system resources. In the context of payments for surgical and non-surgical
care, this has significant implications for Medicare’s influence on long-run resource allocation. The co-movement of public and private prices means that Medicare’s payment
reforms significantly alter the returns to entering favored and unfavored specialties. A
growing body of research finds that the investments of current practitioners (Acemoglu
and Finkelstein 2008, Clemens and Gottlieb 2014), the entry decisions of medical residents
(Dezee et al. 2011), and the development of new technologies respond significantly to such
incentives.38 The gains from reforming Medicare’s payments to reward high value care may
thus be immense.

36

News (Gold 2011, McKee 2013), government reports (Levinson 2013), and advocacy organizations
(American Hospital Association 2014a, 2014b, 2014c, 2014d) provide ample evidence of the CAH program’s
political importance.
37
Due to the much faster growth of health care spending than overall inflation, the $300 million subsidy
in 2010 probably overstates the contemporaneous value of the CAH program in 1997 that would be the
appropriate comparison to the $1 billion spillover that we compute from that year.
38
Acemoglu and Linn (2004), Finkelstein (2004), Blume-Kohout and Sood (2013), Budish et al. (2013),
and Clemens (2013) show that innovation responds to potential market sizes.

25

4

A Model of Private Payments in Medicare’s Shadow
We have seen that two, somewhat distinctive, sets of Medicare price changes resulted

in significant, same-signed movements in private insurers’ payments. To understand why
this result could arise, we consider a model in which physicians treat both Medicare beneficiaries and the privately insured. In this framework, Medicare’s reimbursements determine
the physician’s opportunity cost of treating private patients. We focus on how Medicare’s
reimbursements influence the prices physicians charge to private insurers.
The model abstracts from the rich institutional detail surrounding Medicare’s fee schedule. Industry participants note that Medicare’s prices serve as benchmarks in many private
sector contracts. Under such contracts, changes in Medicare’s payments could mechanically
influence private prices. The model speaks most directly to actively negotiated prices, but
may also help us to understand the rationale for benchmarking private prices to Medicare
rates. We return to the institutional details of Medicare-linked contracts in section 7.
We consider a physician with a fixed aggregate treatment capacity K. This capacity
constraint could arise if the physician incurs only fixed costs F for providing treatments up to
point K, and extremely high variable costs beyond this point. The doctor must allocate this
capacity between publicly and privately insured patients. The relative intensity of treating
private patients is governed by a parameter α. With m and q denoting the quantities of
treatment delivered to Medicare and private patients, respectively, the physician’s constraint
is m + αq ≤ K.39
Since we focus on health insurers’ payments to physicians, we model demand for services
as coming from these insurers. Their demand curve reflects patient demand plus any distortions that the insurance market induces. Let D(p) denote demand as a function of the
39

While a real-world physician likely has some capacity to expand overall treatment, this may be limited
in the short run because of staffing constraints such as the physician’s limited own time. Even when overall
capacity is adjustable, this model may be a reasonable approximation as long as substituting between the
two types of patients is easier than expanding overall capacity.

26

physician’s price, p. The doctor takes Medicare’s reimbursement rate rM as given, and sets
p to maximize profits.
The physician’s general profit function is Π(m, q) = rM m+pq −F whenever m+αq ≤ K.
Assuming she operates at capacity, we can express this as a function of the private price:

π(p) = pD(p) + rM [K − αD(p)] − F.

(9)

Medicare exogenously sets its reimbursement rate rM , while the physician sets p accounting for private sector demand q = D(p). Because the physician has incurred her fixed
costs and operates at capacity, the potential revenue from Medicare patients acts as the
opportunity cost of treating private patients. With a fixed Medicare reimbursement of rM
and intensity parameter α, the doctor faces a constant marginal opportunity cost of αrM .
ǫD (p∗ )
Her pricing decision thus follows a familiar markup rule of p∗ = D ∗
αrM , where
ǫ (p ) − 1
ǫD (p∗ ) = −D′ (p∗ )p∗ /D(p∗ ) is the elasticity of demand and the physician will price such that
ǫD (p∗ ) > 1.
Our primary interest is in the relationship between physicians’ private sector payments
dp∗
ǫD (p∗ )
α. The sign of this relationship
and Medicare’s reimbursement rate, or
= D ∗
drM
ǫ (p ) − 1
has been a matter of much debate in a literature on Medicare’s influence on hospital prices.
Standard considerations, such as those modeled above, imply a positive relationship, which
we describe as cost-following. The hospital pricing literature finds mixed evidence, often
reporting a negative relationship described as cost-shifting. Cost-shifting has long featured
prominently in the public debate over Medicare payments, to the extent that the New York
Times takes it for granted. In 2006, the paper reported that “Employers and consumers are
paying billions of dollars more a year for medical care to compensate for imbalances in the
nation’s health care system resulting from tight Medicare and Medicaid budgets, according

27

to Blue Cross officials and independent actuaries” (Freudenheim 2006).40
Our framework emphasizes that the private price of our profit-maximizing physician
dp∗
relates positively to her opportunity cost, generating the result that
> 0. Consistent
drM
with the empirical results from prior sections, the framework thus predicts that private
payments will move in the same direction as Medicare’s fees. But the literature on hospital
pricing highlights that the possibility of cost-shifting should not be dismissed. Appendix
B.1 shows how an extension of our model that relaxes the capacity constraint and allows for
general cost functions can capture this phenomenon. Cost-shifting could also arise through
altruism (Cutler 1998, Dranove et al. 2013), income effects (McGuire and Pauly 1991), a
change in efficiency, or changes in fixed costs as a physician’s scale increases (Kessler 2007).
drp∗
for Medicare’s influence on aggregate health expenditures, a topic of
The relevance of
drM
considerable policy interest, is readily apparent. In a cost-shifting world, Medicare’s payment
changes are offset by changes in private expenditures—at least in part. In a world of costfollowing, Medicare exerts significant influence over total spending.41 As we emphasize in
section 3.2, links between public and private prices have further implications for the health
sector’s long run development. Cost-following empowers Medicare to shift the distribution of
resources across physician specialties, potentially influencing margins including new medical
graduates’ specialty choices.
We next consider the relationships between market characteristics, average price levels,
and cost-following. Consistent with standard intuition about imperfect competition, our
model points to a central role for the elasticity of insurers’ derived demand for the physician’s
services. Below we briefly consider cases of constant and non-constant demand elasticities,
which diverge in their implications for the link between cost-following and competition.
40

As Dranove et al. (2013) document, it also shows up in numerous government reports (ProPAC, 1992)
and even Supreme Court decisions (Ginsburg 2012).
41
A growing body of research documents the strain these expenditures cause for federal (Baicker, Shepard
and Skinner 2013), state (Baicker, Clemens and Singhal 2012), corporate (Cutler and Madrian 1998), and
household (Gross and Notowidigdo 2011) budgets.

28

Consider first the case in which the demand curve has a constant elasticity of ǫ, which
implies a constant markup. In this case, the physician’s opportunity cost αrM passes through
into prices proportionally, scaled by this markup. Situations that generate a higher ǫ, such
as more competition among physicians, will induce lower prices and less cost-following.
Now consider a demand function that generates variable markups. Specifically, suppose
that D(p) = (A − p)η where η > 1 scales the demand elasticity.42 This demand function has
a choke point at p = A; insurers have an absolute cap of A on what they will pay for this
physician’s services. We assume that A ≥ αrM , as the physician would otherwise only treat
Medicare patients. With this demand curve, the physician faces a higher elasticity as prices
ηp
. This induces lower markups as prices
approach the choke point; specifically, ǫD (p) =
A−p
increase. The physician thus chooses the price to be a weighted average of the choke price
and the outside option, where the weights depend on the elasticity parameter η:

p∗ =

η
1
A+
αrM .
η+1
η+1

(10)

The more elastic demand is, the closer the pricing will be to the physician’s outside option of
αrM . Since A ≥ αrM , more elastic demand (higher η) reduces prices. But since these lower
prices are increasingly pinned down by the outside option, we observe a higher pass-through
dp∗
ηα
. So this variable-markups
of Medicare’s reimbursement rate as η increases:
=
drM
η+1
case induces more cost-following in the same competitive situations that generate lower
physician markups.43
While the constant and non-constant elasticity demand functions both imply positive comovement of Medicare reimbursements and private prices, they have different predictions for
the relationship between this co-movement and market conditions. In the constant elasticity
42

Appendix B.2 shows a utility function that gives rise to this demand.
Equation (10) looks like the outcome of a bargaining model in which the insurer has a threat point of
A and the physician of αrM . We discuss this interpretation below in footnote 56.
43

29

case, more competition leads to lower prices and less cost-following. In the variable markup
case, more competition leads to lower prices but more cost-following. In section 6 we explore
heterogeneity in the empirical magnitude of the Medicare-private pricing relationship. We
first examine the model’s most basic predictions involving the cross-sectional relationship
between Medicare and private prices.

5

Basic Relationships Between Public and Private Prices
Before we dig into the mechanics of cost-following, it is useful to see whether our model

captures core features of private sector pricing. Section 5.1 compares reimbursement rates
between Medicare and the private sector. Section 5.2 introduces measures of concentration
on both the physician and insurer sides of the private market. Section 5.3 then examines
how these concentration measures relate to pricing. After establishing these core facts, we
will be prepared to measure and understand heterogeneity in cost-following in section 6.

5.1

Private and Public Relative Prices

In addition to its predictions about cost-following, the model in section 4 gives guidance
about other features of how private and public prices relate. First, the model requires that
physicians will never treat privately insured patients unless they pay weakly more than the
outside option of treating Medicare patients, scaled by α. While we are not confident about
a universal relative cost of treating private versus Medicare patients, evidence from Glied
and Graff Zivin (2002) suggests that α ≈ 1.44 When this is true, our model predicts that
private prices will, in general, exceed Medicare’s.
44

One aspect of the relative cost of treating Medicare versus private patients is the physician’s time.
Consistent with an assumption of α ≈ 1, Glied and Graff Zivin (2002) find that doctors spend very similar
lengths of time with these two groups of patients. But this is not dispositive; Medicare patients may still be
cheaper because they can visit during times of lower private demand, or costlier because of more complex
medical situations (In the presence of multiple conditions, providing any particular service for any one of
them is likely to be more involved for the physician.)

30

Table 4 shows how often this prediction is upheld and how often rejected in our data.
Row 1 of Panel A compares average prices by state, year and service between the Medicare
and MarketScan data. Column 1 shows that 79 percent of these cells have private payments
exceeding Medicare’s price per service. Subsequent columns reveal that this fraction rises, to
between 82 and 89 percent, when cells are weighted to account for service volumes (columns
2 and 3) or spending (columns 4 and 5). Rows 2 and 3 show that private payments exceed
public payments more often for surgical than for non-surgical services.45
Panel B, and Figure 5, show the magnitudes of the differences between public and private
prices. Figure 5 shows the distribution of log public-private price differences at the state-yearservice level. For the vast majority of these cells, this difference is strongly positive. Instances
in which public payments exceed private payments are relatively few, and the magnitudes
swamped by the typical private-over-public mark-up. Panel B of Table 4 quantifies this fact.
To further summarize the cross-sectional relationship between public and private sector
prices, Panel C shows results from regressions of private against Medicare prices. The coefficient on Medicare’s payments is consistently near 1.4, reflecting the average mark-ups
apparent in Panel B and Figure 5. Controlling for year or for state-by-year effects has no
effect on this relationship. The simple bivariate regression reported in column 1 has an
R2 of 0.81, revealing the tightness of the relationship between public and private prices.46
These facts comport well with our model and suggest that it captures some of the key facts
about private insurance payments. Thus it might also help us to understand the nature of
cost-following, and the heterogeneity that we explore in the next section.

45

Row 4 accounts for payment variability within each state-year-service cell and finds results very similar
to row 1.
46
Note that in Figure 2 we found an even better fit when estimating this relationship in logs.

31

5.2

Measuring Physician and Insurer Concentration

We proxy for the degree of physician competition by computing a Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI) for each market. These HHIs are intended to proxy for the demand elasticity
ǫD in the model. Physicians in relatively competitive markets face relatively elastic demand
from insurers for their services. In contrast, when insurers are more concentrated, they
should exhibit more elastic demand and have more ability to extract lower payments out of
physician groups.
We compute the physician HHIs as follows. We first identify physician groups in the
Medicare claims data using the tax identifier associated with each claim. These tax IDs
indicate the physician, group, or legal entity that Medicare reimburses for the care. These
IDs generally also identify the units that negotiate with insurers.47 In claims data from a 20
percent sample of all Medicare beneficiaries, we should come close to capturing all Medicareserving physicians in the country. Treating each Hospital Referral Region (HRR) as the
relevant market, we first measure the HHI across physician groups within an HRR.48 We
then average this measure across the HRRs within each state to measure the average degree
of competition across the markets within that state. HRRs are an imperfect approximation
of the relevant market, but Dranove and Ody (2014) show—for hospitals—that HRR-based
HHIs are highly correlated with finer measures of market power. This process gives us our
first proxy for physician competition, which varies at the state level.
We next compute a more targeted measure of concentration that varies across specialties
as well as states. For this metric we construct HRR-level HHIs separately for each of the
47

The billing groups may not agree exactly with the negotiating units because of independent practice
associations (IPAs), which negotiate as a bloc but bill separately. But the tax IDs should nevertheless be
a close approximation. Pope, Trisolini, Kautter and Adamache (2002), Pham, Schrag, O’Malley, Wu and
Bach (2007), Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2011), Welch, Cuellar, Stearns and Bindman (2013),
Baker, Bundorf, Royalty and Levin (2014), and other authors have previously made the same approximation.
PN
48
Physician HHI is k=1 s2k,i , where k indexes each of the N physician groups (identified in the claims
data via their tax identifiers) operating in Hospital Referral Region i, and where sk,i expresses the number
of physicians in group k as a share of all physicians in region i. The measure is constructed such that an
index of 1 corresponds to a monopolist and a market approaches perfect competition as the index goes to 0.

32

32 largest physician specialties. We again average these specialty-specific HHIs across the
HRRs within each state. Table 1 reports summary statistics describing both measures of
provider consolidation. On average, the specialty-specific HHIs exhibit greater concentration
since they consider smaller markets. They also exhibit more variation than the all-physician
HHIs.
We measure insurance competition using data from the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (NAIC)’s health insurance reports.49 Using NAIC data on each insurance
carrier’s size in each state, we are able to compute state-level HHIs for all states but California.50 We compute HHIs based on the following four insurer size measures contained in
the NAIC reports: enrollment in comprehensive group insurance plans in 2001, enrollment
in all plans in 2001, the value of health care provided in 2001, and group comprehensive
enrollment in 2002.51

5.3

Concentration and Private Prices

Figure 6 provides suggestive evidence that our HHI measures do indeed capture economically relevant aspects of competition. The figure shows a smoothed measure of the average
price per service in our sample, averaged across all services, based on the HHI in the area
where the service was provided (along the horizontal axis). The two average price lines in
Figure 6 are split based on the first NAIC-based measure of insurer concentration. Consistent with Dunn and Shapiro (2012), both curves show that average physician payments
are higher in areas with more concentrated physicians. At the same time, more concen49

The earliest comprehensive NAIC reports available are from 2001, and California data are mostly missing
and are therefore excluded. For more details on the ultimate sources and issues that arise when computing
health insurance market shares, see Dafny, Dranove, Limbrock and Scott Morton (2011). We thank Dafny
et al. for useful information on NAIC and other data sources in the paper and via personal communication.
PN
50
Insurer HHI is k=1 s2k,i , where k indexes each of the N insurers operating in payment area i and where
sk,i is insurer k’s market share.
51
Data Source: National Association of Insurance Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not
endorse any analysis or conclusions based upon the use of its data.

33

trated insurance markets tend to pay physicians lower reimbursement rates, at any given
level of physician concentration. We interpret this as evidence that our measure captures
economically meaningful variation in competition among insurance carriers.
The last two regressions of Table 4 summarize these facts. We first standardize the HHI
variables as z scores. Column 4 of Panel C includes the physician HHI alongside the services’
average Medicare payment. Column 5 adds the insurance HHI and interactions between the
HHI measures and the Medicare payment. As in Figure 6, more concentrated insurance markets are associated with lower reimbursements while more concentrated physician markets
are associated with higher reimbursements. Since we have not isolated exogenous variation
in these measures of market structure, we do not ascribe a causal interpretation to these results. But they do demonstrate the model’s general consistency with the data. We therefore
believe that section 4 presents a useful framework for understanding cost-following and the
heterogeneity that we document next.

6

The Mediating Effects of Concentration
In section 4 we showed theoretically how the effect of Medicare’s payment changes could

vary across markets based on the level of competition among physician groups and insurers.
In this section, we examine the extent to which these relationships emerge in our data.
We adapt our empirical specifications to allow for heterogeneity in the size of Medicare’s
effect and explore its correlation with measures of competition across physician groups and
insurance carriers.
To estimate the relationship between provider concentration and the cost-following coefficient, we interact the price shocks with either the all-physician or specialty-specific HHI.
is the predicted Medicare price change, and letting HHIj,s
Recalling that PredChgMedicare
j
denote the applicable HHI z-score, we run reduced-form specifications of the following form:

34

Private
Pj,s,t
= β1 · PredChgMedicare
· Post1998t
j

+ β2 · PredChgMedicare
· Post1998t · HHIj,s
j
+ Xj,s,t γ1 + Xj,s,t · HHIj,s γ2 + µ1j
+ µ2j
+ µ1j,s

j

· HHIj,s + µ2s
j

·

s

+ µ1t,s

t

s

·

j

+ µ1s

· HHIj,s + µ2t
s

+ µ2j,s

j

·

s

s

s

+ µ1t

t

· HHIj,s

· HHIj,s + ej,s,t

(11)

We allow the coefficients on all time-varying controls to vary with the relevant HHI variable.52

6.1

Heterogeneity by Physician Market Power

Table 5 presents the estimates. Column 1 shows that the average cost-following coefficient
is roughly 1.4, but that it varies significantly with the all-physician and specialty-specific
HHIs. The coefficient of −0.5 on the physician HHI interaction implies that as HHI increases
by 1 standard deviation, the cost-following coefficient falls by two-fifths of its value at the
mean; the point estimate is statistically distinguishable from zero at the p < 0.01 level.
Cost following in relatively uncompetitive markets is thus much weaker than in the most
competitive markets.
In column 2, we add an interaction between the predicted payment shocks and the number
of physicians in a market (also measured as a z-score). This variable enters significantly, but
with little impact on the coefficient associated with the HHI interaction. The HHI coefficient
is thus not merely capturing differences in the absolute sizes of the relevant markets. As we
discuss below, the total number of physicians correlates strongly with the extent to which
52

We also graphically report results from specifications in which we divide the sample into terciles of
provider consolidation. Estimation on sub-samples implicitly interacts all controls with the HHI variables at
no additional computational cost. In equation (11) we have omitted interactions between the HHI variables
and the state-by-service code fixed effects ( j · s · HHIj,s ), of which there are in excess of 50,000. Note
that because the first stage coefficient in Table 2’s levels regression was nearly 1, the reduced-form and IV
results are nearly identical. Here and for the remainder of the paper we run reduced form specifications to
further ease the computational burden.

35

markets are urban or rural.
Since they vary both across states and across specialties within each state, the specialtyspecific HHIs will give us our most compelling look, in terms of econometric identification,
at the role of market power in mediating the effect of Medicare’s price changes on private
markets. But this comes at a cost in terms of the number of services included in the sample.
Specifically, incorporating specialty-specific HHIs requires restricting attention to services
that tend to be provided primarily by members of a particular specialty.53
Columns 3 through 5 conduct a similar analysis using HHIs measured at the specialtyby-market level. The results are statistically strong and consistent with the all-physician
HHI results. The point estimate of interest is robust to controlling for interactions with
the number of physicians, either within a specialty or throughout the market.54 Column 6
includes both the all-physician and specialty-specific interactions. When included jointly,
both concentration measures remain strong predictors of the strength of Medicare’s price
transmission. The results uniformly support the view that Medicare is more relevant in
competitive markets than in markets with concentrated providers.
Panel A of Figure 7 reports the first stage and cost-following coefficients separately for
each tercile of the specialty HHI distribution. The cost-following coefficient falls from just
over 2 in the most competitive tercile to around zero in the most concentrated.
Because our variation in physician concentration is not quasi-experimental, the heterogeneity of our effects is not identified as persuasively as our estimates of Medicare’s average
effect on private payments. To address concerns that this variation may reflect unobserved
53

This is true because the private sector claims data say little about the physicians associated with each
service. The construction of specialty-specific HHIs and the linking of service codes with particular specialties
could only be done consistently in the Medicare claims data. Consequently, the number of distinct service
codes in our analysis sample falls from 2,149 to 1,303 for our analysis of specialty-specific consolidation.
54
Because of the geographic element in our HHI measures, we also show in Appendix Table D.4 that
the significance is robust to clustering by state instead of service code. This table also explores robustness
to clustering at more aggregated levels of services. The results maintain their precision when we allow for
correlated price shocks across distinct, but similar services (as defined using three different levels of Betos
codes).

36

area characteristics, we include state-specific interactions with the payment shock in column
7. In this column, we only identify the coefficients on the specialty-specific market conditions
based on cross-specialty variation within a state. The coefficients are virtually unchanged
from column 6.
In order to investigate the robustness of the more general result in column 6, Appendix
Table D.5 adds a variety of additional controls. Specifically, we control for interactions
between the payment shocks and area characteristics including Census region indicators,
income per capita, and measures of population density. Note that these controls enter the
regressions in the exact same manner, and with the same degree of flexibility, as the HHIs.
Even so, these controls have little effect on the coefficients associated with our measures of
provider consolidation. This contrasts with the coefficients on the total numbers of physicians, which are less stable. This supports our initial interpretation that the physician count
is a proxy for an area’s urban status; it is strongly correlated with county characteristics such
as total population and population density. Even after adding these controls, our finding
that Medicare exerts particularly strong influence over the payments made to competitive
physician groups appears to be quite robust.

6.2

Insurance Competition and Price Transmission

We now explore the relevance of competition on the insurers’ side of the market. Competition in insurance markets likely has the opposite impact from competition in physician
markets. While competition among physicians should reduce each physician’s market power,
or increase her perceived elasticity of demand, competition among insurers should do the
opposite. Higher insurer concentration implies that the physician faces more elastic demand, and hence prices more aggressively, than with competitive insurers. As section 4
demonstrated, the impact of these differences on cost-following depends on the shape of the
demand curve.

37

As in section 6.1, we convert HHIs into z-scores and run regressions paralleling equation
(11). Table 6 presents the results. The reduced sample size relative to Table 2 reflects
the omission of California from the insurance market data. Columns 1 through 3 reveal a
positive relationship between insurance concentration and the magnitude of Medicare’s effect
on private payments. The precision varies depending on which measure of market share is
used to compute HHIs. Depending on the measure, a one standard deviation increase in
concentration is associated with a $0.15 to $0.36 increase in the cost-following coefficient.55
The distribution of HHIs is asymmetric. The mean HHI in our sample is 0.25 and the
standard deviation is 0.17. The fifth percentile of insurer HHI is 0.08, which is associated with
a cost-following coefficient of 0.85. The ninety-fifth percentile HHI is 0.78, with an implied
cost-following coefficient of 2.2. We graphically display results by tercile of concentration in
Panel B of Figure 7.
Columns 4 through 6 of Table 6 show that coefficient on the insurer-HHI interaction is
robust to controlling for interactions with the number of insurers in each state as well as
our measure of physician concentration. Appendix Table D.6 reports further evidence on
the robustness of this result. The estimate associated with the insurer HHI is stable when
controlling for interactions between the payment shocks and a variety of state economic and
demographic characteristics.
Thus far, this section’s results have used insurance concentration data from 2001, as it
is the earliest year for which we have comprehensive insurer enrollment data. Appendix
Table D.7 explores the results’ robustness to substituting measures constructed using HMO
enrollment data from earlier and later years. When we measure concentration in 1997,
1998, or 2002, the estimated effect of insurance competition is unchanged. The HHI from
1996 has a lower and noisier coefficient, and is indistinguishable from zero. If we measure
55

We obtain these results by intermingling data computed from the NAIC insurer reports with other data
sources. These results are not NAIC information and NAIC is not responsible for any analysis or conclusions
drawn as a result of this intermingling.

38

insurance concentration in 2006, using either NAIC data or a separate measure available
from the American Medical Association (2007), the estimated coefficient is close to 0. Since
the 2006 market shares are estimated nearly a decade following the surgical/non-surgical
payment shock, they are unlikely to accurately reflect conditions at the time of our natural
experiment.
The results in this and the previous section tell a consistent story that informs our
interpretation of the theoretical model. As we saw in Figure 6, increases in doctors’ market
power—whether due to physician group concentration or insurer competition—are associated
with charging higher prices to insurers. Now we have also seen that these same conditions
are associated with weaker cost-following. These results are consistent with the variablemarkups version of our model in section 4. In this case, the physician’s pricing is given
by equation (10), which predicts exactly these patterns.56 In order to better understand
how these prices are set in practice, we next discuss institutional details of the price-setting
process and examine their implications.

7

The Mechanics of Medicare’s Influence On Private
Prices
Thus far we have interpreted our results through a standard price-theoretic lens. Here we

explore further considerations associated with institutional details emphasized by practitioners (e.g. Nandedkar 2011, Gesme and Wiseman 2010, Mertz 2004). The market for physician
care faces numerous frictions and a morass of complex transactions (Cutler and Ly 2011). We

56

This equation also looks like the outcome of a bargaining model in which the physician has bargaining
power of 1/(η + 1) and the insurer η/(η + 1). This would generate similar predictions. Without richer data
on specific physician-insurer relationships, we cannot distinguish between a bargaining story and our model
from section 4 in which the physician sets prices. (The private claims data do not provide any information
about the specific insurer that processes each claim, and we cannot link physicians across firms, so we can’t
observe whether the physician and insurer reach agreement or break apart negotiations and exercise their
outside options.) But given the similarity in the pricing equation, the bargaining model would also yield
similar predictions.

39

thus consider how transaction costs might shape the structure of physician-insurer contracting (Coase 1937, 1960). The resulting insights contribute to our understanding of the overall
magnitude of Medicare’s effects on private prices, and especially its influence on services’
relative valuations.
Practitioners describe two modes of negotiation between providers and private insurers.
Insurers typically offer small physician groups contracts based on a fixed fee schedule. This
may be Medicare’s schedule itself, or a schedule that the insurer has modified. The parties
then negotiate a constant scaling of this schedule. In contrast, insurers are said to negotiate
in more detail with hospitals and large groups over service-specific pricing.57
Adopting Medicare’s fee schedule may be optimal due to the substantial negotiation
and coordination costs in this setting. But if Medicare’s menu has inefficiencies, the value
of an insurer’s product can potentially be improved through more detailed negotiations
over service- or bundle-specific prices.58 The essential insight for rationalizing practitioners’
descriptions of these negotiations is that the value of such improvements rises with the scale
of the physician group. When insurers contract with small physician groups, the transaction
costs associated with detailed negotiations may regularly outweigh the cost of inefficiencies in
Medicare’s menu. By contrast, a great deal of value may be at stake when insurers contract
with large physician groups.
The implications of this institutional story differ subtly from the price theory considerations we modeled in section 4. Specifically, it emphasizes the absolute size of physician
groups, rather than their market power, as a factor that would mediate cost-following’s

57

Their own descriptions can be found in Appendix A. Documentary evidence for this adoption can be
found in many insurers’ monthly newsletters for participating providers (e.g. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of
Texas 2010, Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield 2012b, BlueCross BlueShield of Illinois 2013, Blue Cross
Blue Shield of Michigan 2013)
58
Since Medicare’s payments are cost-based, they likely deviate from the efficient price for service j. In
this context, cost-based means the average cost of care at observed quantities. Since Medicare beneficiaries,
in particular the 90 percent with supplemental insurance (MedPAC 2011), are comprehensively insured,
there may be a substantial wedge between marginal cost and marginal benefit at these quantities.

40

magnitude.59
To take this view to the data, we proxy for the presence of small physician groups using
two variables. The first is the share of physicians working as sole practitioners, measured at
the level of specialties and hospital referral regions. The second, similarly constructed, is the
share of physicians working in groups with five or fewer members. We use these variables to
estimate specifications in the form of equation (11), in which we allow the effect of Medicare’s
price shocks to vary with the fraction of physicians practicing in small groups.
Table 7 shows the results of this exercise. The prevalence of small physician groups
is strongly associated with the extent to which Medicare influences private prices. A one
standard deviation increase in either proxy is associated with an increase of 0.8 in the costfollowing coefficient. In columns 2 and 4 we augment the specification with full sets of
interactions with our measure of physician market power. The measures of absolute size and
market power separately predict variation in the cost-following coefficient in the expected
directions.
Properly interpreting the results in columns 2 and 4 is difficult for two reasons. First, HHI
and the small group market share are quite correlated with one another, and are imperfect
proxies for the relevant economic forces. Second, the coefficient on each variable is estimated
conditional on the other. Increasing the small group market share conditional on HHI, for
example, requires increasing the size of the market’s other, larger groups. It is thus not
obvious that the magnitudes of both forces can be estimated simultaneously. Consequently,
these specifications can only suggestively speak to the distinctive relevance of market power
and absolute group size.

59

In Appendix D.2, we show that Medicare also has a larger influence when it commands a larger share
of the market for a particular service.

41

8

Conclusion
This paper aims to advance our understanding of price determination in the impor-

tant, complex, and opaque markets for physician services. We show that Medicare exerts
widespread and quantitatively substantial influence over the rates that private insurers pay.
We estimate that a $1 change in Medicare’s payments for one service relative to another results in a $1.16 change in private payments. Section 3.2 showed that these payment changes
reoriented billions of both public and private sector health dollars. We find that Medicare
similarly moves the level of private payments when it alters fees across the board. In aggregate, our estimates imply that Medicare’s pricing decisions can appreciably move both
health-sector and overall inflation (Clemens et al. 2014).
This analysis lays the groundwork for a new strand of research into the economics of
physician pricing. Our evidence on how public programs influence private reimbursement
rates creates at least three distinct opportunities for future work. First, public-private linkages may also be of interest with respect to state Medicaid programs. Anecdotal evidence,
coupled with the economics of outside options, suggests that Medicaid’s rates may be particularly relevant for plans sold on the Affordable Care Act’s exchanges.60 Second, our analysis
sample involves payments made on an exclusively fee-for-services basis. While we know less
about physician payments within HMOs, documentary evidence suggests that such payments
also draw heavily on Medicare’s menu.61 Further work that directly analyzes major HMOs’
contracts with physicians will be instrumental in determining the pervasiveness of Medicare’s
60

Numerous sources discuss the limited number of providers accepting insurance plans purchased on the
exchanges (e.g. Pear 2013, Bauman, Coe, Ogden and Parikh 2014, Blumenthal and Collins 2014). Gruber
and McKnight (2014) show directly that these “narrow network” plans offer lower payment rates for physician visits, potentially making Medicaid more relevant as an outside option for participating physicians.
Anecdotally, Harvey (2014) discusses California exchange plans paying 80 percent of the state’s Medicaid
rates and Pittman (2013) makes similar claims.
61
Provider newsletters for non-HMO and HMO plans explicitly describe their use of Medicare’s relative
values (e.g. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas 2010, Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield 2012a). These
are sizable examples, as the HMO Blue Texas plan advertised having 38,000 physicians in its network as of
2009 (Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas 2014)

42

influence in this important setting. Third, it remains to be seen whether Medicare influences
private insurers’ generation and adoption of novel payment models. For example, how do
private plans react to public insurers’ adoption of “bundled payment” mechanisms, or to
transitions from cost- to value-based payments?
Separately, our analysis opens a line of questions regarding the mechanisms underlying
the magnitude and pervasiveness of Medicare’s influence. We emphasize that Medicare likely
exerts sway through multiple channels. As a large market participant, it competes with private insurers for physicians’ resources. Practitioners further highlight that Medicare’s menu
serves a benchmarking function in many private insurers’ contracts. The latter influence
suggests that Medicare may be an essential participant in meaningful payment-system experimentation and reform. Further analyses of these mechanisms may generate insights that
enrich our understanding of Medicare’s capacity to shape the U.S. health system.

43

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Amy Finkelstein, “Input and Technology Choices in Regulated
Industries: Evidence from the Health Care Sector,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2008, 116 (5), 837–880.
and Joshua Linn, “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the Pharmaceutical Industry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2004, 119 (3), 1049–
1090.
Alpert, Abby, Mark Duggan, and Judith K. Hellerstein, “Perverse reverse price
competition: Average wholesale prices and Medicaid pharmaceutical spending,” Journal
of Public Economics, December 2013, 108, 44–62.
American Academy of Pediatrics, “History of Medicare Conversion Factors,” AAP Pediatric Coding Newsletter, July 2012, 7 (10). Available at http://coding.aap.org/
loadDownload.aspx?filename=pcco_book099_en.pdf (accessed July 31, 2014).
American Hospital Association, May 20 2014. Letter from Rick Pollack, Executive
Vice President of the American Hospital Association, to Hon. Tom Harkin. Available
online at http://www.aha.org/content/14/harkin-hopesupport2011.pdf (accessed
August 18, 2014).
, “96-Hour Physician Certification Requirement,” March 4 2014.
AHA
Talking
Points
available
online
at
http://www.aha.org/content/14/
cah-tps96hourlegislation14mar4.pdf (accessed August 18, 2014).
, “Legislative Action Alert!,” May 20 2014. Available online at http://www.aha.org/
content/14/advocactionalert-rhope14may19.pdf (accessed August 18, 2014).
, “Main Messages: Transfer Rates and Use of Post-Acute Care after Surgery at Critical
Access vs Non-Critical Access Hospitals,” May 15 2014. AHA Talking Points available
online at http://www.aha.org/content/14/talkingpoints-cah-jama2014may.pdf
(accessed August 18, 2014).
American Medical Association, “Competition in Health Insurance: A Comprehensive
Study of U.S. Markets,” 2007. Available at http://www.ama-assn.org/ama1/pub/
upload/mm/368/compstudy_52006.pdf.
Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, “Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield Provider
and Facility Manual,” September 2012. Available online at http://www.anthem.com/
provider/nv/f5/s1/t0/pw_e188530.pdf (accessed August 14, 2014).
, “Anthem Network Update Nevada,” May 4 2012.
Available online at
http://www.anthem.com/provider/nv/f5/s2/t0/pw_e184269.pdf?refer=
ahpprovider&state=nv (accessed August 14, 2014).
44

Baicker, Katherine and Dana Goldman, “Patient Cost-Sharing and Healthcare Spending Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2011, 25 (2), 47–68.
, David Cutler, and Zirui Song, “Workplace Wellness Programs Can Generate
Savings,” Health Affairs, February 2010, 29 (2), 1–8.
, Jeffrey P. Clemens, and Monica Singhal, “The Rise of the States: U.S. Fiscal
Decentralization in the Postwar Period,” Journal of Public Economics, December 2012,
96 (11–12), 1079–1091.
, Mark Shepard, and Jonathan Skinner, “Public Financing Of The Medicare
Program Will Make Its Uniform Structure Increasingly Costly To Sustain,” Health
Affairs, 2013, 32 (5), 882–890.
Baker, Laurence C., M. Kate Bundorf, Anne B. Royalty, and Zachary Levin,
“Physician Practice Competition and Prices Paid by Private Insurers for Office Visits,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, October 22/29 2014, 312 (16), 1653–1662.
Bauman, Noam, Erica Coe, Jessica Ogden, and Ashish Parikh, “Hospital
networks: Updated national view of configurations on the exchanges,” June 2014.
McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform, mimeo. Available online at http:
//healthcare.mckinsey.com/sites/default/files/McK%20Reform%20Center%
20-%20Hospital%20networks%20national%20update%20%28June%202014%29_0.pdf
(accessed December 10, 2014).
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas, “Fee schedule updates,” Blue Review, 2010, (3),
15–16. Available online at http://www.bcbstx.com/provider/pdf/bluereview/br_
issue3_2010.pdf (accessed August 14, 2014).
, “HMO Bluer Texas - Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas,” 2014.
Available
online at http://www.bcbstx.com/employer/products/2_50/hmo_blue_texas.htm
(accessed August 14, 2014).
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, “BCBSM Outpatient Psychiatric Care Facility
Participation Agreement,” April 2013. Available online at http://www.bcbsm.com/
content/dam/public/Providers/Documents/enrollment/OPC-TRAD-WP-12946.pdf
(accessed August 14, 2014).
BlueCross BlueShield of Illinois, “BCBSIL Provider Manual—Rev 12/13,” 2013.
Available online at http://www.bcbsil.com/pdf/standards/manual/billing_and_
reimbursement.pdf (accessed August 14, 2014).
Blume-Kohout, Margaret E. and Neeraj Sood, “Market size and innovation: Effects
of Medicare Part D on pharmaceutical research and development,” Journal of Public
Economics, January 2013, 97 (1), 327–336.

45

Blumenthal, David and Sara R. Collins, “Health Care Coverage under the Affordable
Care Act — A Progress Report,” New England Journal of Medicine, July 17 2014, 371,
275–281.
Budish, Eric, Benjamin N. Roin, and Heidi Williams, “Do fixed patent terms distort
innovation? Evidence from cancer clinical trials,” August 2013. University of Chicago,
mimeo. Available at http://economics.mit.edu/files/8651 (accessed Sep. 3, 2013).
Center for Studying Health System Change (CSHSC), “Physician Survey Summary
File: User’s Guide and Codebook,” 1999. Community Tracking Study Physician Survey,
1996–1997 (ICPSR 2597). Available online at http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR02597.
v3.
, “2004–05 Physician Survey Summary File: User’s Guide and Codebook,” 2006. Community Tracking Study Physician Survey, 2004–2005 (ICPSR 4584). Available online at
http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR04584.v2.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, “Physician Group Practice Transition Demonstration Design Overview,” July 14 2011. Available online at https:
//www.cms.gov/Medicare/Demonstration-Projects/DemoProjectsEvalRpts/
downloads/PGP_Transition_Design_Summary.pdf (accessed December 30, 2014).
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), “National Health
Expenditure
Accounts,”
2013.
Available
at
http://www.cms.gov/
Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/NHE2012.zip.
Chandra, Amitabh and Douglas O. Staiger, “Productivity Spillovers in Health Care:
Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks,” Journal of Political Economy, February
2007, 115 (1), 103–140.
and Jonathan S. Skinner, “Technology Growth and Expenditure Growth in Health
Care,” Working Paper No. 16953, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2011.
, Anupam B. Jena, and Jonathan S. Skinner, “The Pragmatist’s Guide to Comparative Effectiveness Research,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2011, 25
(2), 27–46.
Clemens, Jeffrey, “The Effect of U.S. Health Insurance Expansions on Medical Innovation,” Working Paper No. 19761, National Bureau of Economic Research December
2013.
and Joshua D. Gottlieb, “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect Medical Treatment and Patient Health?,” American Economic Review, April 2014, 104 (4), 1320–
1349.

46

,
, and Adam Hale Shapiro, “How Much Do Medicare Payment Cuts Reduce
Inflation?,” FRBSF Economic Letter, September 22 2014, 2014-28.
Coase, Ronald H., “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, November 1937, 4 (16), 386–405.
, “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, October 1960, 3, 1–44.
Codespote, Suzanne M., William J. London, and John D. Shatto, “Physician
Volume & Intensity Response,” Memorandum to Richard S. Foster, Office of the Actuary, Health Care Financing Administration August 13 1998. Available at https:
//www.cms.gov/ActuarialStudies/downloads/PhysicianResponse.pdf.
Cohen, Joshua T. and Peter J. Neumann, “The cost savings and cost-effectiveness of
clinical preventive care,” Research Synthesis Report No. 18, Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation September 2009. Available online at http://www.rwjf.org/content/dam/
farm/reports/issue_briefs/2009/rwjf46045/subassets/rwjf46045_1 (accessed
August 13, 2014).
,
, and Milton C. Weinstein, “Does Preventive Care Save Money? Health Economics and the Presidential Candidates,” New England Journal of Medicine, February
14 2008, 358, 661–663.
Cutler, David M., “Cost Shifting or Cost Cutting?: The Incidence of Reductions in
Medicare Payments,” in James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume
12, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1998, chapter 1.
, “Where Are the Health Care Entrepreneurs? The Failure of Organizational Innovation
in Health Care,” Innovation Policy and the Economy, 2011, 11 (1), 1–28.
and Brigitte C. Madrian, “Labor Market Responses to Rising Health Insurance
Costs: Evidence on Hours Worked,” The Rand Journal of Economics, 1998, pp. 509–
530.
and Dan P. Ly, “The (Paper)Work of Medicine: Understanding International Medical
Costs,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (2), 3–25.
, Mark McClellan, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “How Does Managed Care Do It?,”
RAND Journal of Economics, Autumn 2000, 31, 526–548.
Dafny, Leemore S., “Estimation and Identification of Merger Effects: An Application to
Hospital Mergers,” Working Paper No. 11673, National Bureau of Economic Research
October 2005.
, David Dranove, Frank Limbrock, and Fiona Scott Morton, “Data Impediments to Empirical Work on Health Insurance Markets,” B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy, July 2011, 11, 8.
47

, Mark Duggan, and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan, “Paying a Premium on
Your Premium? Consolidation in the US Health Insurance Industry,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (2), 1161–85.
DeZee, Kent J., Douglas Maurer, Ross Colt, William Shimeall, Renee Mallory,
John Powers, and Steven J. Durning, “Effect of financial remuneration on specialty
choice of fourth-year US medical students,” Academic Medicine, 2011, 86 (2), 187–193.
Doyle, Joseph J., “Returns to Local-Area Healthcare Spending: Using Health Shocks to
Patients far from Home,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2011,
3 (3), 221–243.
Dranove, David, “Pricing by non-profit institutions: The case of hospital cost-shifting,”
Journal of Health Economics, 1988, 7 (1), 47 – 57.
and Chris Ody, “Changing Paradigms: Evolving Measures of Provider Market
Power,” May 2014. Northwestern University, mimeo.
, Craig Garthwaite, and Christopher Ody, “How do Hospitals Respond to Negative Financial Shocks? The Impact of the 2008 Stock Market Crash,” Working Paper
No. 18853, National Bureau of Economic Research February 2013.
Dunn, Abe and Adam Hale Shapiro, “Physician Market Power and Medical-Care Expenditures,” Working Paper No. 84, Bureau of Economic Analysis April 2012.
Finkelstein, Amy, “Static and dynamic effects of health policy: Evidence from the vaccine
industry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (2), 527–564.
Fontes,
Roger,
“Negotiating
Contracts
with
Insurance
Companies,”
August
2013.
Available
at
http://www.hcplive.com/
physicians-money-digest/practice-management/NegotiatingContracts-with-Insurance-Companies-Fontes (as of Jan. 13, 2014).
Foster, Richard W, “Cost-shifting under cost reimbursement and prospective payment,”
Journal of Health Economics, 1985, 4 (3), 261–271.
Frakt, Austin B., “How Much do Hospitals Cost Shift? A Review of the Evidence,”
Milbank Quarterly, March 2011, 89 (1), 90–130.
, “The End of Hospital Cost Shifting and the Quest for Hospital Productivity,” Health
Services Research, 2013.
Freudenheim, Milt, “Low Payments by U.S. Raise Medical Bills Billions a Year,”
June 1 2006. Available online at http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/01/business/
01health.html (accessed December 5, 2015).

48

Fuchs, Victor R., “More Variation In Use Of Care, More Flat-Of-The-Curve Medicine,”
Health Affairs, October 2004, VAR-104.
Gaynor, Martin, Deborah Haas-Wilson, and William B. Vogt, “Are Invisible Hands
Good Hands? Moral Hazard, Competition, and the Second-Best in Health Care Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2000, 108 (5), 992–1005.
Gesme, Dean H. and Marian Wiseman, “How to Negotiate With Health Care Plans,”
Journal of Oncology Practice, July 2010, 6 (4), 220–222.
Ginsburg, Ruth Bader, “Opinion of Ginsburg, J. in National Federation of Independent
Business v. Kathleen Sebelius,” Technical Report No. 11393, Supreme Court of the
United States June 2012.
Glassman, Rochelle, “Payer Contracts,” MedResults Newsletter, December 2012, (4), 1–2.
Glied, Sherry and Joshua Graff Zivin, “How do doctors behave when some (but not
all) of their patients are in managed care?,” Journal of Health Economics, March 2002,
21 (2), 337–353.
Gold, Jenny, “When ‘Critical Access’ Hospitals Are Not So Critical,” Kaiser Health News,
December 8 2011. Available online at http://www.kaiserhealthnews.org/stories/
2011/december/08/medicare-critical-access-rural-hospitals.aspx (accessed
August 18, 2014).
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town, “Mergers When Prices are
Negotiated: Evidence from the Hospital Industry,” Working Paper No. 18875, National
Bureau of Economic Research March 2013.
Gross, Tal and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, “Health insurance and the consumer
bankruptcy decision: Evidence from expansions of Medicaid,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (7), 767–778.
Gruber, Jonathan and Robin McKnight, “Controlling Health Care Costs Through
Limited Network Insurance Plans: Evidence from Massachusetts State Employees,”
Working Paper No. 20462, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2014.
Hadley, Jack and James D. Reschovsky, “Medicare fees and physicians. medicare service volume: Beneficiaries treated and services per beneficiary,” International Journal
of Health Care Finance and Economics, June 2006, 6 (2), 131–150.
Harvey, Kyle, “Doctor networks opt out of new plans,” Visalia Times-Delta, March
14 2014. Available online at http://archive.visaliatimesdelta.com/article/
20140314/NEWS01/303140002/Doctor-networks-opt-out-new-plans (accessed December 10, 2014).

49

Health Care Financing Administration, “Medicare Program; Revisions to Payment
Policies and Adjustments to the Relative Value Units Under the Physician Fee Schedule,
Other Part B Payment Policies, and Establishment of the Clinical Psychologist Fee
Schedule for Calendar Year 1998,” Federal Register, October 31 1997, 62 (211), 59048–
59260. Final Rule With Comment Period.
Ho, Katherine, “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market,” American Economic Review, February 2009, 99, 393–430.
Hurst, Erik, Benjamin J. Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph S. Vavra, “Regional Redistribution through the U.S. Mortgage Market,” October 2014. University of Chicago,
mimeo.
Jacobson, Mireille, Craig C. Earle, Mary Price, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “How
Medicare’s Payment Cuts For Cancer Chemotherapy Drugs Changed Patterns Of Treatment,” Health Affairs, July 2010, 29, 1391–1399.
, Tom Y. Chang, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Craig C. Earle, “Physician Agency
and Competition: Evidence from a Major Change to Medicare Chemotherapy Reimbursement Policy,” Working Paper No. 19247, National Bureau of Economic Research
July 2013.
Kessler, Daniel P., “Cost Shifting in California Hospitals: What Is the Effect on Private
Payers?,” June 6 2007. California Foundation for Commerce and Education.
Levinson, Daniel R., “Most Critical Access Hospitals Would Not Meet the Location Requirements if Required to Re-Enroll in Medicare,” August 2013. Report OEI-05-1200080 from the Office of the Inspector General, Department of Health and Human Services. Available online at http://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-05-12-00080.pdf
(accessed August 18, 2014).
Lewis, Matthew S. and Kevin E. Pflum, “Diagnosing Hospital System Bargaining
Power in Managed Care Networks,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
forthcoming.
Mahoney, Neale, “Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance,” April 2012. Stanford University, mimeo. Available at http://www.stanford.edu/~nmahoney/Research/Mahoney_
Bankruptcy.pdf.
Marton, James, Aaron Yelowitz, and Jeffery C. Talbert, “A tale of two cities? The
heterogeneous impact of medicaid managed care,” Journal of Health Economics, 2014,
36, 47–68.
McGuire, Thomas G. and Mark V. Pauly, “Physician response to fee changes with
multiple payers,” Journal of Health Economics, 1991, 10 (4), 385–410.

50

McKee, Bill, “Area hospitals fear sharp federal cuts,” Moscow-Pullman Daily News,
September 5 2013. Available online at http://www.cantwell.senate.gov/public/
index.cfm/2013/9/area-hospitals-fear-sharp-federal-cuts (accessed August
18, 2014).
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, “A Data Book: Healthcare Spending and
the Medicare Program,” June 2011. Available at http://www.medpac.gov/documents/
Jun11DataBookEntireReport.pdf.
MedPAC, “A Data Book: Health Care Spending and the Medicare Program,” Technical
Report, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission June 2012.
Mertz, Gregory J., “Can You Negotiate Better Reimbursement?,” Family Practice Management, October 2004, 11 (9), 31–34.
Moriya, Asako S., William B. Vogt, and Martin Gaynor, “Hospital prices and market
structure in the hospital and insurance industries,” Health Economics, Policy and Law,
October 2010, 5 (4), 459–479.

Nandedkar,
Maithily,
“Key
principles
for
negotiating
with
insurers,
deciding whether to opt in or out of Medicare,”
September
2011.
Available at http://www.aad.org/dw/monthly/2011/september/
key-principles-for-negotiating-with-insurers-deciding-whether-to-opt-in-or-out-of-m
(accessed August 21, 2013).
Newhouse, Joseph P., Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 2002.
Olea, José Luis Montiel and Carolin Pflueger, “A Robust Test for Weak Instruments,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, July 2013, 31 (3), 358–369.
Pear,
Robert,
“Lower
Health
Insurance
Premiums
to
Come
at
Cost of Fewer Choices,”
New York Times,
September 22 2013.
Available
online
at
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/23/health/
lower-health-insurance-premiums-to-come-at-cost-of-fewer-choices.html
(accessed December 10, 2014).
Pham, Hoangmai H., Deborah Schrag, Ann S. O’Malley, Beny Wu, and Peter B.
Bach, “Care Patterns in Medicare and Their Implications for Pay for Performance,”
New England Journal of Medicine, March 15 2007, 356, 1130–1139.
Pittman, David, “ACA Countdown: Expect Low Pay for Docs in Exchange Plans,” MedPage Today, September 27 2013. Available online at http://www.medpagetoday.com/
Washington-Watch/Reform/41901 (accessed December 10, 2014).

51

Pope, Gregory C., Michael Trisolini, John Kautter, and Walter Adamache,
“Physician Group Practice (PGP) Demonstration Design Report,” October
2 2002.
Baltimore:
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Available
online
at
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Demonstration-Projects/
DemoProjectsEvalRpts/Downloads/PGP_Full_Demo_Report.pdf (accessed December
30, 2014).
Prospective Payment Assessment Commission (ProPAC), “Optional Hospital Payment Rates,” Technical Report C-92-03, Congressional Report 1992. Washington:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Reckenen, “How to Negotiate Insurance Contracts,” 2013. Available at http://reckenen.
com/whitepapers/ (accessed August 21, 2013).
Rice, Thomas H., “The Impact of Changing Medicare Reimbursement Rates on PhysicianInduced Demand,” Medical Care, August 1983, 21 (8), 803–815.
Robinson, James, “Hospitals Respond To Medicare Payment Shortfalls By Both Shifting
Costs And Cutting Them, Based On Market Concentration,” Health Affairs, July 2011,
30, 1265–1271.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken,
Matthew B. Schroeder, and Matthew Sobek., “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0,” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. 2010. Available at
http://usa.ipums.org/.
Showalter, Mark H., “Physicians’ Cost Shifting Behavior: Medicaid Versus Other Patients,” Contemporary Economic Policy, April 1997, 15 (2), 74–84.
Skinner, Jonathan S., Douglas O. Staiger, and Elliott S. Fisher, “Is technological
change in medicine always worth it? The case of acute myocardial infarction,” Health
Affairs, March 2006, 25 (2), W34–W47.
Town, Robert and Gregory Vistnes, “Hospital competition in HMO networks,” Journal
of Health Economics, September 2001, 20, 733–753.
Weisbrod, Burton A., “The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological
Change, Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment,” Journal of Economic
Literature, June 1991, 29 (2), 523–552.
Welch, W. Pete, Alison Evans Cuellar, Sally C. Stearns, and Andrew B. Bindman, “Proportion Of Physicians In Large Group Practices Continued To Grow In
2009–11,” Health Affairs, September 2013, 32 (9), 1659–1666.
White, Chapin, “Contrary To Cost-Shift Theory, Lower Medicare Hospital Payment Rates
For Inpatient Care Lead to Lower Private Payment Rates,” Health Affairs, May 2013,
32 (5), 935–943.
52

and Vivian Wu, “How Do Hospitals Cope with Sustained Slow Growth in Medicare
Prices?,” Health Services Research, October 2013.
Wu, Vivian, “Hospital cost shifting revisited: new evidence from the balanced budget act
of 1997,” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, March 2010,
10, 61–83.

53

Figure 1: Evolution of Medicare Surgical and Non-Surgical Conversion Factors
45
Surgical

-10.4%

40
35

+5%

Conversion Factor ($)

Non-Surgical
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1992

1994

1996

Year

1998

2000

2002

This figure shows the nominal Conversion Factors that Medicare applied to surgical and
general non-surgical services for each year from 1992 through 2002. Source: American
Academy of Pediatrics (2012).

54

Figure 2: Cross-Service Relationship Between Private and Medicare Prices
Panel B: Price Changes: 1995-2002

$8

Average Private-Sector Price: Levels
$50
$400

Average Private-Sector Price: Changes
-86%
0%
+639%

$3,000

Panel A: Price Correlation: 1995

$8
$50
$400
$3,000
Average Public-Sector Price: Levels

-86%

-63%
0%
+172%
+639%
Average Public-Sector Price: Changes

Note: This figure shows the raw cross-service relationships between average private reimbursements and average Medicare reimbursements. The values shown are the average payments we observe in our public (Medicare) and private (Medstat) sector claims data, plotted
on a log scale. Panel A presents these average payments for 1995 while Panel B shows the
changes in these average payments from 1995 to 2002. Circle sizes are proportional to the
number of times a code is observed in the Medicare data. The best-fit line shown in Panel
A results from estimating
ln(PjPrivate ) = β0 + β1 ln(PjMedicare ) + uj
across services j, weighted by the code’s frequency. The regression yields a coefficient of
β1 = 0.87 and R2 = 0.89 with N = 2, 194. The best-fit line shown in Panel B results from
estimating
△ ln(PjPrivate ) = γ0 + γ1 △ ln(PjMedicare ) + vj ,
again weighted by the code’s frequency. The regression yields a coefficient of γ1 = 0.65 and
R2 = 0.60 with N = 2, 194. Note that the regressions are run in logs and the values shown
along the axes are computed by exponentiating the log values.

55

Figure 3: Effects of Medicare’s Elimination of the Surgical Conversion Factor

Effect of Surgical Payment Shock on Prices:
Price Change Relative to 1997 ($)
-1
0
1
2
3

1st Stage and Reduced Form

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Year
Effect on Private Prices

Lower 95% CI, RF/Upper 95% CI, RF

Admin. Change in Public Prices

Note: This figure presents the δt coefficients, with associated 95% confidence intervals, from
estimates of the equation below:
X
Private
=
δt · t · PredChgMedicare
+ Xj,s,t α + υj j + υs s + υt t
Pj,s,t
j
t6=1997

+ υj,s

j

·

s

+ υt,s

t

·

s

+ vj,s,t .

are the predicted changes in Medicare payments associated with the
where PredChgMedicare
j
elimination of the separate surgical conversion factor. The figure also plots the point estimates from the associated first stage, showing that our coding of PredChgMedicare
correctly
j
tracks the Conversion Factors’ merger. The dependent variable is the level of the average
private payment, calculated at the service-by-state-by-year level, that we observe in our
data on private sector claims. Controls include full sets of service-by-state ( j · s ) and
state-by-year ( t · s ) fixed effects, corresponding direct effects, as well as indicator variables
that account for sharp reductions in Medicare’s payments for cataract surgery that occurred
during the mid-1990s. Also included are two variables accounting for the insurance plan
types associated with our data on private sector claims. Standard errors are clustered at the
service code level. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare and Thompson Reuters
MarketScan data.
56

Figure 4: Effect of Geographic Payment Shocks on Private Prices

Effect of Geographic Payment Shocks on Prices:
Price Change Relative to 1996 ($)
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

1st Stage and Reduced Form

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Year
Effect on Private Prices

Lower 95% CI, RF/Upper 95% CI, RF

Admin. Change in Public Prices

Figure shows the the results from estimating equations (7) and (8) as described in section
3.1. The payment shocks are constructed such that a one unit change in the payment shock
should correspond to a one dollar increase in Medicare’s payments. This is confirmed by
the point estimates labeled “Admin. Change in Public Prices.” Estimates labeled “Effect
on Private Prices” are the corresponding estimates associated with the relationship between
Medicare’s payment shocks and private sector prices. Sources: Federal Register, various
issues; Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims, Thompson Reuters MarketScan data,
and Ruggles et al. (2010).

57

0

.5

Density

1

1.5

Figure 5: Distribution of Private-Medicare Price Difference

-1

0
1
Log diff. between private and Medicare prices (truncated)

2

Note: This figure shows the distribution of the difference between the log average prices in the
private and Medicare databases, across all services, states and years. Values are winsorized
at -1 and +2. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters
MarketScan data.

58

90

Average private price per service
100
110

120

Figure 6: Variation in Private Prices with Provider and Insurer Market Power

0

.1
.2
.3
.4
Physician concentration by specialty and HRR
Least Concentrated Ins.

.5

Most Concentrated Ins.

Note: This figure shows the average private sector payments separately in low-concentration
(blue solid line) and high-concentration (red dashed line) insurance markets, based on the
degree of provider concentration (along the x-axis). The private payments are averaged
across all years, states, and services.

59

-1

Coefficients on Predicted Price Change
0
1
2
3

Figure 7: First Stage and Reduced Form Coefficients by Tercile of Competition
Panel A: Coefficients by Tercile of Competition Among Physicians

1

2
Tercile of HHI
First Stage

3
Reduced Form

0

Coefficients on Predicted Price Change
1
2

3

Panel B: Coefficients by Tercile of Competition Among Insurers

1

2
Tercile of HHI
First Stage

3
Reduced Form

This figure shows coefficients of Medicare price and private prices on the predicted price
change interacted with years following its implementation, from specifications based on equation (3), with associated 95% confidence intervals. Coefficients are estimated separately when
cutting the sample by the HHI of (A) physician groups, computed at the specialty-by-state
level, and (B) insurance carriers, computed by state. In each panel, the dashed line shows
first-stage coefficients indicating the impact on Medicare payments. The solid line shows
reduced form coefficients indicating the impact on private insurer reimbursement rates.
Data Source for the insurance concentration measures: National Association of Insurance
Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not endorse any analysis or conclusions
60
based upon the use of its data.

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Private
Payments per Service
Medicare
Payments per Service
Standard Deviation
Private Payments per Service
Standard Deviation
Medicare Payments per Service
Plan Type
Payment Generosity
Service Specific
Cost Sharing
State level
Physician HHI
Physician Specialty
HHI
Private Market
Volume (1000s)
Medicare
Relative Size
State Level
Insurer HHI (NAIC)
State Level
Insurer HHI (AMA)

Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:
Mean/SD:
Range:

Non-Surgical Care
N = 140, 716

Surgical Services
N = 163, 012

$125.17 ($133.35)
[$1.10, $6,967]
$114.44 ($148.39)
[$3.28, $1,150]
$84.07 ($127.61)
[$0.00, $9,503]
$17.60 ($27.03)
[$0.41, $260.65]
83.06 (43.41)
[15.52, 586.00]
0.226 (0.188)
[0.00, 1.00]
0.023 (0.024)
[0.003, 0.14]
0.157 (0.100)
[0.007, 0.79]
61.60 (309.61)
[0.01, 4898.08]
7.28 (20.94)
[0.003, 459.83]
0.258 (0.187)
[0.00, 0.95]
0.335 (0.135)
[0.15, 0.69]

$374.48 ($441.33)
[$0.30, $21,891]
$239.23 ($248.05)
[$3.51, $2,112]
$257.76 ($403.80)
[$0.00, $34,634]
$78.05 ($106.09)
[$0.20, $1,320]
237.43 (142.34)
[19.06, 670.95]
0.180 (0.180)
[0.00, 1.00]
0.022 (0.020)
[0.003, 0.14]
0.147 (0.109)
[0.007, 1.00]
11.43 (46.57)
[0.01, 721.61]
2.66 (4.62)
[0.015, 136.87]
0.227 (0.167)
[0.00, 0.95]
0.324 (0.122)
[0.15, 0.69]

Note: This table shows summary statistics for our data on public and private payments, characteristics
of the private plans we observe, and the characteristics of the geographic and service-specific markets that
we use to explore heterogeneity in the effect of Medicare price changes on public prices. Observations are
constructed at the service-by-state-by-year level and the panel is balanced in the sense that each serviceby-state panel is only included if public and private prices are available for each year from 1995 through
2002. Private and Medicare Payments Per Service are expressed in dollars and are the average payment
within each service-by-state-by-year cell. The standard deviations are correspondingly standard deviations
of claims-level payments within these cells. The construction of “Plan Type Payment Generosity” and “Out
of Pocket Share” is described in section 1.4, and that of the HHI variables in section 5.2. The first insurance
market HHI variable comes from authors’ calculations on data obtained from the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), and NAIC is not responsible for these calculations. The second insurance
market HHI variable is provided directly by the American Medical Association (2007), which does not provide
HHIs for the following states: KS, ND, MS, PA, SD, WV, and DC. “Private Market Volume” expresses (in
tens of thousands of dollars) the total payments associated with each service in private sector claims data.
“Medicare Relative Size” is the ratio of the number of times a service appears in the Medicare claims data
and in the private-sector claims data. Sources: Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data
61 Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not
(lines 1–10). Line 11: National Association of Insurance
endorse any analysis or conclusions based upon the use of its data. Line 12: American Medical Association
(2007).

62

6.861
(8.988)
-0.972+
(0.578)
303,728
2,194

-3.543 -11.514
(22.334) (28.184)
-3.439
-2.310
(6.008) (6.144)
303,728 303,728
2,194
2,194

0.074
(0.041)
-0.008
(0.006)
303,120
2,192

-0.225**
(0.032)

0.009
(0.021)
-0.005
(0.020)
303,120
2,192

-0.108**
(0.027)
0.480**
(0.062)
-0.026
(0.028)
-0.001
(0.020)
303,120
2,192

(5)
(6)
Log Payments
Public
Private Private
1st Stage Red. Form
IV

(4)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of OLS and
IV specifications of the forms described in section 1.2. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates of equations (3) and its associated reduced form
respectively, where the payment shock and outcome variables are expressed in dollar terms. Column 3 reports an estimate of equation (4).
Columns 4 through 6 report otherwise equivalent specifications in which the dependent variables are expressed in logs and the instrument is
an indicator for surgical procedures performed in years following 1997. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-by-year level. In
columns 1 through 3, observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare claims in 1997. In columns
4 through 6, the weights reflect each service’s average share of payments made through Medicare Part B in 1997. The panel is balanced in the
sense that each service-by-state panel is only included if public and private prices are available for each year from 1995 through 2002. Standard
errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each service. Additional features of each specification
are described within the table. The construction of all variables is further described in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources:
Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data.

N
Number of Clusters

Service Specific Cost Sharing

Plan Type Payment Generosity

Ln(Public Payment)

Surgical Procedure × Post 1997

Public Payment

Payment Shock × Post 1997

Dependent Variable:

(2)
(3)
Payment Levels
Public
Private Private
1st Stage Red. Form
IV
1.192**
1.385**
(0.072)
(0.261)
1.162**
(0.225)

(1)

Table 2: Baseline Estimates of the Effect of Medicare Price Changes on Private Sector Prices

63

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of OLS, reduced
form specifications taking the form of equation (8). Observations are constructed at the service-by-year-by-payment locality level. The panel is
balanced in the sense that each service-by-payment locality panel is only included if public and private prices are available for each year from
1993 through 2003. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each payment locality,
which is the level at which the relevant payment shocks occur. Additional features of each specification are described within the table. Sources:
Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims, Thompson Reuters MarketScan data, and Ruggles et al. (2010).

N
Number of Clusters
State By Year FE
Year FE
HCPCS By Old MPL FE
Old MPL FE
HCPCS FE
Pop. By Year Controls
Panel Balanced

Payment Shock × Post-1996

(2)
(3)
(4)
Private Payment Level
1.268* 0.990* 1.267** 0.846
(0.500) (0.466) (0.477) (0.902)
176,960 176,960 176,960 176,960
199
199
199
199
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(1)

Table 3: Estimates of the Effect of Across-the-Board, Area-Specific, Medicare Payment Shocks on Private
Sector Prices

Table 4: Summarizing the Differences Between Medicare and Private Prices

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Panel A: Share of Observations with Private Rates Exceeding Medicare
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Weighting:
None
Service Count in
Total Spending in
Medicare Private Medicare Private
Based on mean price
0.793
0.885
0.825
0.844
0.821
Surgical only
0.854
0.911
0.883
0.908
0.915
Non-surgical only
0.722
0.880
0.810
0.814
0.756
Based on t-test probabilities
0.793
0.885
0.825
0.844
0.819

(1)
(2)

Panel B: Mean Difference Between Log Private and Medicare Prices
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Weighting:
None
Service Count in
Total Spending in
Medicare Private Medicare Private
Among services with:
P Medicare > P Private
-0.309
-0.122
-0.159
-0.162
-0.176
Medicare
Private
P
<P
0.548
0.394
0.413
0.408
0.493
Panel C: Regression of Private on Medicare Prices
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Public payment
1.447*** 1.447*** 1.449*** 1.504***
(0.054)
(0.054)
(0.053)
(0.061)
Physician HHI
1.806***
(0.406)
Insurance HHI
Public payment
× Specialty HHI
Public payment
× Insurance HHI
N
Number of Clusters
R2
Fixed Effects
Physician HHI Measure

253,632
1,364
0.813
None

253,632
1,364
0.814
Year

253,632
1,364
0.818
StateYear

253,632
1,364
0.814
Year
All MDs

(5)
1.426***
(0.090)
2.930*
(1.443)
-3.188*
(1.266)
-0.023
(0.023)
0.067**
(0.024)
253,632
1,364
0.827
Year &
Specialty
Specialty

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. Panel A
shows the share of state-year-service observations in which the average private sector payment exceeds the
average Medicare payment. Rows 1–3 simply count the number of state-year-service cells, while applying
various different weights, according to the respective column heading, to each cell. Row 4 splits each cell
based on the probability ascribed to having an underlying private mean payment above the Medicare mean
payment based on a one-tailed t-test of the null hypothesis P Medicare ≥ P Private . Panel B shows the log price
difference between the average private payment and average Medicare payment within each cell, split based
on which is higher. Panel C regresses the observed average private price on the average Medicare price and,
in columns 4 and 5, measures of concentration. Regressions are weighted by service count as in Table 2.
Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims64and Thompson Reuters MarketScan.

65
240,264
1,303
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec

1.429**
(0.265)
-0.538**
(0.092)

(3)
(4)
(5)
Private Payment Level
1.272** 1.327** 1.345**
(0.190)
(0.218)
(0.211)

(6)

(7)

240,264
1,303
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec

240,264
1,303
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec

240,264
1,303
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec

240,264
1,303
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec

240,264
1,303
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec

Yes
240,264
1,303
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec

1.410**
(0.235)
-0.511**
(0.063)
-0.891** -0.846** -0.827** -0.516* -0.599**
(0.286)
(0.275)
(0.278)
(0.224)
(0.222)
0.353**
0.369**
0.064
(0.065)
(0.071)
(0.159)
0.408** 0.640**
0.480+
(0.066)
(0.202)
(0.248)

1.476**
(0.290)
-0.511**
(0.092)

(2)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications of the form described by equation (11) in section 5.2. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-by-year level. The
panel is balanced in the sense that each service-by-state panel is only included if public and private prices are available for each year from 1995
through 2002. Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare claims in 1997. The dependent
variable in all columns is the level of the average private payment. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the
errors associated with each service. The “HHI” and “Count” variables have been converted to z-scores, and further details of the construction
of all variables are described in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson
Reuters MarketScan data.

Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Physician HHI
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Specialty HHI
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Physician Count
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Specialty Count
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× State Fixed Effects
N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
State By Year FE
HCPCS By State FE
Fully Interacted
Eye Procedure Reductions
Plan Type Controls
Panel Balanced
Merged Sample Restrictions

Dependent Variable:
Payment Shock × Post-1997

(1)

Table 5: Heterogeneity in Surgical CF Shock’s Effect by Provider Concentration

66
293,688
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No CA

293,688
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No CA

Group Plan Tot. Mbrs.,
Mbrs., 2001
2001
1.296**
1.391**
(0.214)
(0.260)
0.392*
0.390
(0.169)
(0.287)

(2)

293,688
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No CA

293,688
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No CA

(3)
(4)
Private Payment Level
Total Med. Group Plan
Spend, 2001 Mbrs., 2001
1.375**
1.295**
(0.254)
(0.215)
0.169
0.440
(0.107)
(0.293)
0.070
(0.254)

-0.084
(0.183)
-0.885*
(0.404)
245,456
1,364
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec Merge,
No CA

-0.565**
(0.087)

291,952
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No CA

Group Plan
Mbrs., 2001
1.189**
(0.144)
0.564**
(0.186)

(6)

Group Plan
Mbrs., 2001
1.317**
(0.218)
0.395*
(0.164)

(5)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications of the form described by equation (11) as modified in section 6.2. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-by-year
level. The panel is balanced in the sense that each service-by-state panel is only included if public and private prices are available for each year
from 1995 through 2002. Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare claims in 1997. The
dependent variable in all columns is the level of the average private payment. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation
among the errors associated with each service. The “HHI” and “Count” variables have been converted to z-scores, and further details of the
construction of all variables are described in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims,
Thompson Reuters MarketScan data, American Medical Association (2007), and data obtained from the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not endorse any analysis or conclusions based upon the use of its data.

Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Insurer HHI
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Insurer Count, 2001
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Physician HHI
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Specialty HHI
N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
State By Year FE
HCPCS By State FE
Fully Interacted
Eye Procedure Reductions
Plan Type Controls
Panel Balanced
Other Sample Restrictions

Payment Shock × Post-1997

Dependent Variable:
Insurance HHI Measure:

(1)

Table 6: Heterogeneity in Surgical CF Shock’s Effect by Insurer Concentration

67

253,632
1,364
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec Merge

1.242**
(0.201)
0.863**
(0.220)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Private Payment Level
1.216**
1.187**
1.217**
(0.170)
(0.175)
(0.170)
0.479**
(0.129)
0.759**
0.337**
(0.230)
(0.116)
-0.713**
-0.758**
(0.272)
(0.278)
253,632
253,632
253,632
1,364
1,364
1,364
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec Merge Spec Merge Spec Merge

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications of the form described by equation (11) in section 5.2. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-by-year level. The
panel is balanced in the sense that each service-by-state panel is only included if public and private prices are available for each year from 1995
through 2002. Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare claims in 1997. The dependent
variable in all columns is the average private payment. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors
associated with each service. “Public-Private Ratio” and “Medstat Volume” are expressed as percentile ranks (across all services observed
within a given market) minus 0.5; the variables thus have a mean of 0 and range from -0.5 to 0.5. Further details regarding the construction of
all variables are described in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson
Reuters MarketScan data.

Payment Shock
× Share in Solo Practice
Payment Shock
× Share in Small Groups
Payment Shock
× Specialty HHI
N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
State By Year FE
HCPCS By State FE
Fully Interacted
Eye Procedure Reductions
Plan Type Controls
Panel Balanced
Other Sample Restrictions

Dependent Variable:
Payment Shock

(1)

Table 7: Heterogeneity in Surgical CF Shock’s Effect by Prevalence of Small Physician Groups

Appendix For Online Publication Only
A

Background on Physician-Insurer Negotiations

In this appendix, we present practitioner descriptions of negotiations between physicians
and insurers. The depictions come largely from physicians and consultants who represent
physicians in these negotiations. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the latter sometimes seek to dispel
small physician groups’ concerns regarding their prospects for success in such negotiations.
Two themes are emphasized regularly: the importance of the Medicare fee schedule and the
importance of market power. Below we present samples of consultants’ discussions of each.

A.1

The Role of Medicare’s Fee Schedule

Practitioners’ views of physician-insurer negotiations frequently emphasize the role of
Medicare’s fee schedule as a starting point from which negotiations take place. Some emphasize the relevance of “the fee schedule” in general, while placing varying degrees of relevance
on Medicare itself. Examples follow:
• “All insurance companies will offer a fixed fee-for-service schedule. For some carriers,
you may only be allowed to request a certain percentage above Medicare rates. Others
may accept number values” (Nandedkar 2011).
• “The fee schedule will be the platform for negotiation” (Nandedkar 2011).
• “Anthem’s fee schedule is based on the CMS Resource Based Relative Value Scale
(‘RBRVS’). The RBRVS is based on the resources a physician typically uses for each
procedure and service, from physical, intellectual and emotional effort to overhead
and training. . . Throughout this Manual, Anthem’s method of reimbursement will be
referred to as the current Anthem fee schedule, which is a combination of the modified
RBRVS values, the services not evaluated by RBRVS and the Anthem conversion
factor.” (Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield 2012a)
• “Today, most health plans operate with fixed fee schedules. Often these schedules have
little in common with the RBRVS, and while some are roughly based on a percentage
of what Medicare pays, they may be tied to payment levels that are three or more
years old. Most physicians who question this methodology for paying for professional
services are told to take it or leave it.” (Mertz 2004).
• “The fee schedule in many contracts is stated as a percentage of the Medicare rate. All
individuals interviewed for this article recommended specifying a year to be used for the
Medicare rate to protect against potential Medicare cuts” (Gesme and Wiseman 2010).

68

• “The ParPlan, BlueChoicer and HMO Bluer Texas (Independent Provider Network
only) maximum allowable fees for practitioners will be updated to reflect 2010 CMS
values effective July 1, 2010.” (Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas 2010)
Negotiating consultants recommend that physicians be wary of negotiating over payments
for specific codes rather than negotiating over average payments. This line of advice is directly linked to the fee schedule’s complexity. Consultants express the concern that insurers’
negotiating sophistication, in particular relative to that of small physician groups, will give
insurers an advantage when trading off increases and decreases in payments for individual
service codes:
• “Why do we focus on Revenue per Visit and not, say, the fee schedule of your most
important codes? For one very simple reason: Focusing on the fees for specific procedure codes plays right into the shell game the insurance companies love to play”
(Reckenen 2013).
• “One difficulty in negotiating a fee schedule is the sheer number and variety of codes
that may be covered within a negotiation. Companies may make this more difficult by
offering irregular payment schedules that don’t correspond to standard fee schedules
like Medicare or an RVU based system” (Fontes 2013).
• “A physician should beware of companies that state average reimbursements either in
terms of RVU or a Medicare fee schedule. One may find that the fee for a frequently
used CPT code is well below average and CPT codes rarely billed are several multiples
higher to skew the average. An effective method to counter this tactic is for the practice
to submit its top 30 CPT codes by volume and have the insurance company specifically
define the fee schedule for these high-volume codes” (Fontes 2013).
• “Bob Phelan, chief executive officer of Integrated Community Oncology Network (Jacksonville, FL), a multispecialty cancer services network spanning four northeast Florida
counties, explains why his network initially assesses the aggregated fees: ‘The payers
try to slide the money from one bucket to another. They’ll increase E&M [evaluation
and management] codes by 20%, but that’s really only approximately 12% to 13% of
business. At the same time, they decrease drug reimbursement by 2%, which offsets
the E&M increase” (Gesme and Wiseman 2010).
Physicians who opt to negotiate over code-specific payments are encouraged to ensure
that the codes over which they negotiate account for the bulk of their practice’s revenues:
• “Be sure the codes on your list account for at least 75 percent of total practice charges....
Whatever method you choose, be sure to update your fee schedule annually based on
changes to the Medicare fee schedule” (Mertz 2004).
While commenting on the evolution of provider networks, one consultant concludes with
emphasis on one of the industry’s few certainties:
69

• “It is not clear how or when these evolving provider structures and systems will be
rewarded or remunerated. What is clear is that there will be complex negotiation
occurring in the near future as result” (Fontes 2013).

A.2

The Importance of Market Power

Market power emerged as a common theme, both as a determinant of whether it makes
sense to negotiate it all, and as a source of leverage over a negotiation’s course:
• “Unless you dominate your market, payers are unlikely to grant sweeping fee increases.
However, you may be able to negotiate increases for individual services if you can
demonstrate inequities using your data analysis” (Mertz 2004).
• “Before negotiating a contract with any insurance company, first look at the state
of your own company. Why should any carrier negotiate with you? What makes
your practice unique relative to your competitors? What do you have that the carrier
wants?” (Nandedkar 2011)
• “Negotiating strength comes from robust patient relationships...” (Nandedkar 2011)
• “If a health plans payment levels are extremely low, you may be tempted to bypass
negotiations and simply no longer accept patients from that plan. Whether this is
a sound strategy depends on your local market. For example, if you practice in a
highly competitive market, those patients will easily find another physician and you will
simply lose market share. However, in less competitive markets, patients may complain
to their employers that the loss of your practice has created a hardship and they may
pressure the insurance company to return to the bargaining table” (Mertz 2004).
Only the most optimistic of consultants actively encourage sole practitioners to pursue
active negotiations:
• “Can a solo physician or small group practice really negotiate their payer contract
language and increase reimbursement rates? The answer is YES!” (Glassman 2012).
• “I am told everyday that the large healthcare insurance companies (such as Blue Cross,
Blue Shield, Aetna, United Healthcare, Health Net, Cigna and Independent Physicians
Organizations (IPAs), do not negotiate with solo physicians and small group practices.
Although the health plans would love for you to believe that, it simply is not true”
(Glassman 2012).

70

B
B.1

Further Details on the Model of Section 4
Generalizing the Physician Cost Function

According to the model presented in section 4, physicians choose their supply to the two
sectors, private and Medicare, to maximize profits. Here, we relax the assumption of a fixed
capacity and replace it with a general cost function C(m, q) that depends on the number of
patients treated in each sector. So profits are given by
Π(m, p) = rM m + pq − C(m, q)

(B.1)

where q and m are quantities in the two markets respectively, and C(m, q) is the total cost
function. Note that we have defined the profit function in terms of the Medicare quantity
but the private sector price. The cost function is defined in terms of both sectors’ quantities.
The physician faces a demand curve q = D(p) and sets the private price p taking this
into account. We assume rM is a parameter set exogenously by Medicare. To explicitly
incorporate the demand curve that the physician faces, we rewrite profits as
Π(m, p) = rM m + pD(p) − C(m, D(p)).

(B.2)

The physician’s first-order conditions are:
rM = Cm (m∗ , D(p∗ ))
0 = p∗ D′ (p∗ ) + D(p∗ ) − Cq (m∗ , D(p∗ ))D′ (p∗ )

(B.3)
(B.4)

where Cm and Cq denotes the marginal costs of supplying Medicare and private patients,
respectively, and asterisks denote equilibrium choices or outcomes. The physician chooses
m∗ and p∗ (or, equivalently through the demand curve, q ∗ ). Since the physician takes
Medicare’s payment rM as given, equation (B.3) says that the marginal cost of treating
a Medicare patient must equal the reimbursement rate. In contrast, the marginal cost of
treating a privately insured patient must equal the marginal revenue from such a patient, or
p∗ D′ (p∗ ) + D(p∗ ), as equation (B.4) shows.
We now take comparative statics with respect to rM , suppressing the arguments of the
second derivatives:
∗
dm∗
′ ∗ dp
1 = Cmm
+ Cmq D (p )
drM
drM
∗
dp
dp∗
dp∗
0 = p∗ D′′ (p∗ )
+ 2D′ (p∗ )
− Cq (m∗ , D(p∗ ))D′′ (p∗ )
drM
drM
drM
∗
∗
dm
dp
− D′ (p∗ )Cmq
− D′ (p∗ )2 Cqq
drM
drM

71

(B.5)

(B.6)

We solve these equations jointly for

∗
drP
:
drM

Cmq
dp∗
n
o
=
′′ ∗
drM
2 ] + [p∗ − C (m∗ , D(p∗ ))] D (p ) + 2 C
−D′ (p∗ )[Cqq Cmm − Cmq
q
mm
D ′ (p∗ )

(B.7)

Equation (B.7) gives the general expression for cost-following or cost-shifting. Since the
denominator is generally positive, the overall sign depends on Cmq in the numerator. First
consider the case where Cmq is positive; treating additional Medicare patients raises the
marginal cost of treating private patients. This case is illustrated in Figure B.1, which
shows why competitive market intuitions prevail. An increase in Medicare’s reimbursement
rate leads the physician to treat more Medicare patients,62 which shifts the private sector
marginal cost curve to the left (from Cq1 to Cq2 ). This moves the equilibrium higher up the
marginal cost curve, so private prices increase.
Now consider the case of declining marginal costs. This could arise in the case of a natural
monopoly with large fixed costs and constant or declining marginal costs. Or perhaps a
practice that expands would be able to invest in an efficiency-enhancing technology. For
either reason, the cross partial Cmq is negative. Figure B.2 depicts this case. Suppose that
Medicare increases its reimbursement rate, again increasing the supply of care to Medicare
beneficiaries. This movement along the Medicare supply curve shifts the private sector Cq
curve to the left. This shift reduces the equilibrium private sector price; the increase in
supply to Medicare beneficiaries lowers the marginal cost of care because, by assumption,
Cmq < 0. Such cost curves may be relatively plausible in the hospital setting, where fixed
costs are large and many markets are highly concentrated.

B.2

Utility Function Generating Variable Markups

Section 4 shows an example demand function of D(p) = (A − p)η , where η > 1, that can
generate variable physician markups. This demand reflects the following utility function:
U (x, q) = x + Aq −

η+1
η
q η
η+1

(B.8)

where q represents the consumption of health care and x that of the numeraire composite
commodity. Note, however, that the demand function in the text is that of the insurers
who represent the patients in the local market. Depending on the structure of competition,
underlying patient demand need not be directly reflected in the insurers’ ultimate demand.
62

Although own-price supply responses are positive in most settings, this is a subject of longstanding
debate in markets for health care services. Papers finding evidence of positive own-price supply responses
include Hadley and Reschovsky (2006) and Clemens and Gottlieb (2014). Evidence consistent with backward
bending supply curves can be found in Rice (1983) and, more recently, Jacobson, Chang, Newhouse and Earle
(2013). An assumption of backward bending labor supply is embedded in the federal budgeting process
(Codespote, London and Shatto 1998), where it is described as a source of “volume offsets.” The literature
on physician behavior has extensively studied the target income hypothesis, which is shown by McGuire and
Pauly (1991) to require large and unusually patterned income effects.

72

Marginal cost, marginal revenue

Appendix Figure B.1: Cost-Following in Response to a Medicare Price Increase
Cqm > 0, e.g.:
Office visits when at capacity
Cq2

Cq1

MR
Private sector quantity q

This figure shows the cost-following that we would expect to see in response to a Medicare
price increase when the physician’s cost curve slopes up. In this case, an increase in Medicare reimbursement rates, combined with an upward-sloping Medicare supply curve (not
pictured), shifts the private sector marginal cost curve left (from Cq1 to Cq2 , as depicted
here). This leads to higher private sector reimbursement rates. Hence we find cost-following
in this scenario.

73

Marginal cost, marginal revenue

Appendix Figure B.2: Cost-Shifting in Response to a Medicare Price Increase
Cqm < 0, e.g.:
↑ rM enables efficiency gains

Cq1

Cq2
MR
Private sector quantity q

This figure shows the cost-shifting that we would expect to see in response to a Medicare
price increase when the physician’s cost curve slopes up. In this case, an increase in Medicare reimbursement rates, combined with an upward-sloping Medicare supply curve (not
pictured), shifts the private sector marginal cost curve left (from Cq1 to Cq2 , as depicted
here). This leads to lower private sector reimbursement rates. Hence we find cost-shifting in
this scenario.

74

C

Data Appendix

This Data Appendix serves two purposes. In section C.1 we describe our core datasets
in further detail. In section C.2 we document the data loss that arises from our Medicareprivate merge procedure in order to determine how comprehensive and representative our
final dataset is.

C.1

Data Sources

Our Medicare claims data are provided by the Research Data Assistance Center (ResDAC) in Minneapolis, Minn., on behalf of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
These data come directly from the claims that physicians file with the Medicare carriers who
process reimbursements on behalf of CMS in each state. Because Medicare is a centralized
national program, these data are directly comparable across locations.
We measure payments using a variable in the carrier claims file, called the “Line Allowed
Charge Amount.” This is defined as “The amount of allowed charges for the line item
service on the noninstitutional claim. This charge is used to compute pay to providers or
reimbursement to beneficiaries.” Note that “The amount includes beneficiary-paid amounts
(i.e., deductible and coinsurance).” So this reflects the full amount that physicians are
allowed to bill for the service, and hence what Medicare pays them.
The MarketScan data are somewhat more complex. This database compiles health care
claims processed by insurers for “a selection of large employers, health plans, and government and public organizations.” It incorporates around 100 payers and 500 million
individual claims annually. According to the documentation, “These data represent the
medical experience of insured employees and their dependents for active employees, early
retirees, COBRA continues and Medicare-eligible retirees with employer-provided Medicare
Supplemental plans.” We use the outpatient services portion of the Commercial Claims and
Encounters Database in MarketScan.
The benefit of MarketScan is its ability to pool data from numerous separate firms and
other insurance providers. While these data represent care provided by numerous insurers
and ultimate payers, Thompson Reuters standardizes the files and variables so as to be
comparable across firms. We pool together claims from all firms in the MarketScan files. It
is important to keep in mind that the number and composition of firms changes over time,
and these firms use a range of different insurers. So when we analyze heterogeneity in private
price responses we can only do so at the aggregate level, and cannot distinguish between
individual insurers.
In both datasets we eliminate claims of less than $1 or with quantities of 100 or more.
In MarketScan, we also eliminate claims associated with capitated payment arrangements,
as recorded in the data. In general, the payments associated with such arrangements cannot
be meaningfully linked to identifiable units of care.

75

C.2

Comprehensiveness of the Medicare-MarketScan Merge

Analyzing the relationships between private and public prices requires merging the Medicare and MarketScan databases. This merge is made possible by the fact that Medicare and
private insurers both make payments using the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS). The HCPCS is, in turn, linked to the American Medical Association’s Current
Procedure Terminology (CPT). Importantly, CPT is designed to characterize the universe
of services provided by physicians; it is not catered specifically to care for the elderly, young,
or working-age adult population.
We merge the Medicare and MarketScan databases on the HCPCS codes. Inclusion in
our analysis sample requires satisfying two criteria. First, the codes must be observed in both
the Medicare and MarketScan databases. Second, we require that our panel be balanced in
the following sense: a state-by-service pair is only included if it appears in each year from
1995 through 2002.
Our estimation sample includes 2,194 of the 12,729 unique HCPCS codes observed in
MarketScan during our sample period. While our sample accounts for a minority of codes,
these codes account for a majority of the total care provided. This reflects the fact that the
more commonly used codes are more likely to satisfy our criteria. Lost codes include codes
that are never or rarely provided to the elderly, the non-elderly, or both. They also include
codes that were introduced or eliminated over the course of our sample. Appendix Table
C.1 presents details on the data loss associated with each step of the merge process.
The table focuses on data from 1995, namely the first year of our sample, and progressively
eliminates codes in four steps. Row C presents the total number of distinct codes appearing
in each data set in 1995. 6,037 distinct HCPCS codes were submitted within our Medicare
claims data, while 8,781 were submitted within MarketScan. Since row C presents a full
accounting of the codes in each database in 1995, the codes are associated with a full 100
percent of each dataset’s care in terms of both dollars spent and unique services counted.
Row D eliminates codes that do not exist in the official Medicare RVU files. This eliminates
zero Medicare claims. In column 6, we see that this first exclusion eliminates 30.1 percent of
the unique MarketScan codes. Columns 4 and 5 reveal that these codes represent a relatively
small portion of overall private spending—column 5 shows that they account for only 3.1
percent of services and column 4 shows that they represent only 8.6 percent of spending. It is
reassuring that matchable codes, where public and private payment rates could conceivably
be compared, represent an overwhelming majority of the care provided.
The next three rows show why additional data are eliminated as we progress to the final
estimation sample. Row E imposes the criterion that a code be used at some point in time
in the complementary dataset. The percentages for Medicare thus show the share of codes
that appear in the MarketScan data, and vice versa. We again see virtually no exclusions
from the Medicare data. We also see minimal further data loss from MarketScan. Among
codes actively in use in either database, more than 98 percent make at least one appearance
in the complementary database.
Row F imposes the requirement that the Medicare claims data be balanced. That is,
it drops all remaining codes that do not appear in the Medicare data in each year from
76

1995 to 2002. This panel-balance requirement results in significant loss of codes in both the
Medicare and MarketScan data. Just under 50 percent of the remaining service codes are
lost in both data sets. These codes account for 6.5 percent of Medicare spending and 21
percent of remaining private sector spending (that is, 19 of the remaining 91 percent). These
include irregularly use codes as well as codes that were either eliminated or introduced over
the course of the sample.
Finally, row G imposes that the panel be balanced in both the Medicare and MarketScan
databases. This reduces the MarketScan files to 63.5 percent of their initial spending and
the Medicare files to 76.8 percent of their initial spending. The data loss associated with
the last two steps reflect our effort to construct a balanced panel. The codes that we lose
through these steps are those that are not continually relevant to medical providers during
our sample period. Importantly, they do not reflect services for which either Medicare or
private insurers selectively opted out of determining prices altogether.

77

78

100%
100%
100%
93.5%
76.8%

100%
100%
100%
87.3%
63.4%

6,037
100%
99.9%
54.6%
35.3%

(1)
(2)
(3)
Starting merge with Medicare data
Spending Quantity
Codes
100%
91.4%
90.8%
71.7%
63.5%

100%
96.9%
96.0%
77.4%
59.9%

8,781
69.9%
68.3%
36.7%
25.0%

(4)
(5)
(6)
Starting merge with MarketScan data
Spending Quantity
Codes

Note: This table presents the comprehensiveness of our merge procedure between the Medicare claims data and private sector data from
MarketScan introduced in section 1.4 using data from 1995. Line (A) indicates which file we start with; columns 1 and 2 show the merge
overlap when starting with Medicare and then merging in the MarketScan private data while columns 3 and 4 conduct the merge in the
opposite direction. Line (B) distinguishes between measurements of the overlap in dollar terms (labeled “Spending”) and in service count
(labeled “Quantity”). The subsequent lines show the share of the initial dataset that survives each step of the merge procedure. Line (C) starts
with the full dataset. Line (D) shows the share remaining after matching codes with the opposite dataset from the one listed in line (A). Line
(E) shows the final share remaining after balancing the panel. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters
MarketScan data.

(C) Initial dataset
(D) Code exists
(E) Used in complementary dataset
(F) Medicare balanced panel
(G) Panel balanced

(A) Initial sample:
(B) Size measure:

Appendix Table C.1: Measures of Merge Comprehensiveness

D

Further Results and Robustness Tests

Panel B: Price Changes: 1995-2002

Log Average Private-Sector Price: Changes
-.2
0
.2

.4

Panel A: Price Correlation: 1995

-.4

$50

Average Private-Sector Price: Levels
$150

$400

Appendix Figure D.1: Cross-State Relationship Between Private and Medicare Prices

$50

$150
$400
Average Public-Sector Price: Levels

-.02
0
.02
.04
.06
Log Average Public-Sector Price: Changes

Note: This figure shows the raw cross-state relationships between average private reimbursements and average Medicare reimbursements. The payments are the natural logs of the
average payment we observe in our public (Medicare) and private (Medstat) sector claims
data. Panel A presents these average payments for 1995 while Panel B shows the changes
in these average payments from 1995 to 2002. Circle sizes are proportional to Medicare
spending in each state. The best-fit line shown in Panel A results from estimating
ln(PsPrivate ) = β0 + β1 ln(PsMedicare ) + us
across states s, weighted by each state’s Medicare spending. The regression yields a coefficient of β1 = 1.07 and R2 = 0.81, with N = 50. The best-fit line shown in Panel B results
from estimating
△ ln(PsPrivate ) = γ0 + γ1 △ ln(PsMedicare ) + vs ,
again weighted state spending. The regression yields a coefficient of γ1 = 1.00 (statistically
indistinguishable from zero) and R2 = 0.02 with N = 50. Note that the regressions are run
in logs and the values shown along the axes are computed by exponentiating the log values.

79

Appendix Figure D.2: Medicare Payment Areas

1996 GAF:
0.880 0.907 0.931 0.959 0.993 1.036 1.106 -

0.906
0.930
0.958
0.992
1.035
1.105
1.225

Proposed GAF:
0.88 - 0.907
0.91 - 0.93
0.932 - 0.959
0.961 - 0.992
0.995 - 1.035
1.041 - 1.105
1.105 - 1.225

E

E

E

E
E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E E
E
E E
E
E E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E
E
E E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E
E E
E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E
E

E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E

E
E

E

E

E

E

E E E E E
E E E E E
E E E E E E
E E E E E E
E E E E E E
E E E E E
E E E
E E E E
E E E
E E EEE
E E E
E E E
E E E
E E E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E E EE

E

E

E

E

E
E E
E E
E E
E
E E
E E
E E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E

E

EE E E

E
E E
EEE
E E
E
E E
EEE
E E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E E
E
E E
EE E
E
E E
E E
E
EEE E E
E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E E E E
E E E E
E E E E
E E E E
E E E E
E E
E E
E E
E E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E
E E
EEE
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

E
EEE
E E
E
E E
E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E
E
E E
EEE
E E
E E
E E
E E
E E

E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E E E
E E E
E E
E E E
E
E E E
E E E
E
E E E
E E E
E EEE E E
E E E
E E
E E
E
E
E
E

E

E
E

E
E

E

E E E
E E E
E E E
E E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E

E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E

E

E

EE E EE

E
E
E
E
E

E E E
E
E
E E E
E
E
E E E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E

EE E EE

E

E E E
E
E
E E E
E
E
E E E

E
E

E

EE E EE

E

E

E

E E
E E
E E
E

E

E

E
E

E
E

E
E E
E
E
E E E
E
E E
E E E
E E
EE E EEE

E

E
E
E E
E E E
E E
E E E
E EEE

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E E
EEE
E E
E E
EEE
E E
E
E E
EE
E

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

EEE
E E
E
E E
E EEE
E E E
E E
E E E
E EEE
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E E E
E E E E
E E E E E
E E E
E E E EEE E E E
E E
E E E
E E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E E
E E
E E
E
E E
EEE
E E
E
E E
E

E E E E
E E E E E
E E
E E E E E
E EEE E EE
E E
E E E E
E E
E EEE E E
E E E
E E E E
E
E

E
E

E

E EEE E E E E E E
E E E E E E E E E
E
E E E E E E E E E
E EEE E E E E
E E E E E E E
E E E E
E E E E E E E
E

E

E

E

E

E EE

E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E

E

EE

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E
E
E

E

E

E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

EE

E
E
E
E
E

E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E

E

E

E
E
E E E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E
E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E

E

E E E
E
E

E

E

E

E

E
E
E
E
E E E E
E
E E E E E
E
E
E E E E E
EE
EE E E E E E
E E E E
E E
E
E
E E E E
E
E E EEE
E
E
E E E E E E
E
E E E E E
E
E
E EE E EEE

E

E E E
E E E
E
E E E
E
E

E

E

GAF change:
E E E
E E E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

0.028 0.015 0.005 -0.003 -0.014 -0.029 -0.070 -

0.059
0.025
0.014
0.004
-0.004
-0.014
-0.031

The first panel shows the 206 Medicare fee schedule areas in the continental United States as of 1996 and
the second shows the 85 such localities after the consolidation in 1997. (These totals exclude Alaska, Hawaii,
Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, each of which was its own unique locality throughout this period.)
The colors indicate the Geographic Adjustment Factors (GAF) associated with each Payment Locality, with
darker colors indicating higher reimbursement rates. The third panel shows the change in GAF for each
county due to the payment region consolidation that took place in 1997. Source: Clemens and Gottlieb
(2014), based on data from the Federal Register, various issues.

80

D.1

Robustness Checks

Appendix Tables D.1 through D.7 report various robustness checks as discussed in the
main text, including cost-following measurements using nationally aggregated data.

D.2

Service Market Size and Price Transmission

We now consider a dimension of heterogeneity in Medicare’s effect that most models
predict. This is Medicare’s market share, or its size relative to the private market. In the
model of section 4, a setting where Medicare is larger likely makes it easier for physicians
to find private patients to treat, relative to Medicare patients. The model would account
for this through a higher relative cost parameter α, and hence an increase in cost-following
(e.g in equation [10]).
In a more general cost structure, which we discuss in Appendix B.1, we also see that
growth in Medicare’s share of the patient pool increases the magnitude of cost-following.
In this case, the force driving the relationship is Medicare’s larger role in total costs. As
the public sector grows, a pricing change that shifts physicians along their Medicare supply
curve will have a larger effect on the residual supply for privately insured patients, and hence
on the price in that sector.
Finally, the institutional story that we discussed in section 7 also predicts that Medicare’s
market share should affect its pricing influence. As the private market’s size grows, the gains
available by negotiating away from Medicare’s default price increase.
We test this rather universal prediction by using two proxies for the relative sizes of
the private and public markets. First, we look at the relative sizes for each service and,
second, at the number of Medicare beneficiaries as a fraction of each state’s population. As
in previous sections, we examine the relationship between these variables and the extent of
Medicare’s influence on private prices.
Our measure of the relative sizes of the public and private markets for each service is
based on the service counts we observe in our databases of public and private sector claims.
Specifically, we construct the variable “Medicare Relative Size” as the ratio of the number of
times a service appears in a single year of the Medicare claims data and the number of times
it appears in a single year of the MedStat data. Because MedStat is a non-random sample of
the private market, with time-varying size, the variable would poorly characterize the actual
relative sizes of public and private markets. Nonetheless, it should form a reasonable basis
for dividing services into those with relatively large and small Medicare market shares. This
variable is strongly right skewed; the lower bound of the relevant z-scores is roughly −0.2 for
Private Market Volume and −0.4 for Medicare Relative Size. Consequently, we normalize
it using percentile ranks rather than z-scores. We subtract 0.5 from the percentile ranks so
that the resulting variables are symmetric about 0. Our measure of Medicare’s share of the
patient pool is constructed directly from state-level beneficiary and population counts. Since
this variable is relatively symmetric, we normalize it using z-scores. We then interact these
variables with the price shocks and controls as in equation (11).
Appendix Table D.8 presents these results. Column 1 shows that the public-private ratio
81

enters significantly, with a coefficient of 1.3. Moving from the first to the 99th percentile of
the Medicare Relative Size distribution is associated with moving from a price transmission
coefficient of 0.3 to a cost-following coefficient of 1.5. The larger the relative size of the
Medicare market, the larger the cost-following coefficient. Column 2 shows the relationship
between cost-following and Medicare’s share of the potential patient pool. The estimate in
this case is statistically indistinguishable from zero.

D.3

Does Payment Reform Affect Private-Sector Price Dispersion?

In this section we briefly explore additional pricing consequences of Medicare payment
policy. One outcome potentially of interest is price dispersion. Dispersion in private payments for ostensibly similar services is substantial, and its determinant are not fully understood. We estimate the extent to which price dispersion responded to our natural experiment, which involved a substantial reduction in payments for surgical procedures relative to
other services. It may also have resolved a degree of uncertainty surrounding the future of
Medicare’s payments, at least temporarily.
Appendix Table D.9 reports the results, which involve specifications taking the same
form as those reported in columns 2 and 5 of Table 2. The dependent variables measure
price dispersion at the service-by-state-by-year level. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent
variable is the standard deviation of prices within these markets, while in columns 3 and 4
it is the coefficient of variation. The results imply that increases in payments are associated
with increases in dispersion. In column 3, the coefficient of variation is uncorrelated with
the magnitude of the payment shocks, while column 4 shows that the overall level of price
dispersion did increase for surgical procedures.

82

83

1.162**
(0.225)
-11.514
(28.184)
-2.310
(6.144)
303,728
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
None

1.157**
(0.212)
-0.657
(14.557)
-2.252
(6.214)
303,728
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
None

(2)

303,728
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
None

(3)
Private
1.161**
(0.226)
-7.540
(28.435)

(4)
Payment
0.972**
(0.107)
5.415
(5.849)
-2.403
(6.024)
303,728
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
None

(5)
Level
0.673**
(0.112)
-13.455
(24.134)
1.767**
(0.190)
303,728
2,194
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
None

(7)

1.324** 1.116**
(0.261) (0.250)
-8.536
(16.669)
-3.093
-2.389
(5.963) (6.126)
303,728 303,728
2,194
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
None

(6)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of IV specifications
based on those in column 3 of Table 2. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-year level. Unless noted, observations are weighted
according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare Part B in 1997. The panel is balanced in the sense that each service-by-state
pairing is only included if public and private prices could be estimated for each year from 1995 through 2002. Standard errors are calculated
allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each service. Additional features of each specification are described within
the table. The construction of all variables is further described in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations
using Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data.

N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
State By Year FE
HCPCS By State FE
Eye Procedure Reductions
RVUs Per Service Control
Trend by Procedure
Panel Balanced
Other Sample Restrictions

Cost Sharing Fraction

Plan Type Controls

Public Payment

(1)

Appendix Table D.1: Robustness Checks on the Effect of Medicare Price Changes on Private Sector Prices

84

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Payment Levels
Log Payments
Public
Private Private
Public
Private Private
1st Stage Red. Form
IV
1st Stage Red. Form
IV
1.122**
1.305**
(0.067)
(0.225)
1.163**
(0.210)
-0.228**
-0.116**
(0.031)
(0.027)
0.508**
(0.061)
9.707
19.600
8.312
0.113+
-0.000
-0.057
(13.707)
(17.664) (19.059)
(0.066)
(0.036) (0.045)
-17.324+ -102.019** -81.874*
-0.140
-0.276* -0.205*
(10.323)
(36.129) (39.342)
(0.089)
(0.133) (0.102)
17,552
17,552
17,552
17,536
17,536 17,536
2,194
2,194
2,194
2,192
2,192
2,192
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

(1)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of specifications
analogous to those in Table 2, except that here observations are constructed at the service-by-year level. Unless noted, observations are weighted
according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare Part B in 1997. The panel is balanced in the sense that each service is
only included if public and private prices could be estimated for each year from 1994 through 2002. All specifications include service code and
year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each service. Additional
features of each specification are described within the table. The construction of all variables is further described in the note to Table 1 and
in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data.

N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
HCPCS FE
Year FE
Eye Procedure Reductions
RVUs Per Service Control

Cost Sharing Fraction

Plan Type Control

Ln(Public Payment)

Surgical Procedure × Post 1997

Public Payment

Payment Shock × Post 1997

Dependent Variable:

Appendix Table D.2: The Effect of Medicare Price Changes on Private Sector Prices, National Regressions

85

(2)

1.163** 1.167**
(0.210)
(0.207)
8.312
(19.059)
-81.874* -82.765*
(39.342) (39.400)
17,552
17,552
2,194
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

(1)

(3)
(4)
Private Payment
1.148** 0.965**
(0.216)
(0.096)
12.109 -25.287
(17.931) (38.700)
-86.306*
(38.231)
17,552
17,552
2,194
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

(5)
(6)
Level
0.181 1.370**
(0.412)
(0.261)
31.678*
24.241
(13.197) (14.779)
18.937 -99.272*
(12.135) (41.228)
17,552
17,552
2,194
2,194
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No

1.111**
(0.243)
7.645
(18.693)
-83.596*
(39.028)
17,552
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

(7)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of IV specifications
based on those in column 3 of Table D.2. Observations are constructed at the service-by-year level. Unless noted, observations are weighted
according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare Part B in 1997. The panel is balanced in the sense that each service is
only included if public and private prices could be estimated for each year from 1994 through 2002. All specifications include service code and
year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated with each service. Additional
features of each specification are described within the table. The construction of all variables is further described in the note to Table 1 and
in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data.

N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
HCPCS FE
Year FE
Eye Procedure Reductions
RVUs Per Service Control
Trend by Procedure

Cost Sharing Fraction

Plan Type Control

Dependent Variable:
Public Payment

Appendix Table D.3: Robustness Checks on the Effect of Medicare Price Changes on Private Sector Prices
Nationally

86

1.345**
(0.312)
-0.827*
(0.336)
0.408+
(0.219)
240,264
49
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec
State

(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Private Payment Level
1.345** 1.345** 1.345**
(0.234)
(0.317)
(0.082)
-0.827** -0.827* -0.827**
(0.305)
(0.347)
(0.113)
0.408** 0.408** 0.408**
(0.068)
(0.079)
(0.050)
240,264 240,264 240,264
75
20
4
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Spec
Spec
Spec
Betos
Betos
Betos
(3-digit) (2-digit) (1-digit)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications based on column 4 of Table 5. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-year level. The panel is balanced in the
sense that each service-by-state pairing is only included if public and private prices could be estimated for each year from 1995 through 2002.
Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare Part B in 1997. The dependent variable in
all columns is the level of the average private payment. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation within the clusters
indicated in each column. The construction of all variables is further described in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources: Authors’
calculations using Medicare claims and and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data.

Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Specialty HHI
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Specialty Count
N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
State By Year FE
HCPCS By State FE
Fully Interacted
Eye Procedure Reductions
Plan Type Controls
Panel Balanced
Merged Sample Restrictions
Cluster Level

Dependent Variable:
Payment Shock × Post-1997

Appendix Table D.4: Heterogeneity in Surgical CF Shock’s Effect by Provider Concentration, Alternative
Clustering

87

(2)

1.418**
1.323**
(0.226)
(0.201)
-0.485**
-0.441**
(0.056)
(0.046)
-0.589*
-0.675*
(0.276)
(0.310)
-0.316
-0.216
(0.253)
(0.193)
0.904*
0.321
(0.425)
(0.268)
240,264
240,264
1,303
1,303
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Phys Merge Phys Merge

(1)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Payment Levels
1.505**
1.440**
1.443**
1.406**
(0.314)
(0.247)
(0.254)
(0.243)
-0.546**
-0.518**
-0.553**
-0.486**
(0.073)
(0.066)
(0.074)
(0.063)
-0.418*
-0.451*
-0.434*
-0.540*
(0.191)
(0.220)
(0.192)
(0.229)
-0.942*
-0.248
-0.235
-0.210
(0.411)
(0.159)
(0.160)
(0.159)
0.814**
0.638**
0.632**
0.659**
(0.268)
(0.202)
(0.203)
(0.205)
240,264
240,264
240,264
240,264
1,303
1,303
1,303
1,303
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Phys Merge Phys Merge Phys Merge Phys Merge

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications based on column 6 of Table 5. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-year level. The panel is balanced in the
sense that each service-by-state pairing is only included if public and private prices could be estimated for each year from 1995 through 2002.
Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare Part B in 1997. The dependent variable in
all columns is the level of the average private payment. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors
associated with each service. In columns 1 and 2, “Payment Shock × Post-1997” is interacted with a full set of region or division fixed effects,
and the coefficient shown is the average of those interactions. The construction of all variables is further described in the note to Table 1 and
in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data, and Ruggles et al. (2010).

Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Physician HHI
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Specialty HHI
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Physician Count
Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Specialty Count
N
Number of Clusters
Census Region
Census Division
Log Population
Log Density
Log Income Per Capita
Education (HS and BA Compl.)
Sample Restrictions

Dependent Variable:
Payment Shock × Post-1997

Appendix Table D.5: Robustness Checks on Heterogeneity in Surgical CF Shock’s Effect by Provider
Concentration

88

1.338**
(0.205)
0.309+
(0.163)
293,688
2,194
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No CA

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Payment Levels
1.280** 1.424** 1.326** 1.305** 1.338**
(0.211) (0.282) (0.227) (0.216) (0.235)
0.487* 0.711** 0.474** 0.501** 0.368*
(0.204) (0.228) (0.169) (0.191) (0.176)
293,688 293,688 293,688 293,688 293,688
2,194
2,194
2,194
2,194
2,194
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No CA No CA No CA No CA No CA

(2)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications based on column 6 of Table 5. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-year level. The panel is balanced in the
sense that each service-by-state pairing is only included if public and private prices could be estimated for each year from 1995 through 2002.
Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare Part B in 1997. The dependent variable in
all columns is the level of the average private payment. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors
associated with each service. In columns 1 and 2, “Payment Shock × Post-1997” is interacted with a full set of region or division fixed effects,
and the coefficient shown is the average of those interactions. The construction of all variables is further described in the note to Table 1 and
in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims, Thompson Reuters MarketScan data, Ruggles et al. (2010), and data
obtained from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not endorse any analysis or conclusions
based upon the use of its data.

Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Insurer HHI
N
Number of Clusters
Census Region
Census Division
Log Population
Log Density
Log Income Per Capita
Education (HS and BA Compl.)
Other Sample Restrictions

Dependent Variable:
Payment Shock × Post-1997

(1)

Appendix Table D.6: Robustness Checks on Heterogeneity in Surgical CF Shock’s Effect by Insurer
Concentration

89

NAIC 1996 NAIC 1997
1.246**
1.289**
(0.227)
(0.206)
0.102
0.411+
(0.205)
(0.213)
286,568
293,688
2,194
2,194
No CA
No CA

(2)

(3)
(4)
Private Payment Level
NAIC 1998 NAIC 2002
1.309**
1.257**
(0.232)
(0.185)
0.302**
0.521*
(0.082)
(0.240)
288,072
293,688
2,194
2,194
No CA
No CA

(6)

NAIC 2006 AMA 2006
1.378**
1.429**
(0.267)
(0.252)
0.039
-0.051
(0.062)
(0.166)
293,688
275,728
2,194
2,193
No CA AMA Data

(5)

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications based on column 6 of Table 5. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-year level. The panel is balanced in the
sense that each service-by-state pairing is only included if public and private prices could be estimated for each year from 1995 through 2002.
Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare Part B in 1997. The dependent variable in
all columns is the level of the average private payment. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors
associated with each service. In columns 1 and 2, “Payment Shock × Post-1997” is interacted with a full set of region or division fixed effects,
and the coefficient shown is the average of those interactions. The construction of all variables is further described in the note to Table 1 and
in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims, Thompson Reuters MarketScan data, and data obtained from the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not endorse any analysis or conclusions based upon the use
of its data.

Payment Shock × Post-1997
× Insurer HHI
N
Number of Clusters
Other Sample Restrictions

Dependent Variable:
Insurance HHI Measure:
Payment Shock × Post-1997

(1)

Appendix Table D.7: Insurer Concentration Measured in Various Years

90

(1)
(2)
Private Payment Level
0.991**
1.414**
(0.135)
(0.276)
1.331**
(0.483)
-0.178
(0.180)
303728
303728
2,194
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
None

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications of the form described by equation (11) in section 5.2. Observations are constructed at the service-by-state-year level. The panel
is balanced in the sense that each service-by-state pairing is only included if public and private prices could be estimated for each year from
1995 through 2002. Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare Part B in 1997. The
dependent variable in all columns is the average private payment. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the
errors associated with each service. “Public-Private Ratio” is expressed in percentile ranks (across all services observed within a given market)
minus 0.5; it thus has a mean of 0 and range from -0.5 to 0.5. “Medicare Population Share” is expressed in z-scores. Further details regarding
the construction of all variables are described in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare
claims and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data.

Payment Shock
× Public-Private Ratio
Payment Shock
× Medicare Population Share
N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
State By Year FE
HCPCS By State FE
Fully Interacted
Eye Procedure Reductions
Plan Type Controls
Panel Balanced
Other Sample Restrictions

Dependent Variable:
Payment Shock

Appendix Table D.8: Heterogeneity in Surgical CF Shock’s Effect by Medicare Market Share

91

(3)
(4)
Private Payment CV
-0.0002
(0.0004)
0.123*
(0.049)
0.046
0.056
(0.074)
(0.077)
0.184+
0.188+
(0.103)
(0.103)
293,714
293,714
2,194
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Num. Obs. Num. Obs.

Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table shows the results of reduced form
specifications of the forms described in section 1.2, but with measures of price dispersion, rather than average prices, as the dependent variables.
Columns 1 and 3 report estimates that take the same form as that reported in column 2 of Table 2, while columns 2 and 4 report estimates that
take the same form as that reported in column 5 of Table 2. In columns 1 and 2 the dependent variables is the standard deviation of payments,
as calculated at the service-by-state-year level. In columns 3 and 4 the dependent variables is the coefficient of variation of payments, again
calculated at the service-by-state-year level. Observations are weighted according to the number of times the service is observed in Medicare
Part B in 1997. The panel is balanced in the sense that each service-by-state pairing is only included if public and private prices could be
estimated for each year from 1995 through 2002. Standard errors are calculated allowing for arbitrary correlation among the errors associated
with each service. Additional features of each specification are described within the table. The construction of all variables is further described
in the note to Table 1 and in the main text. Sources: Authors’ calculations using Medicare claims and Thompson Reuters MarketScan data.

N
Number of Clusters
Weighted
State By Year FE
HCPCS By State FE
Eye Procedure Reductions
Play Type Controls
RVUs Per Service Control
Panel Balanced
Other Sample Restrictions

Cost Sharing Fraction

Plan Type Control

Surgical Procedure × Post-1997

Dependent Variable:
Payment Shock × Post-1997

(1)
(2)
Private Payment SD
0.681*
(0.292)
2.763
(8.569)
29.550
37.817
(24.710)
(30.637)
24.051
24.380
(30.134)
(30.110)
293,714
293,714
2,194
2,194
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Num. Obs. Num. Obs.

Appendix Table D.9: Baseline Estimates of the Effect of Medicare Price Changes on Price Variation

E

Estimates of the Overall Reallocation Resulting from
Our Payment Shocks

Medicare spending on surgical care amounted to $21.9 billion (inflation-adjusted to 2013
dollars) after the surgical payment cut, and that on medical care $47.3 billion (also in 2013
dollars) after the payment increase. 63 Private insurers spent $175 billion on physician and
clinical services in 1998 (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 2013). Assuming
the same medical-surgical split as in Medicare, and using our baseline cost-following estimate
of 1.16, yields a reallocation of $7.6 billion in private insurance payments due to the medicalsurgical pricing change.
This estimate of the private sector spillover is subject to two caveats. The first is a
standard concern of our estimates’ external validity. As we observed in section 1.4, the
MarketScan data represent the universe of claims associated with a selected set of plans
provided by large employers. Small employers’ plans or individual market insurance may
be more or less likely to pay physicians according to fee schedules influenced by Medicare’s
relative payments.
Second, Medicare may exert more influence over fee-for-service payments than over capitated payments. On this point it is important to keep in mind that, although managed care
was pervasive during the period we study, it typically did not translate into capitated payment of physician groups. The Community Tracking Study (CTS) reveals that throughout
the period we study, roughly 40 percent of the revenue of physicians’ practices was linked to
managed care contracts. A much smaller share of revenue was prepaid or capitated. In 1996
this share was 16 percent (CSHSC 1999, 56), while in 2004 it was 13 percent (CSHSC 2006,
4-29). Throughout our sample, capitated payments thus represented less than one-third of
the revenues associated with managed care. Additionally, the share of revenue reported in
the CTS as being capitated includes payments under both Medicaid and Medicare managed
care arrangements, which are sizable. The capitated share of physician revenues from private
sector payers is thus not particularly large. In the context of Medicare’s payments for surgical procedures relative to other services, conservative adjustments for these factors would
leave our estimate of the ratio of the private sector spillover to Medicare’s direct effect on
the order of 3, rather than the 3.9 that we present in section 3.2.
We must also consider external validity in the context of our estimates of the effects of
changes in Medicare’s system of geographic adjustments. Here too, Medicare’s influence on
payments in small-group and individual market plans may be either greater or smaller than
its influence on the payments of plans provided by large employers. But the concern about
capitation that we raised in the previous paragraph is less relevant here. Recall that these
geographic payment changes altered payments across the board rather than differentially
across services. In fee-for-service settings, benchmarking to Medicare’s relative payment
63

The data come from Medicare’s Physician/Supplier Procedure Summary Master File,
which is available from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services at http://www.cms.
gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Files-for-Order/NonIdentifiableDataFiles/
PhysicianSupplierProcedureSummaryMasterFile.html (accessed August 11, 2014).

92

menu creates a strong, mechanical link between public and private payments for one service
relative to another, which would not be relevant in capitated contracts. But since this
mechanism is less applicable when considering across-the-board payment changes, our results
in this context likely reflect Medicare’s influence on the physician’s opportunity cost, which
would be relevant for both capitated and fee-for-service payments. So there is less need
to exclude capitated payments when calculating the spillovers from broad-based geographic
payment changes.

93

