                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW MUCH DO OFFICIAL PRICE INDEXES TELL US ABOUT INFLATION?

                                        Jessie Handbury
                                       Tsutomu Watanabe
                                       David E. Weinstein

                                       Working Paper 19504
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19504


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We would like to thank Morgan Hardy, Scott Marchi, and
Molly Schnell for excellent research support. We also would like to thank Sakai Ando, Kosuke Aoki,
John Greenlees, and Emi Nakamura for excellent comments. David Weinstein would like to thank
the National Science Foundation (SES-11227493) and the Center on Japanese Economy and Business
for generous financial support. Jessie Handbury would like to thank the Research Sponsors’ Program
of the Zell-Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton for financial support. Tsutomu Watanabe would like
to thank the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for financial support (JSPS Grant-in-Aid for
Scientific Research no. 24223003).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jessie Handbury, Tsutomu Watanabe, and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Much Do Official Price Indexes Tell Us about Inflation?
Jessie Handbury, Tsutomu Watanabe, and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 19504
October 2013
JEL No. E01,E31,E5

                                             ABSTRACT

Official price indexes, such as the CPI, are imperfect indicators of inflation calculated using ad hoc
price formulae different from the theoretically well-founded inflation indexes favored by economists.
This paper provides the first estimate of how accurately the CPI informs us about “true” inflation.
We use the largest price and quantity dataset ever employed in economics to build a Törnqvist inflation
index for Japan between 1989 and 2010. Our comparison of this true inflation index with the CPI indicates
that the CPI bias is not constant but depends on the level of inflation. We show the informativeness
of the CPI rises with inflation. When measured inflation is low (less than 2.4% per year) the CPI is
a poor predictor of true inflation even over 12-month periods. Outside this range, the CPI is a much
better measure of inflation. We find that the U.S. PCE Deflator methodology is superior to the Japanese
CPI methodology but still exhibits substantial measurement error and biases rendering it a problematic
predictor of inflation in low inflation regimes as well.


Jessie Handbury                                     David E. Weinstein
The Wharton School                                  Columbia University
University of Pennsylvania                          Department of Economics
1463 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall                   420 W. 118th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104                              MC 3308
handbury@wharton.upenn.edu                          New York, NY 10027
                                                    and NBER
Tsutomu Watanabe                                    dew35@columbia.edu
Faculty of Economics
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo, 113-0033
watanabe@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp
1     Introduction

We have long known that the price indexes constructed by statistical agencies, such as the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) deflator,
measure inflation with error. This error arises for two reasons. First, formula biases or er-
rors appear because statistical agencies do not use the price aggregation formula dictated by
theory. Second, imperfect sampling means that official price indexes are inherently stochas-
tic. A theoretical macroeconomics literature starting with Svensson and Woodford [2003]
and Aoki [2003] has noted that these stochastic measurement errors imply that one cannot
assume that true inflation equals the CPI less some bias term. In general, the relationship is
more complex, but what is it? This paper provides the first answer to this question by an-
alyzing the largest dataset ever utilized in economics: 5 billion Japanese price and quantity
observations collected over a 23 year period. The results are disturbing. We show that when
the Japanese CPI measures inflation as low (below 2.4 percent in our baseline estimates)
there is little relation between measured inflation and actual inflation. Outside of this range,
measured inflation understates actual inflation changes. In other words, one can infer infla-
tion changes from CPI changes when the CPI is high, but not when the CPI close to zero.
We also show that if Japan were to shift to a methodology akin to the U.S. PCE deflator,
the non-linearity would be reduced but not eliminated. This non-linear relationship between
measured and actual inflation has important implications for the conduct of monetary policy
in low inflation regimes.
    The basic intuition is straightforward. There is little disagreement that a superlative
price index, such as the Törnqvist, has the best theoretical properties of any price index
we have discovered [Diewert and Nakamura, 1993]. However, it is not possible to construct
this index given the limited data resources of most statistical agencies. Thus, price indexes
in all countries are constructed using other functional forms. We demonstrate that the
measurement error that results from using the wrong formula is not diminished by averaging
over larger sets of observations and is not constant over time. The empirical macroeconomics

                                               1
literature has documented that the volatility of inflation rises with the level of inflation. We
study the volatility of both true inflation and the CPI measurement errors with surprising
results. While we confirm that the volatility of true inflation rises rapidly with its level, we
find that the variance of the CPI measurement errors does not.
   Thus, when inflation is high, most of the observed movement in the CPI is due to actual
inflation movements, but when the inflation is low, much of the movement in the CPI is
noise. Just as a bathroom scale is suitable for determining changes in a person’s weight but
not those of a mouse, so the CPI is more accurate when inflation is high than when it is low.
   To understand the math underlying this result, think of the CPI as having two compo-
nents: a signal of true inflation and a measurement error, or noise. If the measurement errors
are uncorrelated with inflation rates, it is easy to show that the CPI inflation will be more
informative about actual inflation if the signal-to-noise ratio is high. If this ratio is high, the
variance of true inflation must be a large component of CPI variation, and one should expect
that true inflation moves nearly one to one with the CPI. If the variance of true inflation is
small relative the movements in the CPI, then the signal-to-noise ratio will, likewise be low,
and it is safe to largely ignore CPI movements when trying to determine inflation changes.
   One can formalize this intuition mathematically by realizing that our best estimate of
true inflation movements equal CPI movements multiplied by a coefficient that equals the
variance of true inflation divided by the variance of the CPI. Since the variance of the CPI
rises with both the variance of true inflation and the variance of the error, this coefficient
will tend to be less than one. If the variance of true inflation is high relative to the variance
of the CPI error (a high signal-to-noise ratio), this coefficient will be close to one, and true
inflation will move almost one-to-one with the CPI. However, if the signal-to-noise ratio is
low, CPI movements will not be informative about true inflation movements and one should
not expect true inflation to move much as the CPI moves.
   While this result is a simple application of econometric theory, economics can inform
our understanding of when we should expect the signal-to-noise ratio of the CPI to be high


                                                2
and when we should expect it to be low. Starting with Okun [1971], many studies (e.g.,
Friedman [1977], Taylor [1981], Ball et al. [1988], Ball and Cecchetti [1990], Kiley [2000])
have found that countries with high inflation rates tend to have high inflation volatility.1
Critically, these studies imply that the signal in the CPI (i.e., the variance of true inflation)
should be rising as inflation rises. The rising inflation signal in the CPI implies that as long
as CPI noise does not rise too quickly with inflation, it must be the case that there is a much
tighter relationship between the CPI and inflation in high inflation regimes than in low ones.
    This has profound implications for how one should think about inflation and monetary
policy. First, it means that one cannot write true inflation as a linear function of the CPI.
In particular, true inflation cannot be assumed to equal the CPI less a constant bias term.
These non-linearities matter enormously in our data. For example, in our baseline estimates
based on Japanese data that we will discuss later, we find that when the annual Japanese CPI
registers an inflation rate of 0 percent, true inflation is -0.8 percent—but when CPI inflation
is 2 percent the bias rises to -1.8 percent. In other words, a 2 percent CPI inflation target is
actually a price stability target, when using annual data. Since the methodology underlying
the Japanese CPI is more prevalent internationally than that used in the U.S. PCE deflator,
this potentially has broad implications. Our results even have implications for the U.S.
PCE deflator. When we replicate the PCE deflator methodology using Japanese data, we
find the PCE deflator methodology generates substantial upward biases: the PCE deflator
methodology overstates inflation by about a percentage point when reported inflation is 2
    1
      Friedman [1977] argues that “a burst of inflation produces strong pressure to counter it. Policy goes
from one direction to the other, encouraging wide variation in the actual and anticipated rate of inflation.”
A similar idea is proposed by Ball [1992], who argues that when inflation is low, there is a consensus that it
should be kept low; however, when inflation is high, there is disagreement about the importance of reducing
it, leading to high variability of inflation. Taylor [1981] suggests that accommodative monetary policies may
lead to high inflation and greater variability in response to supply shocks. Cukierman and Meltzer argue that
an exogenous increase in the variance of monetary control errors gives a central bank a stronger incentive
to create surprise inflation, leading to a high inflation and high volatility of inflation. Ball et al. [1988]
show, using a menu cost model, that high trend inflation reduces nominal price rigidity and thus steepens
the short-run Phillips curve. As a result, shocks to aggregate demand have smaller effects on output but
larger effects on inflation. Gagnon [2009] confirms that the micro price data is consistent with this story by
showing that the frequency of price adjustment increases with the level of inflation.




                                                      3
percent and overstates inflation changes by 30 percent when inflation is below 2.2 percent.2
       A second important implication concerns how central banks and other economic agents
should respond to CPI inflation movements. Again, the non-linearity arising from the fact
that the signal-to-noise ratio in the Japanese CPI is much higher in high inflation regimes
matters. We estimate that a one percentage point rise in the CPI should raise one’s assess-
ment of true inflation by only half a percentage point when inflation is less than 2 percent,
but this same increase should raise one’s assessment by 2 percent when inflation is high. In
other words, failure to take into account the change in an official price index’s signal-to-noise
ratio is likely to mean that central banks pay far too much attention to official price indexes
when they are low and not enough attention when they are high.
       In order to demonstrate these points, our paper makes use of the Nikkei Point of Sale
database.3 Nikkei collects daily scanner purchase data from hundreds of large and small
stores covering hundreds of thousands of barcodes spread across Japan in the grocery sector.
These data are typically sold by Nikkei to customers interested in accurately measuring the
sales of individual barcodes. Our data covers the period from 1988 to 2010 and contains 4.82
billion price and quantity observations. The Japanese CPI, like the CPIs of most countries,
contains no quantity data and a tiny fraction of the number of price observations. Crucially,
the Nikkei data come as close as one could come empirically to observing the universe of
grocery price and quantity observations in the Japanese economy. Moreover, the long time
span means that we observe Japanese periods of substantial inflation and deflation. The fact
that we have both price and quantity data enables us to construct the theoretically well-
founded Törnqvist index of “true” inflation for a set of items covering 17 percent of Japanese
consumer expenditure. By following Abe and Tonogi’s [2010] concordance matching the
items in the Nikkei POS with those of the Japanese CPI, we are able to observe both a true
inflation measure and the CPI value.
   2
     The variability of the bias has not been the focus of most prior work in this area (see the excellent
surveys by Hausman [2003], Lebow and Rudd [2003], and Reinsdorf and Triplett [2009]).
   3
     This is an expanded version of the dataset used in Abe and Tonogi [2010].



                                                    4
   These data let us make a number of important empirical findings. The first is the
volatility in the CPI error. Our estimates of this error based on grocery data are likely to
be substantially lower than for the rest of the CPI because it is much easier to measure the
prices of the goods sold in a grocery store than major CPI components like housing, transport
and communication, and recreation. Nonetheless, we find that inflation mismeasurement is
large. Our results indicate that over 12-month periods, the grocery CPI sometimes overstated
inflation relative to a Törnqvist by as much as four percentage points while at other times it
understated inflation by as much as 2 percentage points. The fact that the standard deviation
in the bias is 0.9 percent means that much of the fluctuation in observed inflation during
this time period was due to CPI errors. It is the surprising magnitude of these errors that
drive our basic finding that the CPI is not very informative when the variance of inflation is
low.
   It is not possible to precisely decompose the reasons for all of the differences between
the CPI and the Törnqvist because the two indexes differ in a myriad of ways. Some of
the important differences include the use of unweighted arithmetic (or sometimes geometric)
averages rather than sales-weighted geometric averages at the lower-level, upper level weights
that differ from those of a Törnqvist because they are computed from different sources than
the lower level data and at different times, and finally, samples of prices instead of the
universe of prices. In sum, official price indexes contain two classes of errors: “sampling
errors” arising from using a subset of the price data and “formula errors” arising from using
the wrong weights and formulas to aggregate the price information. An important difference
between these two types of errors is that formula errors are not diminished by building price
indexes with more data. For example, if the correct formula required a set of numbers to
be multiplied together, but instead the statistical agency added them, the result would be
different in general, and this difference would not be diminished by working with larger sets
of numbers.
   In order to better understand the sources of this noise, we show how one can express


                                              5
CPI errors relative to a Törnqvist index, so that one can decompose the variance of the
CPI into movements in true inflation, upper-level weighting errors, and mismeasurement
of lower-level item indexes. True inflation can also be decomposed into fluctuations due to
aggregate inflation movements and fluctuations arising from relative price movements (which
will matter if some goods have nontrivial sales shares).
   Since we can directly measure the CPI variance and its components, we can precisely
explain the non-linear relationship between the CPI and true inflation. We first show that
while there is some tendency for the variance of CPI noise to rise as inflation rises, the rise
is small compared to the tremendous increase in inflation volatility that occurs as inflation
rises. In other words, while Cecchetti [1997] and Shapiro and Wilcox [1996] were right to
point the tendency for CPI noise to rise with inflation because lower-level substitution bias
rises with inflation, this effect is very small compared to the rise in inflation volatility.
   Because we observe the underlying individual price and quantity data, we are able to
be precise about how the non-linear relationship between the two series is generated. We
decompose inflation volatility into two components: one related to movements in compo-
nents of inflation that are common across products and another related to the relative price
dispersion across products. Consistent with previous work, we find that relative price dis-
persion rises with inflation (c.f. Vining and Elwertowski [1976], Parks [1978], Fischer [1981]
and Stockton [1988]). The variance in relative price shocks more than doubles as inflation
rises past 2.4 percent, but this dispersion explains only a small component of the increase in
aggregate price volatility. Most of this increase is explained by the variance in the aggregate
or common component of inflation, which rises by a massive 320 percent. The non-linear
relationship between inflation and the CPI is primarily driven by the fact that CPI mea-
surement errors are much less sensitive to inflation than either component of aggregate price
volatility: the variance of upper- and lower-level measurement errors only increase by 35–60
percent as we move from low inflation to high inflation regimes. The critical factors driving
the non-linearity are the higher inflation variance in high inflation regimes and the relative


                                                6
insensitivity of CPI measurement errors to inflation movements.
        The richness of our data enables us to delve deeper into the sources of these errors by
performing a number of informative decompositions. First our results suggest that upper-
level weighting errors—which in the U.S. account for most of the difference between chained
and unchained indexes—matter for the average bias but are relatively unimportant in under-
standing movements in measurement error. Second, we find that one major source of formula
error comes from using arithmetic, rather than geometric, averages of prices. This suggests
that the move to geometric averaging of prices not only reduced the upward bias in inflation
indexes but also reduced the noise in these indexes. Third, we are able to show that geo-
metric averaging is not a complete solution in itself. In our simulations using Japanese data,
we show that the PCE deflator methodology still produces significant biases and measure-
ment error relative to the Törnqvist due to the choice of simple geometric averaging rather
than weighted averaging. Interestingly, sampling errors seem to be relatively unimportant
in understanding why our price indexes are flawed.
        The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes our data and provides a
preview of the CPI measurement issues, biases and data challenges. Section 3 describes the
econometric strategies we follow in decomposing the relationship between true and measured
inflation. Section 4 presents our main empirical findings, and Section 5 concludes.



2         Data

Our paper makes use of two principal datasets. The first is detailed Japanese CPI data. We
obtained the price indexes and CPI weights from various issues of the Annual Report on the
Consumer Price Index produced by the Statistics Bureau (SBJ) at the Ministry of Internal
Affairs and Communications.4 We then used these data to build the CPI for grocery items
following the same formulas used by the SBJ. In all of our work, the inflation rate we work
    4
    Although the official name of the bureau is the “Statististics Bureau,” we will follow the Japanese website
and abbreviate it with SBJ, which stands for “Statistics Bureau of Japan.” Data are available at the SBJ
website (http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/cpi/). Issues prior to 2001 are only available in paper form.

                                                      7
with is the inflation rate in a given month relative to the same month in the previous year.
This lets us avoid seasonality problems.
       The SBJ produces a CPI index conforming to the International Labor Organization
standard. The ILO methodology is the basic approach used in all advanced countries.5 Thus,
many of the strengths and weaknesses of the Japanese CPI are common to most advanced
countries. Nevertheless, it is worth describing how the index is constructed. Price quotes for
each good are collected each month during the span of the same week in stores in hundreds of
locations across Japan. Indeed the geographic representation of the Japanese CPI is superior
to that of the U.S. CPI. Like the U.S. CPI, there is highly imperfect information available
on what weights to use at the lower level. The SBJ defines product type specifications for
each of the item categories and only collects prices for products fitting these specifications.6
For example, the price quotes for the “Butter” item include only the prices of products that
are 200 grams and packed in a paper container, excluding unsalted varieties [Imai et al.,
2012]. The SBJ then calculates inflation for each item as a Dutot index; that is, the ratio
of the mean price quotes collected for an item in one period relative to another. Once these
item indexes are constructed, the SBJ aggregates the data to form an overall CPI using
weights from its consumer expenditure survey. The upper-level item weights are based on
item expenditure shares in a base year that is updated every five years.7
       The items in the grocery elements of the CPI account for 17 percent of the full CPI.
Grocery items are extremely standardized items that are easy to price, so it is far easier to
measure price changes for this sample of the CPI than it is for most of the remainder. For
example, it is easier to measure the the 30-day price change of a 300 ml can of Coca Cola
sold in a particular store than the 30-day price change of other major expenditure items
like imputed rent or recreational services. One should therefore anticipate that our paper
   5
      See http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/cpi/1585.htm#B2
   6
      See Imai et al. [2012] for a more detailed description of this “purposive” sampling rule and a comparison
of its performance relative to the probability sampling used by the BLS.
    7
      There are a range of differences between how the BLS calculates the U.S. CPI and the Japanese method-
ology described above. We explore how these technical differences potentially reduce the variance of the CPI
errors that drive our main results in Section 4.4 below.


                                                      8
                                                  Figure 1

                                               Official CPI Series

              .06
              .04
          Inflation
              0.02
              −.02




                      Jan 1990      Jan 1995         Jan 2000    Jan 2005       Jan 2010
                                                       Date

                                               Grocery CPI           Full CPI
                      Monthly Weights using 12 Month Base Gap




understates the magnitude of CPI measurement error.
   An obvious concern with our focus on grocery items is that this sample of goods might
not be representative. While it is true that inflation measurement errors are likely to be
much smaller in our sample of grocery items than for the whole CPI, the grocery CPI tends
to track the overall Japanese CPI quite closely. Figure 1 plots both the Grocery CPI and the
full CPI, and it is immediately apparent that the two are fairly closely correlated (ρ = 0.8)
despite the fact that grocery items make up less 20 percent of the CPI. Our sample of
products seems to capture most of the variation in the official CPI including the overall
trend in inflation.
   Our second dataset is the Nikkei Point of Sale (Nikkei POS) dataset. The Nikkei data
differs from other barcode datasets in frequency, scope, and length. Nikkei collects data at
a daily frequency. We observe the number of units of a barcoded good purchased in a store
on a day and the store’s sales revenue for that barcode on that day. In a typical month


                                                      9
we observe prices for about a quarter of a million different grocery products, each identified
by a barcode. Nikkei also has impressive scope relative to other datasets. Where other
datasets focus on one store or chain, the Nikkei POS database includes observations taken
from hundreds of grocery and convenience stores spread across Japan each day. This is done
so that Nikkei can provide customers with an accurate picture of how goods are sold in
general and across different markets. Finally, the truly amazing feature of the Nikkei POS
data is its time dimension. Our data makes use of 23 years of these data collected from 1988
through 2010, all together comprising close to 5 billion observations.
       The detail in the Nikkei data allows us to construct a price index under fewer assumptions
than the official CPI. We measure “true” inflation using a Törnqvist index. As a superlative
index, the Törnqvist is a second order approximation to any twice-differentiable homothetic
expenditure function, and is as close as we can come to computing an exact inflation index
without actually specifying preferences.8 Since our data permits us to compare the prices of
identical goods purchased in the the same store using the correct weights for that store, we
are able to exactly produce this index.9
       It is difficult to formally compare the properties of the two-tiered CPI with those of
the Törnqvist, which does not have a two-tier system. For example, it is not impossible
to formally assess the importance of measurement error at the CPI’s lower level because
the Törnqvist has no lower level. In order to make progress on understanding what causes
CPI errors, we utilize a Törnqvist index that has a two-tiered structure. We call this two-
tiered index the “item Törnqvist” because the lower tier indexes are calculated at the “item”
level to correspond with the Japanese CPI and then aggregated using Törnqvist weights.
Fortunately, the item Törnqvist produces inflation rates that are almost identical to those
of the standard Törnqvist as is shown in Figure 2. Thus, we can be confident that virtually
all of the difference between Törnqvist and the CPI can be understood in terms of the
   8
     The Törnqvist measures inflation in common goods prices. Assumptions on preferences are required in
order to account for the welfare effects of entry and exit of goods (see, for example, Broda and Weinstein
[2010]).
   9
     See Appendix B for details on the Törnqvist index calculation.


                                                   10
                                                      Figure 2

                                           Standard vs. Item Tornqvist

                .06
                .04
                  .02
           Inflation
           0    −.02
                −.04




                        Jan 1990        Jan 1995          Jan 2000         Jan 2005            Jan 2010
                                                            Date

                                           Standard Tornqvist               Item Tornqvist
                        Monthly Weights using 12 Month Base Gap
                        Our ’Item Tornqvist’ incorporates a two−tiered aggregation structure




decomposition between an item Törnqvist and the CPI and not as differences between the
item Törnqvist and the standard Törnqvist.10 In the interest of simplicity, we will therefore
ignore the difference between the item Törnqvist and the Törnqvist indexes of inflation and
refer simply to to the “item Törnqvist” as the “Törnqvist” index throughout.


2.1     Measurement Error in the Official CPI

We calculate the measurement error in the official CPI by comparing it with the Törnqvist
index. Figure 3 presents the grocery component of the official CPI and the Törnqvist index
calculated using the Nikkei data. As one can see in the figure, there are substantial differences
between the CPI and the Törnqvist index. Figure 3 suggests that there is a very clear upward
  10
    Diewert [1978] shows that a superlative index, such as the Törnqvist, is approximately consistent in
aggregation (that is, the value of an index calculated in two stages approximately coincides with the value
of an index calculated in a single stage) and that this approximation is closer for chained indexes, like those
constructed here using changes in prices and quantities between successive periods, rather than fixed base
indexes. It is not surprising, therefore, that all of our results are qualitatively identical whether we use the
standard or the item Törnqvist.

                                                          11
                                                  Figure 3

                                      Competing Inflation Measures

              .06
              .04.02
          Inflation
         0    −.02
              −.04




                       Jan 1990      Jan 1995        Jan 2000    Jan 2005     Jan 2010
                                                       Date

                                              Grocery CPI        Tornqvist
                       Monthly Weights using 12 Month Base Gap




bias in the official index. While the Törnqvist index became negative in 1993, the official
index did not register deflation until 1995. However, the correlation between the CPI and
the Törnqvist is much less tight than what one might expect for two indexes measuring
the same component of inflation. The correlation between the two indexes is 0.87, which
reflects the fact that there are some periods in with the two indexes differ quite substantially.
For example, in 1994 the CPI was registering an inflation rate that was at one point 4.7
percentage points above that of Törnqvist, in 1991 CPI understated inflation by almost
2 percentage points, and between 1995-1999, the bias was close to zero. Thus, Figure 3
indicates that one should be very wary of assuming that one can infer inflation by looking
at an official index and subtracting off a constant bias term.
   In Table 1, we study the bias in the CPI, defined as the difference between the CPI and
the Törnqvist. As we can see in the first column, this difference averages to 0.63 percent
per year. The Törnqvist index suggests that Japanese grocery goods entered a period of


                                                     12
sustained deflation in 1993. If we focus our attention on that period we see that the official
bias in the CPI was actually larger, at 0.76 percent per year.

                                               Table 1
                                             Index Biases

                                                                     π CPI − π T
                                       Annualized Total Bias              0.625
                                   Standard Deviation of Bias             0.961
                            Annualized Total Bias (Post-93)               0.762
                        Standard Deviation of Bias (Post-93)              0.763


       This bias implies a radically different impression of what has happened to the price
level in Japan (at least for grocery goods). As one can see in Figure 4 the official price index
suggests that prices only fell by 4.2 percent between 1993 and 2010, suggesting that deflation
was quite mild. The superlative index, on the other hand, indicates that deflation averaged
.91 percent per year, implying a far more substantial 14.5 percent drop in the price level
over the whole period.
       What is most striking in Table 1 is the magnitude of the standard deviation of the bias:
0.96 percentage points. This means that while, on average, the CPI inflation rate is biased
upwards by 0.6 percentage points per year, one can only say with 95 percent confidence that
this bias lies between -1.3 and 2.5 percentage points. In other words, if the official inflation
rate is one percent per year and aggregate CPI errors are the same as those for grocery
items, one can only infer that the true is inflation rate is between -1.5and 2.3 percentage
points. Thus, a one percent measured inflation rate would not be sufficient information for a
central bank to know if the economy is in inflation or deflation. The magnitude and standard
deviation of the bias in the grocery component of the CPI is particularly striking since other
components of the CPI are subject to much larger measurement errors, potentially yielding
an even larger and more noisy bias in the overall CPI.11
  11
     Of course, averaging over more price series might improve the picture for the overall CPI—a point we
will address later—but the magnitude of the errors is still worrying.



                                                   13
                                                   Figure 4

                                     Imputed Price Level (100 = 1993)

           105    100
 Implied Price Level
90       9585




                        Jan 1990        Jan 1995           Jan 2000       Jan 2005     Jan 2010
                                                           Year

                                               Tornqvist              Grocery CPI
                        Monthly Weights using 12 Month Base Gap




                                                   Figure 5

                                      Difference Between Grocery CPI
                                               and Tornqvist
 .02       .06
           .04
Bias
           0
           −.02




                        Jan 1990      Jan 1995         Jan 2000         Jan 2005     Jan 2010
                                                         Date
                        Monthly Weights using 12 Month Base Gap




                                                       14
    We can see the magnitude of the noise in Figure 5. The figure plots the difference between
the CPI and the Törnqvist index over the full time period. There are two important findings
revealed by the figure. First, as we saw in Table 1, the CPI bias is not constant. While
the bias is positive on average, the difference between the CPI and the Törnqvist fluctuates.
Second, the magnitude of the measurement error is quite large in comparison with the
underlying Japanese inflation rate. While one can see that the bias is clearly positive on
average, there appears to be no clear relationship between the magnitude of the bias and the
underling inflation rate. For example, the bias was not exceptionally high or low in either of
the two periods that Japan experience inflation peaks, 1990-1 and 2008-9. The plot suggests
that it is not implausible to think of this noise as classical measurement error.
    The results in Figure 5 and Table 1 have extremely important implications for our un-
derstanding of inflation. As basic econometrics tells us, the fact that there is substantial
measurement error in the CPI means those who assume that a one percent movement in the
CPI corresponds to a one percent movement in inflation will systematically overstate true
inflation movements. We turn to formalizing this intuition in the next section.



3     Econometric Theory

3.1    Inferring True Inflation from Measured Inflation

The basic question we are trying to ask is how do we infer true inflation from the measured
values of inflation. We think about this problem mathematically by first assuming that
measured inflation—the CPI, which we denote πtCP I —is equal to true inflation, which we
denote πtT , plus some measurement error, φt :


                                       πtCP I = πtT + φt                                   (1)




                                              15
where πtT and φt are both unobserved. Equation 1 can be thought of as the standard equation
used in the CPI bias literature.12 However, most users of the CPI are are interested in a
related but different question: what is the expected value of true inflation given measured
                  h           i
inflation, or E πtT |πtCP I = α0 + β 0 πtCP I ? Since πtT and πtCP I are both univariate and they
follow a linear relationship, the minimum mean square estimate of πtT is its conditional
expectation, which we can express as:

                                                                         
                                                    Cov πtT , πtCP I h CP I             i
                   E πtT |πtCP I = E πtT              +                   π t   − E   π CP I
                                                                                        t                    (2)
                                                         V ar (πtCP I )

indicating that the extent to which an unexpected change in the CPI is a signal of an
unexpected change in true inflation is governed by the ratio of the covariance of inflation
and the CPI to the variance of the CPI.
       The amount of information on true inflation, πtT , that is contained in observed inflation,
πtCP I , therefore depends crucially on the covariance of the two series relative to the variance
of the observed inflation series. It is useful to rewrite equation 2 in terms of a regression
coefficient, β, that would be obtained from regressing πtT on πtCP I :

                                                h                        i
                           E πtT |πtCP I = E πtT − βE πtCP I                       + βπtCP I


where:

                                                                                      
                          Cov πtT , πtCP I                  V ar πtT + Cov πtT , φt
                   β≡                             =                                                          (3)
                            V ar (πtCP I )            V ar (πtT ) + V ar (φt ) + 2Cov (πtT , φt )

where the second equality follows from equation (1).
       Equation 3 forms the foundation of everything that follows. In particular, the notion
that a given movement in the CPI produces a movement in actual inflation of the same
  12
     One can think of this formally by realizing that the price measurement literature has focused on obtaining
a link between true and measured inflation, i.e. estimating πtCP I = πtT + α + t , where π CP I is the CPI
inflation rate, πtT is the true inflation rate, α is the bias, and t is a mean-zero error term. This approach is
equivalent to equation (1) with φt = α + t .



                                                            16
magnitude, i.e. β = 1, relies on the assumption that there is no variation in the measurement
error of CPI. If there is any volatility measurement error in the CPI, true inflation cannot be
expressed as equal to measured inflation less some constant term. In other words, the fact
that the bias term in Figure 5 is not a horizontal line, provides prima facie evidence that the
common practice of assuming true inflation equals measured inflation less some bias term is
wrong.
   The noisy indicators literature has examined cases where β is constant. We will next
show that one should not expect this. In order to do this, it will be useful to build some
theory from first principles on what we should expect the relationship to be.


3.2      Decomposing “True” Inflation

We need to make a few assumptions about the underlying error structure causing CPI
mismeasurement in order to understand why β in equation 3 is unlikely to equal one or be
constant. We begin by assuming that inflation, πtT , is given by a Törnqvist index:


                                                            n
                                                πtT
                                                              X
                                       ln 1 +             =         wit πit                       (4)
                                                              i=1

              1
where wit =   2
                  (sit + sit−1 ), sit is the expenditure share of good i in period t, and 1 + πit is
                                                                                      Pn
the relative price of good i in period t relative to its price in period t − 1, and     i=1   wit = 1.
The price change of every good i from period t to period t − 1 can be decomposed as follows:


                                             πit = µt + νit ,                                     (5)

where µt is the aggregate component of inflation and νit is an idiosyncratic component of
that good’s price change. This enables us to rewrite the Törnqvist inflation index as

                                                           n
                                       πtT = µt +
                                                           X
                                                                 wit νit .                        (6)
                                                           i=1




                                                      17
3.3     The Variance of “Measured” Inflation

As we have argued earlier, statistical agencies cannot compute the Törnqvist index in equa-
tion (4) because the data requirements are too high. We can think of official inflation rates
as weighted averages of price changes in which the weights and formulas contain errors. We
can therefore write a general equation for the CPI, πtCP I in terms of the true underlying
price indexes as:
                                                n
                                     πtCP I =
                                                X
                                                      (wit + it ) (πit + δit ) ,                                      (7)
                                                i=1

where we use it to denote the error in the upper-level weight for good i at time t and δit to
denote the lower-level error in the measured inflation rate for the good. In this formulation,
if the the upper- and lower-level errors were eliminated, the CPI inflation rate would collapse
to that of the Törnqvist.
    In order to make the analysis that follows tractable, we need to assume that these errors
are random independent draws from distributions with zero means. In particular, we assume
(i.e. E (it ) = E (δit ) = 0, and Cov (it , jt ) = Cov (δit , δjt ) = Cov (νit , νjt ) = 0, µt ⊥ it , δit ).
As we show in Appendix A, these assumptions are sufficient to ensure that the error term
in equation 3 is independent of the level of inflation, a condition that we will examine in
the empirical section. These assumptions enable us to derive the variance of the the CPI in
                                                                                                
terms of the signal, given by the variance of true inflation V ar πtCP I                               , and the variances
of the various errors given below:

                                                                     n
                                                                                                         !
                                                                                       γ2
                       ar(πtCP I )         ar(πtT )        σδ2t            s2i,t−1        (n − 1) σν2t
                                                                     X
                   V                 = V               +                             +
                                                                     i=1               4
                                                 h                            i
                                        +nσ2t    σµ2 t   +   σν2t   + σδ2t ,                                          (8)


where the algebra used to derive this equation is relegated to Appendix A.
    Equation 8 is key to understanding the problems of formula bias in understanding the
variance of inflation measures. As we argued before, if wit ≈ 1/n ≈ si,t−1 then in the limit,



                                                           18
as the number of products goes to infinity, the law of large numbers will cause the variance
in the first term to approach the variance in underlying inflation. Similarly, the law of large
numbers will also cause the second term to also approach zero because any idiosyncratic
error in calculating lower-level price quote will not affect the average. However, the last
term in equation (8) will not in general approach zero as the number of items in the index
approaches infinity. The reason more data does not improve the accuracy of the CPI stems
from the fact that CPI contains a formula bias, which is contained in the t ’s. These errors
do not disappear as one averages across more sectors because they are correlated with the
inflationary errors and the δt ’s. In other words, one cannot correct for the fact that the CPI
uses the wrong formula to measure inflation by simply using more data: averaging over more
sectors will not solve the problem of formula bias.
   Our next task is to compute correlation between πtCP I and πtT . In Appendix A we
show that under reasonable assumptions about the independence of the various idiosyncratic
shocks we can write:

                                                                 
                               Cov πtT , πtCP I        = V ar πtT                          (9)


The key assumption behind this result is that the CPI measurement errors, it and δit , are
independent draws from a distribution and, therefore, uncorrelated with the components of
true inflation, µt and νit . While equation 9 does not need to be true for all possible price
shocks, we will show in the empirical section that it is an extremely good approximation of
reality. This result has important implications for our understanding of 2. In particular, if
we maintain the assumptions necessary to derive equation 9, we can rewrite the expression




                                                  19
for β derived in equation 3 in terms of the fundamental microeconomic price shocks as,
                                      
                       V ar πtT
       β =                                                                                                                   (10)
               V ar (πtT ) + V ar (φt )
                                                                         
                                                              V ar πtT
           =                               n
                                                                                   !                                    ≤1   (11)
                                                             γ2                     h                    i
                                   σδ2t          s2i,t−1        (n − 1) σν2t + nσ2t σµ2 t + σν2t + σδ2t
                                           X
               V   ar (πtT )   +                           +
                                           i=1               4
                                   |                                          {z                                    }
                                                                      “CPI Noise”≥0



where σµ2 t is the variance in common price shocks inflation, and σν2t is the variance in id-
iosyncratic price shocks..
   Equation 11 is the critical equation for everything that follows. A first clear implication of
this equation is that a rise in CPI inflation of a given percentage should always be associated
with an equal or smaller percentage rise in actual inflation. A second implication is that
with non-constant measurement errors (i.e., σδ2t > 0 or σ2t > 0) changes in the CPI always
overestimate actual inflation changes.
   Our ability to decompose this bias into the underlying components enables us to make
much stronger statements about the relationship between real inflation and measured infla-
tion. Ball et al. [1988], among others, have argued that the variance of inflation should rise
as inflation rises. However, they were only able to make this claim using U.S. CPI data, and
thus, it is not clear that this rise in variance is due to actual inflation becoming more volatile,
i.e., a rise in σµ2 t , or just an increase in the volatility of idiosyncratic price movements, σν2t .
The former might occur if monetary shocks become more volatile when inflation rises, and
the latter would arise if price dispersion rises with inflation. One of the interesting elements
                                                                                                    
of our setup is that we can not only examine if Cov V ar πtT , πtT > 0, but we can also
understand why it is true.
   A second, and more important, feature of our approach is that we also have a direct
                                                                                                            
measure of the “CPI Noise” term in equation 11. If Cov V ar πtT , πtT                                              > 0 and this
term is approximately constant, then this implies that there will be a non-linear relationship



                                                                 20
between CPI inflation changes and actual inflation changes. When the CPI is low, the signal
to noise ratio will be low because most movements in the CPI will be driven by noise, and
hence one should not adjust expectations of true inflation from movements in the CPI. But
                                     
when inflation is high and V ar πtT is large, movements in our estimate of actual inflation
much more with movements in the CPI. In order to compute the exact magnitudes we need
to first compute the elements of equation 11.



4      Results

We divide our results into several sections. First, we document that there is a strong non-
linear relationship between true inflation and the CPI. Second, we investigate the microstruc-
ture of this non-linearity with an aim of understanding what elements of measured inflation
explain our findings. Third, we conduct a series of robustness checks to examine whether
the results stem from the methodologies employed by statistical agencies or whether our
results simply stem from using a different dataset to measure prices. Finally, we consider
some potential fixes to the measurement of inflation.


4.1     Inferring Inflation

We now turn to studying the relationship between the official CPI and the Törnqvist index
addressing a series of questions motivated by the theoretical framework outlined above:

    1. Is the signal-to-noise coefficient (β) equal to one?

    2. Is the relationship between true inflation and measured inflation non-linear, resulting
       in a poor relationship between measured inflation when it is low and a stronger one
       when it is high?

    Fortunately, both of these questions can be qualitatively assessed by looking at the data.
We start by plotting πtT against πtCP I in Figure 6. Each point in the plot represents a 12-


                                               21
                                                  Figure 6

                                            Spline Regression Fit
                                                  Knot at 2.385%
             6
             4
         Tornqvist
         0   −2
             −42




                       −2               0                 2               4         6
                                                    Grocery CPI

                                            Observations           Fitted values
                                            45° Line
                     Monthly Weights using 12 Month Base Gap




month inflation rate taken from our sample. There is a very strong positive relationship
between true inflation and CPI inflation when the inflation rate exceeds 2 percent, but there
is a much weaker connection between CPI inflation and actual inflation when the CPI is
registering rates of inflation below 2 percent per year.
   Regression evidence confirms that our eyes are not deceiving us. In Table 2 we present
a number of regressions of of πtT against πtCP I . In the first column we perform a simple
OLS regression and obtain a coefficient of 0.83. The fact that this coefficient is less than
one suggests that CPI measurement error could be causing an attenuation bias. However,
simple inspection of Figure 6 indicates that this bias is not stable. In column 2 we regress
πtT against πtCP I and its square. The data indicate that the attenuation bias is much larger
when CPI inflation is low relative to when it is higher. In column 3, we run a spline
regression with a knot placed at 1 percent measured inflation. The interesting feature of this
regression is that that for inflation rates below 1 percent, there is a much weaker relationship


                                                     22
                                       Table 2
Grocery CPI vs. Tornqvist Inflation Regressions (Lag-11 Newey-West Standard Errors)

                                        Tornqvist      Tornqvist   Tornqvist   Tornqvist
       Grocery CPI                       0.832∗∗∗      0.553∗∗∗
                                         (0.148)       (0.151)
       Grocery CPI2                                     0.119∗∗
                                                       (0.0494)
       Grocery CPI (≤ 1%)                                           0.398∗∗
                                                                    (0.189)
       Grocery CPI (> 1%)                                          1.257∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.241)
       Grocery CPI (≤ 2.385%)                                                  0.505∗∗∗
                                                                               (0.165)
       Grocery CPI (> 2.385%)                                                  1.843∗∗∗
                                                                               (0.446)
       Constant                         -0.584∗∗∗      -0.908∗∗∗   -0.894∗∗∗   -0.775∗∗∗
                                         (0.173)        (0.224)     (0.216)     (0.183)
       Observations                        262            262         262         262
       Adjusted R2                        0.668          0.717       0.713       0.739
       Standard errors in parentheses
       ∗
         p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                  23
between measured and actual inflation. If we chose an endogenous knot, the data place it at
2.4 percent, indicating that there is a substantially weaker relationship between measured
inflation and true inflation below this point.13
       The results presented in the last column suggest that the relationship between measured
and actual inflation is highly non-linear. Consider, for example, how to interpret a move
in the Japanese CPI from -1 to 2 percent. According to the regression evidence in the last
column in Table 2, an inflation rate of -1 percent per year—as the Japanese CPI averaged
for many years—corresponds to a true inflation rate of -1.3. In other words the bias in
inflation is very small when inflation is moderately negative. However, if CPI inflation were
to rise by three percentage points to 2 percent, the negative bias would rise in magnitude
dramatically, reaching 1.8 percentage points. Our point estimate suggests that two percent
measured inflation rate is only a 0.2 percent inflation rate. In other words the current Bank
of Japan target inflation rate of 2 percent is extremely close to the correct rate to achieve
price stability! Moreover, the fact that the bias point estimate varies considerably with the
underlying inflation rate means that one should exercise caution in comparing estimates of
the bias computed using samples composed of observations using different inflation rates.
       A second striking feature of the non-linearity that we observe is that further increases in
CPI inflation imply much sharper rises in true inflation. For example, our estimation implies
that an increase in inflation from 2 percent to 5 percent would correspond to an increase in
true inflation from 0.24 percent to 3.4 percent. Since the upward bias largely disappears at
higher inflation rates, central banks should pay much more attention to inflationary changes
when inflation is high than when it is close to zero. A central bank that deems a movement
in CPI inflation from 0 to 2 percent as the same as a movement from 2 to 4 percent is liable
to dramatically overreact to inflation when it is low and and underact when it is high.
  13
    It is possible the relationship between measured inflation and true inflation depends on the absolute
magnitude of inflation, rather than its level. Suppose, for example, that inflation Tvolatility
                                                                                                  is increas-
                                                                                 T
ing in the magnitude
                T     of inflation, rather than its level, that is, Cov V ar π t  , |πt |  > 0 rather  than
             T
Cov V ar πt , πt > 0. We considered a specification with two knots symmetrically placed around 0, but
the data did not support this parameterization instead selecting a model with a single knot placed at 2.4
percent. This may reflect the fact that we do not experience any highly deflationary periods.


                                                     24
4.2      The Microstructure of Inflation Measurement Errors

The analysis above gives visual and econometric evidence for a non-linear relationship be-
tween the CPI and actual inflation, but we still have not identified the micro-foundations of
this relationship. Our theory depends on the CPI measurement error being classical. The-
oretically, one can construct cases in which this is not true, but its veracity is an empirical
                                                                
question. In order to assess whether Cov πtT , φt = 0, we regressed φt on πtT and could
not statistically reject that there was no relationship between the measurement error and
the level of inflation. Since we cannot statistically reject the hypothesis that the inflation
measurement error is classical, we assume it is so and proceed with our decomposition.

                                                Table 3
                               Summary Statistics (Means): Item Tornqvist

                        All       Ratio (1% Knot)            Ratio (2% Knot)          Ratio (Endogenous Knot)
 β(π CPI , π T )      0.833                2.56                      3.42                           3.65
 σπ2 T               3.18e-04             10.41                      8.01                           5.68
 σν2t                  3.49                2.46                      2.55                           2.34
 σµ̂2 t                0.79                7.45                      5.77                           4.16
 σε2t                  0.32                1.14                      1.19                           1.35
 σδ2t                  2.83                1.57                      1.60                           1.62
 Herf t               0.019                1.05                      1.05                           1.05
 CPI Noise            0.20                 2.36                      2.49                           2.56
 #Itemst              135.2                0.97                      0.98                           0.99
 γt                    -0.68
 Observations           262                0.32                      0.21                           0.15
 Note: Entries for σν2i,t , σµ̂2 t , σε2i,t , σδ2i,t , and the CPI Noise are divided by the entry for σπ2 T . The “Ratio”
 columns give the ratio of a variable in periods where π CPI is greater than the knot value to that variable’s
 value calculated from observations in those months when π CPI is less than the knot. The “Endogenous Knot”
 was determined to be 2.385%.



      Equation 11 provides the formula for decomposing β into the underlying variances. Fortu-
nately, our dataset is rich enough that we can directly measure all of the variance components
that are likely to create the biases. In Table 3 we compute β̂ along with all of its compo-
nents to examine why it varies with the level of inflation. In the first column of the table, we


                                                            25
present the results from the full sample with the first three elements of the column presenting
our regression coefficient from the first column of Table 2 along with its decomposition as
given in equation 11.
   A critical feature of equation 2 is that it tells us how to decompose movements in the
link between CPI inflation and actual based on movements in the underlying forces driving
movements in variance of actual inflation σπ2 T and movements in the CPI noise term. Let’s
                                                t

begin by focusing on the determinants of inflation volatility.
   We know from equation 5 that we can decompose actual inflation of an item, πitT , into two
components: the aggregate component of inflation, µt , and its idiosyncratic component, νit .
By simply running this OLS regression we can identify each element of this decomposition.
In Figure 7, we plot the inflation rate implied by the aggregate component of inflation,
µt , against that of true inflation, πtT . Not surprisingly, these two series track each other
extremely closely, which is what one would expect if aggregate inflation were driven largely
by shocks common to all sectors rather than to shocks to a few sectors.
   In the next cells of the first column of Table 3, we express each of the component variances
as a share of σπ2 T , so that one can get some sense of how important each factor is relative
to the variance of CPI inflation. The fact that the variance of the aggregate component of
inflation, σµ2 t , is 80 percent as large as σπ2 T implies that actual inflation movements are an
important determinant of CPI inflation movements as one might suspect. It is a little harder
to interpret the importance of idiosyncratic inflation volatility because this term only enters
into the formula for actual or CPI inflation volatility after being multiplied by another term,
but the fact that we saw in Figure 7 that πitT tracks µt so closely means that these idiosyncratic
terms cannot be an important determinant of actual inflation. The next two cells show the
importance of error terms that only affect the variance of measured (CPI) inflation but not
actual inflation. As one can see from the table, the variance of the lower-level errors, σδ2t ,
are much larger than the upper-level ones, σ2t , although here, too, it is difficult to assess the
importance of each error because they affect the CPI noise interactively.


                                                26
                                                Figure 7

                                 Aggregate Component over Time
            .06
            .04
            .02
            0
            −.02
            −.04




                   Jan 1990       Jan 1995        Jan 2000       Jan 2005         Jan 2010
                                                    Date

                                         Agg. Component            Tornqvist
                   Monthly Weights using 12 Month Base Gap




       In order to make some progress on this issue, we can think of performing a number
of counterfactual exercises in which we assume that a statistical agency could eliminate
different types of errors and see what this does to the variance of the aggregate measurement
error. The move to producing chained CPI’s can be thought of as attempts to eliminate the
upper-level weighting problems captured by σ2t . Equation 11 lets us compute how much the
variance in the CPI noise would fall if we eliminated these errors by setting σ2t = 0. Our
results suggest that eliminating upper-level weighting from the current weighting structure
a perfect weighting structure would only reduce the variance in CPI noise by 49 percent.
However, if we were to eliminate lower-level measurement errors, i.e. setting σδ2t = 0, this
would reduce the variance in CPI noise by 71 percent.14 It is clear that at least half of the
problem in the CPI is that there are substantial formula biases and other measurement errors
at the lower level. The importance of lower-level errors in driving overall CPI measurement
  14
    The two numbers do not sum to 100 percent because the nσ2t σδ2t term can be eliminated by setting
either σ2t or σδ2t to zero.


                                                   27
error probably stems from the fact that the inability to weight goods by sales and the choice
of the price aggregation method at the lower level is not rigorously based on theory.
       In addition to decomposing the sources of the errors, we also can back out the combined
impact of each of these terms by using equation 11 and our parameter estimates to solve
for the variance in the CPI noise. This number is presented in the row labeled “CPI Noise”
in Table 3 and indicates that this noise is about 20 percent as big as the variance of actual
inflation implying a signal-to-noise ratio of about 5.15
       The following three columns of Table 3 present what happens to each parameter as we
divide the data into different bins. The first two columns corresponds to results of assuming
that there are knots at inflation rates of one percent and two percent, and the last column
corresponds to the endogenous knot we identified in Table 2. For example, we see in the first
row that if we estimated β using data in which the CPI exceeded 2.4 percent (the value of
our endogenous knot) we would obtain a value that is 3.65 times larger than if we estimated
β using data in which measured inflation is less than 2.4 percent. The lower rows provide
information how changes in the key variances that determine β in equation 11 vary above
and below each knot. The second row of the table shows that the variance of true inflation,
σπ2 T , rises by a factor of almost 5.7 to 10.4 as we move from a low inflation regime to a high
inflation regime. This is the standard result that variance of inflation rises with inflation.
       However, we are able to drill deeper into this result to understand its cause.As one can see
from the third and fourth rows of Table 3 the rise in the variance of true inflation is driven
by two forces. First and foremost, we see that the variance of the aggregate component of
inflation, σµ2 t , rises by a factor of 4 in the endogenous knot specification, which is consistent
with the idea that the variance of aggregate shocks rise as inflation rates rise. Second, we
see that variance of idiosyncratic price shocks, σν2t , doubles, which suggests that rising price
dispersion—a feature of many staggered pricing models—also increases with inflation.
  15
     As a check on our results we can also solve for the translog demand parameter, γ, which comes out equal
to -0.68, implying that firm with a 20 percent market share would have a 29 percent markup. Our procedure
is surely not the most efficient means of estimating this demand parameter; we report the number simply to
demonstrate that our approach does not imply an implausible elasticity.


                                                    28
   While the data also indicate that the variance of CPI noise rises with inflation, the
increase is much smaller: as we move from low to high inflation regimes, CPI noise only rises
half as much as the variance of true inflation. This increase comes from a number of sources.
The rise in idiosyncratic price shocks, σν2t , interacts with the substantial rise in lower level
measurement errors, σδ2t , reinforcing the level of measurement error. Similarly, upper level
weighting errors, σ2t , also rise, further boosting measurement error. However, despite these
effects, the CPI’s signal-to-noise ratio almost doubles in the high inflation regime, which
explains why the CPI is a much more reliable predictor of inflation when inflation is high.


4.3    Robustness Check: Are the results due to dataset differences?

An obvious concern about our results is that we are working with two different datasets—
the Nikkei POS and the CPI—and that our results may be due to the fact that the data
collection methods differ. In order to test whether this is driving our results we need to
replicate the Japanese CPI using the Nikkei POS data. This is not a trivial exercise as the
purposive sampling method used by SBJ uses a non-random selection of goods. Fortunately,
Imai et al. [2012] used the CPI price quote descriptions to identify the barcodes that match
these specifications in the Nikkei data and then replicated the Japanese CPI methodology
on this sub-sample of the Nikkei data for 2000–10.
   Table 4 reports the results of replicating the regressions in Table 2 on the Imai et al. [2012]
set of barcodes believed to be used in the Japanese CPI. A striking feature of these results
is how similar the two sets of results are. One cannot statistically reject that the coefficients
in in Table 4 are the same as their counterparts in in Table 2. These results indicate that
the reason for the non-linearity is not based on differences in the underlying price data in
the Nikkei and CPI samples, but must emanate from the different methodologies used to
construct the price indexes.




                                               29
                                         Table 4
Replicated CPI vs. Tornqvist Inflation Regressions (Lag-11 Newey-West Standard Errors)

                                           Tornqvist      Tornqvist   Tornqvist   Tornqvist
       Replicated CPI                          0.671∗∗∗   0.608∗∗∗
                                               (0.0947)   (0.0612)
       Replicated CPI2                                    0.0655∗∗∗
                                                          (0.0209)
       Replicated CPI (≤ 1%)                                          0.434∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.0972)
       Replicated CPI (> 1%)                                          1.075∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.0939)
       Replicated CPI (≤ 1.507%)                                                  0.464∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.0895)
       Replicated CPI (> 1.507%)                                                  1.181∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.124)
       Constant                            -0.622∗∗∗      -0.849∗∗∗   -0.852∗∗∗   -0.804∗∗∗
                                            (0.150)        (0.189)     (0.176)     (0.164)
       Observations                              113         113         113         113
       Adjusted R2                              0.748       0.794       0.810       0.812
       Standard errors in parentheses
       ∗
         p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
       Index begins in 2000




                                                    30
4.4     Are other price index methodologies superior?

There have been a number of analyses that have suggested that one way to improve the CPI
is to move from Dutot index of prices (which is comprised of a simple average of prices) to
a Jevons index (which uses a geometric average of prices) at the lower level. Both methods
are acceptable according to ILO standards, and the ILO reports that slightly more countries
use the Dutot method than the Jevons.16 For example, Belgium, Germany, and the U.K.
also use Dutot indexes. However, many countries, including the U.S., switched to the Jevons
methodology in the 1990s because it better controls for consumer substitution. It therefore is
reasonable to ask whether a methodology akin to that used by the U.S. in the construction of
the PCE deflator eliminates the non-linearity. In order to assess the importance of arithmetic
versus geometric averaging, we replicated the methodology used by the BLS in the selection
of the price quotes, and then constructed a price index based on the PCE deflator that
consisted of geometric averaging at the lower level and a Törnqvist index at the upper
level.17 The results from this exercise are presented in Table 5. If we compare our results
based on US methodology with those using Japanese methodology in Tables 2 or 4, we see
that using geometric averaging improves our measure of inflation both in terms of raising the
R2 and in terms of reducing the level of the bias. We can see this most clearly in Figure 8,
which plots the movements of the bias in the grocery CPI (πtCP I −πtT ) against its level (πtCP I )
in green, and the movement of the bias in our replication of the PCE deflator (πtP CE − πtT )
against its level (πtP CE ) in blue. As one can see from the plots, both indexes tend to overstate
  16
    See http://www.ilo.org/public/english/bureau/stat/download/cpi/survey.pdf.
  17
    In order to do this we replicated both the sample size and the sampling procedure used by the BLS.
The BLS collects prices for 85,000 products each month. These products are classified into 305 entry level
items (ELIs), of which 62 are food as opposed to 135 items in Japan. We chose the number of store-barcodes
according to the following formula:
             62 Food ELIs   85,000 price quotes
                          ×                     = 128 store-barcodes per Japan CPI item
            305 Total ELIs 135 Japan CPI items

The BLS chooses products for inclusion on a rotating basis. The BLS methodology replaces 1/16th of their
sample of price quotes each quarter, and we replicated this in our data. We did this by resampling 8 store-
barcodes in each of our item categories each quarter. Selection probability was a store-barcode’s share of
the previous quarter’s sales within its CPI item. Sampling weights were based on the sales of each barcode
in the two years prior to each base year.


                                                    31
inflation. However, the extent to which the Japanese CPI overstates inflation increases much
more dramatically than the upward bias in the replicated PCE deflator. The upward bias
in the Japanese CPI is largest at 1.5 percentage points when measured inflation approaches
2 percent and decreases thereafter, while the upward bias in the replicated PCE deflator
increases consistently but slowly with the level of measured inflation never reaching more
than one percentage point. Furthermore, although our replicated PCE deflator indicates that
a substantial share of movement in the PCE is noise at low inflation rates, our replicated PCE
deflator does appear more accurate than the Japanese CPI. A rise of measured inflation from
0 percent to 2 percent is associated with a 1.4 percent increase in inflation if when using the
PCE deflator methodology but only 1 percent when using the Japanese CPI methodology.

                                                Table 5
   Replicated PCE vs. Tornqvist Inflation Regressions (Lag-11 Newey-West Standard Errors)

                                           Tornqvist      Tornqvist    Tornqvist      Tornqvist
       Replicated PCE                      0.925∗∗∗       0.789∗∗∗
                                           (0.0791)       (0.0480)
       Replicated PCE2                                    0.0635∗∗∗
                                                          (0.0121)
       Replicated PCE (≤ 1%)                                            0.668∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.0623)
       Replicated PCE (> 1%)                                            1.202∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.0964)
       Replicated PCE (≤ 2.251%)                                                      0.725∗∗∗
                                                                                      (0.0663)
       Replicated PCE (> 2.251%)                                                      1.454∗∗∗
                                                                                      (0.0812)
       Constant                            -0.433∗∗∗      -0.645∗∗∗    -0.657∗∗∗      -0.591∗∗∗
                                           (0.0877)       (0.0950)     (0.0992)       (0.0910)
       Observations                           240            240          240            240
       Adjusted R2                           0.898          0.923        0.921          0.925
       Standard errors in parentheses
       ∗
         p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
       Index starts in January 1991, the first month we have 2 full calendar years’ worth of data.




                                                   32
                                                                Figure 8

                                                 Assessing Bias from Measured Inflation
                                                                  Lowess Fits
                                      1.5
         Measured Less Actual Inflation
         0        .5       1




                                            −2             0                        2               4
                                                               Measured Inflation

                                                          Replicated PCE            PCE Tornqvist
                                                          Grocery CPI




   One obvious question is how important are sampling errors versus formula errors in the
generation of measurement errors in price indexes. We can easily address this question in
the case of the PCE deflator methodology by maintaining the BLS sampling technique but
switching the price aggregation method from a simple geometric average (the Jevons index)
to the Törnqvist. By constructing this “PCE Törnqvist” index, we eliminate all of the
formula bias in the price estimate but keep errors due to sampling only a subset of prices.
Figure 8 and Table 6 report the results of this exercise. Our results suggest that eliminating
the formula bias substantially improves the accuracy relative to the purposive sampling
approach. Figure 8 shows that moving from the PCE deflator formula to a Törnqvist index
yields a much better predictor of the level of true inflation: the bias drops to around a third of
the bias in the replicated PCE deflator. The relationship between the Törnqvist index with
the replicated BLS sample is still non-linear, but the kink is at a lower level of inflation than
the kink in either the replicated PCE deflator or the official grocery CPI. Moreover, the bias


                                                                    33
becomes fairly stable when measured inflation is above 1 percent. In fact, the final column
in Table 6 shows that the PCE deflator Törnqvist index moves almost one-to-one with true
inflation when inflation exceeds 0.6 percent per year. In other words, if the BLS used the
correct aggregation formula, actual and measured inflation would move one-to-one at most
levels of inflation even if the sampling methodology were unchanged. This establishes that it
is the use of the wrong formula and not the sampling techniques that is the principal culprit
generating measurement errors in the PCE deflator methodology.

                                                  Table 6
Tornqvist PCE (All Stores) vs. Tornqvist (All Stores) Inflation Regressions (Lag-11 Newey-West
                                      Standard Errors)

                                          Tornqvist      Tornqvist      Tornqvist   Tornqvist
        Tornqvist PCE                      0.896∗∗∗         0.818∗∗∗
                                           (0.0465)         (0.0206)
        Tornqvist PCE2                                   0.0420∗∗∗
                                                         (0.00401)
        Tornqvist PCE (≤ 1%)                                            0.710∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.0341)
        Tornqvist PCE (> 1%)                                            1.120∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.0306)
        Tornqvist PCE (≤ .611%)                                                     0.695∗∗∗
                                                                                    (0.0317)
        Tornqvist PCE (> .611%)                                                     1.087∗∗∗
                                                                                    (0.0306)
        Constant                            -0.0610         -0.261∗∗∗   -0.286∗∗∗   -0.311∗∗∗
                                           (0.0614)         (0.0495)    (0.0557)    (0.0531)
        Observations                             262          262          262         262
        Adjusted R2                             0.957        0.975        0.974       0.974
        Standard errors in parentheses
        ∗
          p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                    34
4.5    Applicability of our results for the broader CPI

Another way of seeing that formula errors are driving our results more than sampling errors
can be garnered from realizing that the CPI errors are not mitigated much by building
indexes that use more categories of goods. We can obtain some sense of how much working
with data for a larger set of items might matter by bootstrapping the underlying errors in
the CPI and seeing how the variance of the CPI falls with as we average over more product
categories. Any CPI measure of aggregate prices can be thought of as a weighted average
over a set of K individual item indexes. Thus we can write:


                                                        CP IK CP I
                                     πtCP IK =
                                                 X
                                                       wi,t  πi,t ,                       (12)
                                                 i∈K


where πtCP IK is the CPI computed over set of K items, wi,t
                                                        K
                                                            is the weight of item i in a CPI
                                   CP I
computed over set of K items, and πi,t  is the CPI item index. Similarly, one can define a
Törnqvist index over the same set of items:


                                              Y           wTK
                                     πtTK =          T       i,t
                                                    πi,t           − 1,                   (13)
                                              i∈K


where πtTK is a Törnqvist index computed over the K items, wi,t
                                                            TK
                                                                is the Törnqvist weight of
                                                            T
item i in a Törnqvist index computed over the K items, and πi,t is the Törnqvist item index.
                                                       CP IK
We now can define the bias in the K item index as φK
                                                   t ≡πt     -πtTK , and its variance across
all time periods as σφ2 K . Similarly, we can define share of of the K items in the full CPI as
       0.168   P          CP IK
WK =     T     t∈T,i∈K   wi,t   , where T is the number of time periods, and 0.168 is the share
of the total CPI expenditure categories in our data. For each value of K from one to 178,
we can draw fifty samples with replacement and record the values of σφ2 K and WK .
   Figure 9 plots the result of this exercise. Not surprisingly, we see that the bias variance
declines with sample size, but what is striking is that the impact of increasing the sample
size has a rapidly diminishing effect on reducing the variance. This is exactly what one
might have expected given that some of the variance of the error is due to formula errors


                                                    35
                                                        Figure 9

                                          Bias Variance & Item Coverage

                −4
         log Bias Variance
          −8    −10    −6




                             −10        −8             −6           −4              −2             0
                                                     log Sum CPI Weights

                                   Observations                  Exp Fit: −9.67 + 0.38*exp(−.26*coverage)
                                   Linear Fit: Beta=−.271




and not due to simply having a larger sample. Indeed if we fit a Weibull function to this
distribution, we estimate that using the full sample of all CPI products would only reduce
the variance by 30 percent relative to our sample, and this result, of course, assumes that
the sampling and formula errors in the non-grocery components of the CPI are not higher
than those within the grocery sector. Thus, it appears that the mere fact that the CPI
is computed over more items is unlikely to dramatically alter the fact that formula biases
generate significant inflation measurement errors that cannot be averaged away.


4.6    Can time averaging reduce non-linearities?

Comprehensive overhaul of a country’s price indexes is not easy, so one question that remains
is whether there are any quick fixes that could mitigate this problem. One such approach
is to use time averaging and compute inflation over longer periods: perhaps a 24-, 36-, or
48-month inflation rate will be more accurate than a 12-month one. Averaging might help


                                                            36
eliminate errors if the covariance of inflation in consecutive years was positive. The intuition
behind this insight comes from the fact that if true inflation rates are positively correlated
but the noise is not, then the noise will tend to cancel as we average over longer time periods,
but the true inflation signal will amplify. This is essentially the same intuition about why a
sample average produces a lower variance estimate of a mean than a single observation.18
       We can see the impact of time averaging in Table 7. Since most of the non-linear relation-
ship between CPI inflation and actual inflation can be captured by the quadratic functional
form (because there are not many periods of severe deflation in Japan), we will focus our
results on this specification. As one can see, computing inflation over 24, 36, or 48 month
periods does not tend to change the coefficients much, although the standard errors rise,
presumably because longer differences require us to throw out more data.

                                         Table 7
   Grocery CPI vs. Item Tornqvist Inflation Regressions (Newey-West Standard Errors)

                                  Base Gap           12             24             36            48
          Grocery CPI                             0.553***     0.571**        0.621**        0.633***
                                                  (0.151)      (0.221)        (0.241)        (0.198)
          Grocery CPI2                            0.119**      0.164**        0.153*         0.110
                                                  (0.0494)     (0.0753)       (0.0906)       (0.101)
          Constant                                -0.908*** -0.876*** -0.823***              -0.785***
                                                  (0.224)   (0.263)   (0.225)                (0.190)

          Implied Price Stability Target          1.285        1.152          1.052          1.049
          Adjusted R2                             0.717        0.727          0.732          0.773
          Standard errors in parentheses
          ∗
            p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
  18
    Temporal aggregation reduces the variance of random variables with non-negative serial correlation and
the rate of decay is increasing Pwith   the extent to which the
                                                              Pvariable  is serially correlated (see, for example,
                              1    m                        1    m
Wei [1990]). Let ΠTt,m = m            π T
                                   t=1 t−m+1   and   ΦT
                                                      t,m = m       φ
                                                                 t=1 t−m+1 be true inflation and the CPI bias
                                      m            T          T
aggregated over m periods and β = V ar(Πt,m )/[V ar(Πt,m ) + V ar(Φt,m )] is the conditional expectation
coefficient on expected annualized inflation implied by equation 11. In the extreme case, in which we assume
that true inflation is positively serially correlated but the noise is not, then the variance of true inflation,
V ar(ΠTt,m ), will decay faster with the order of temporal aggregation, m, than the variance of the measurement
error, V ar(Φt,m ) and, therefore, that the conditional expectation coefficient, βm , increases towards one as
m increases.




                                                       37
    The results in this section provide two important takeaways for understanding the impli-
cations of our technical results when using CPI data. First, the fact that formula biases are
not dramatically reduced when moving from the analyses of subsamples of the CPI to full
samples means that CPI index errors are likely to be a problem for inflation measurement in
low inflation regimes. Second, one possible solution to these problems is to measure inflation
using longer time averages.



5     Conclusion

This paper shows that the relationship between the economic concepts of inflation and the
inflation indexes generated by statistical agencies is nonlinear. In particular, changes in the
CPI and PCE deflator overstate changes in true inflation when inflation is low, and are only
accurate measures when inflation is high. This result stems from the fact that much of the
movement in the CPI (or our replicated PCE deflator) in low inflation regimes arises from
formula errors in the computation of price indexes. Since the variance of true inflation is
high in high inflation regimes, the signal-to-noise ratio of the CPI rises with inflation making
it more accurate in inflationary periods.
    Moreover, our estimates suggest that the the biases of official inflation indexes are not
constant. Inflationary biases peak when official inflation rates are at two percent per year,
but approach zero at higher inflation rates. Thus, there is no single bias number for the CPI.
Moreover, we are also able to show that even a chained official index, like the PCE deflator,
has an upward bias relative to a Törnqvist index. This bias is largely due to the usage of
unweighted geometric averages of price quotes at the lower level.
    Our results have a number of implications for policy. First, given the biases inherent
in the Japanese CPI, an inflation target of 2 percent approximately corresponds to price
stability. Similarly, our results suggest that price stability in the U.S. would correspond
to a PCE deflator inflation rate of 1 percent. These result also suggest that the switch



                                              38
to geometric averaging at the lower level of the U.S. CPI and chaining at the upper level
have not eliminated the upward bias in the PCE deflator or chained-CPI. This implies that
indexing benefits to a chained index may provide real income gains to recipients.
   Second, our results also imply that central banks would do well to pay less attention to
official inflation measures in low inflation regimes. Similarly, economists using official price
indexes to measure inflation should be cognizant of the fact that these measures do not
always move one to one with actual inflation.




                                              39
References
Naohito Abe and Akiyuki Tonogi. Micro and macro price dynamics in daily data. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 57(6):716–728, 2010.

Kosuke Aoki. On the optimal monetary policy response to noisy indicators. Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 50(3):501–523, 2003.

Laurence Ball. Why does high inflation raise inflation uncertainty? Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 29(3):371–388, 1992.

Laurence Ball and Stephen G. Cecchetti. Inflation and uncertainty at short and long horizons.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1990(1):215–254, 1990.

Laurence Ball, N. Gregory Mankiw, and David Romer. The new Keynesian economics and
  the output-inflation trade-off. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(1):1–82, 1988.

Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein. Product creation and destruction: Evidence and
 price implications. American Economic Review, 100:691–723, 2010.

Stephen G. Cecchetti. Measuring short-run inflation for central bankers. Review of the
  Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 79(3):143–156, 1997.

Alex Cukierman and Allan H. Meltzer. A theory of ambiguity, credibility, and inflation under
  discretion and asymmetric information. Econometrica, 54(5):1099–1128.

W Erwin Diewert. Superlative index numbers and consistency in aggregation. Econometrica,
 pages 883–900, 1978.

W. Erwin Diewert and Alice O. Nakamura. Essays on Index Number Theory: Volume 1.
 North-Holland, 1993.

Stanley Fischer. Relative shocks, relative price variability, and inflation. Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, 1981(2):381–441, 1981.

Milton Friedman. Nobel lecture: Inflation and unemployment. The Journal of Political
 Economy, pages 451–472, 1977.

Etienne Gagnon. Price setting during low and high inflation: Evidence from mexico. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3):1221–1263, 2009.

Jerry Hausman. Sources of bias and solutions to bias in the consumer price index. the
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1):23–44, 2003.

Satoshi Imai, Chihiro Shimizu, and Tsutomu Watanabe. How fast are prices in japan falling?
  Discussion papers 12075, Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry (RIETI),
  2012.

Michael T. Kiley. Endogenous price stickiness and business cycle persistence. Journal of
 Money, Credit and Banking, pages 28–53, 2000.

                                             40
David E. Lebow and Jeremy B. Rudd. Measurement error in the consumer price index:
 Where do we stand? Journal of Economic Literature, 41(1):159–201, 2003.

Arthur M. Okun. The mirage of steady inflation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  1971(2):485–498, 1971.

Richard W. Parks. Inflation and relative price variability. The Journal of Political Economy,
  pages 79–95, 1978.

Marshall Reinsdorf and Jack E. Triplett. A review of reviews: Ninety years of professional
 thinking about the consumer price index. In Price Index Concepts and Measurement,
 pages 17–83. University of Chicago Press, 2009.

Matthew D. Shapiro and David W. Wilcox. Mismeasurement in the consumer price index:
 An evaluation. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996, Volume 11, pages 93–154. MIT
 Press, 1996.

David J. Stockton. Relative price dispersion, aggregate price movement, and the natural
 rate of unemployment. Economic Inquiry, 26(1):1–22, 1988.

Lars E.O. Svensson and Michael Woodford. Indicator variables for optimal policy. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 50(3):691–720, 2003.

John B. Taylor. On the relation between the variability of inflation and the average inflation
  rate. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, volume 15, pages 57–86.
  Elsevier, 1981.

Daniel R. Vining and Thomas C. Elwertowski. The relationship between relative prices and
 the general price level. American Economic Review, 66(4):699–708, 1976.

W.W.S. Wei. Time series analysis: univariate and multivariate methods. Addison-Wesley,
 1990.




                                             41
Appendix A                                             Derivations

Variance of the CPI: The CPI is related to the Törnqvist index by the following equation


                     πtCP I :=                    (wit + it ) (πit + δit ) = πtT +
                                      X                                                                            X                            X                         X
                                                                                                                               wit δit +                 it πit +                it δit .              (14)
                                          i                                                                            i                            i                         i


By expanding (14), we obtain

                                                                                       !                                       !                                  !
                                           
        πtCP I                      πtT
                                                                   X                                      X                                     X
V                    = V                          +V                     wit δit + V                           it πit + V                              it δit
                                                                     i                                     i                                        i
                                                                             !                                                             !                                                !
                                               πtT ,                                                      πtT ,                                               πtT ,
                                                           X                                                       X                                                      X
                     + 2Cov                                        wit δit + 2Cov                                          it πit + 2Cov                                         it δit
                                                               i                                                   i                                                          i
                                                                                               !                                                             !                                                         !
                                               X                         X                                         X                            X                                        X                    X
                     + 2Cov                                wit δit ,          it πit + 2Cov                                   wit δit ,                it δit + 2Cov                            it πit ,       it δit .
                                                   i                     i                                                 i                    i                                             i               i


Notice that all the covariance terms are zero because the error terms are independent. For
example, consider the first covariance term. We know that the expected value of the weighted
average of the error terms is zero because

                                                  "                      #
                                                      X                            X                               X
                                          E                  wit δit =                         E [wit δit ] =                  E [wit ] E [δit ] = 0
                                                       i                               i                                   i

which gives

                                                            !                      "                           !                               !#                        

            nCov πtT ,
                                 X                                                         X                       X                                     X
                                              wit δit                = E                            wit πit                    wit δit              = E  wit wjt πit δjt 
                                      i                                                        i                       i                                      i,j
                                                                             X
                                                                     =             E [wit wjt πit ] E [δjt ] = 0.
                                                                             i,j


A similar argument holds for all other covariance terms. Therefore,

                                                                                                          !                                         !                                !
                                                                  
                             πtCP I                            πtT
                                                                                       X                                       X                                  X
                     V                        =V                         +V                        wit δit + V                         it πit + V                            it δit .                  (15)
                                                                                           i                                       i                                  i

We can write the second term of (15) in terms of the underlying variances of the errors
                                                                                                    P                           P                                 P
through a bit of algebra. First recall E [                                                            i   wit δit ] =                  i   E [wit δit ] =                 i   E [wit ] E [δit ] = 0.

                                                                                                        42
Now we can write,
                                                                
                   !
                                  1 X                       2
    X                                           γ
V        wit δit           =    E       sit−1 + (νit − νjt ) δit 
                                  n            2
                                                                  
                                                                 
     i                               i,j

                             1    X                            γ                                         γ
                                                                                                                                       
                           =                     E        sit−1 + (νit − νjt )                      sit−1 + (νit − νkt ) δit2                     (∵ δit ⊥δjt if i 6= j)
                             n2          i,j,k                   2                                         2
                             σ2 X
                                                     "                                                         !#
                                                                   γ2
                           = δ2t     E                    s2it−1 +    (νit − νjt ) (νit − νkt )                        (∵ E [νit − νkt ] = 0∀i, k)
                             n i,j,k                               4
                                                                                                                                                                       

                                σδ2t     X               γ2            X h i                                                                   
                                                 s2it−1 +                       E νit2 −
                                                                                         X                    X                    X
                           =                                                                   E [νit νkt ] −       E [νjt νit ] +   E [νjt νkt ]
                                                                                                                                               
                                n2
                                                                       
                                         
                                           i,j,k          4             
                                                                          i,j,k | {z }   i,j,k
                                                                                               | {z }
                                                                                                              i,j,k
                                                                                                                    | {z } i,j,k | {z }
                                                                                      =σν2t             =σν2t 1{i=k}          =σν2t 1{j=i}                =σν2t 1{j=k}
                                                                                                                                                           
                             σδ2t X 2 X            γ2 2 X           X              X              X
                           =         s it−1     1 +   σ ν         1 −       1{i=k} −       1{j=i} +       1{j=k} 
                             n2    i        j,k     4     t
                                                            i,j,k     i,j,k          i,j,k          i,j,k

                             σ2
                                                                                                                   !
                                                                 γ2                     
                           = δ2t            n2           s2it−1 + σν2t n3 − n2 − n2 + n2
                                                 X
                             n                       i           4
                                                                                           !
                                                               γ2
                                σδ2t             s2it−1           (n − 1) σν2t .
                                           X
                           =                                 +
                                             i                 4

We can rewrite the third term of (15) in terms of the underlying variances by first remem-
                           P                     P
bering that E [             i it πit ]    =         i   E [it ] E [πit ] = 0. The independence of it guarantees that the
cross terms disappear, and we get

                                     !                                        !2 
                                                                                                    h          i              h       i       h     i
                                                                                                  E (it πit )2 =           E 2it E πit2
                   X                                         X                             X                           X
           V               it πit         = E                      it πit      =
                       i                                         i                            i                         i
                                                                               
                                           = nσ2t σµ2 t + σν2t .


Finally, since the error terms are iid when i 6= j and E [it ] = E [δit ] = 0, the fourth term of
(15) can be rewritten as

                                                                                      !
                                                                               it δit = nσ2t σδ2t .
                                                                       X
                                                                 V
                                                                        i




                                                                                    43
In summary,

                                                                                               !
                                                                         γ2                                 
              πtCP I                     πtT           σδ2t       s2it−1        (n − 1) σν2t + nσ2t σµ2 t + σν2t + nσ2t σδ2t
                                                              X
      V                        = V                 +                       +
                                                              i              4
                                                                                               !
                                                                           γ2                                         
                                         πtT           σδ2t       s2it−1        (n − 1) σν2t + nσ2t σµ2 t + σν2t + σδ2t
                                                              X
                               = V                 +                       +
                                                              i              4

                                                                                                                                                  
Covariance of the CPI and true inflation: Note Cov πtT ,                                                       wit δit = Cov πtT ,
                                                                                                       P                             P
                                                                                                           i                             i it πit       =
                              
Cov πtT ,
                P
                   i it δit       = 0. Hence,

                                                                                    !                               !                                   !
                                                
          πtCP I , πtT                       πtT                  πtT ,                            πtT ,                         πtT ,
                                                                          X                                X                             X
Cov                             = V                    + Cov                   wit δit + Cov                   it πit + Cov                  it δit
                                                                           i                               i                             i
                                                  
                                = V πtT .



Appendix A.1                          Decomposing CPI Measurement Error

We can use the upper-level components of the item Törnqvist to study the measurement error
in the Japanese CPI through the lens of the theoretical framework presented in Section 3
above. In this section, we derived the relationship between the aggregate measurement error
in the Japanese CPI and the measurement errors in the underlying item-level components
of this index (Equation 8). We can now define these errors in the weight and item inflation
index components empirically as


                                                                  εIT     CP I
                                                                   i,t = wi,t
                                                                                  T
                                                                               − wi,t                                                        (16)
                                                                   IT     CP I    T
                                                                  δi,t = πi,t  − πi,t                                                        (17)


The relationship between these errors and the aggregate measurement error defined in Equa-
tion 8 also depended on the aggregate and idiosyncratic components of the true item level
inflation. We extract these components by running the following unweighted regression:
 T
πi,t = µt + νi,t .
    In Section 3, we additionally formally characterized the measurement error in the Japanese

                                                                               44
CPI. We found that the conditional expectation of true inflation based on observed inflation
depends crucially on the variances of the inflation components (µt , νit ) and errors (t , δit )
listed above. To characterize the inference problem empirically, we estimate these variances.
We define the variance of the aggregate component of inflation, µt as

                                              N                          N
                                           1 X                      ¯= 1
                                                        ¯ 2 , where µ̂
                                                           
                                σ̂µ2 t =
                                                                         X
                                                  µ̂t − µ̂                   µ̂t                                        (18)
                                           N t=1                       N t=1

and where N is the number of observations (months) in the sample. We then calculate the
variances of ε, δ, ν within each item as

                                             N                                 N
                                          1 X                2              1 X
                              σ̂x2i,t =          x̂i,t − x̂¯i , where x̂¯i =       x̂i,t                                (19)
                                          N t=1                              N t=1

where x = ε, δ, ν specifies the variable under consideration. We aggregate these variances
across items using Törnqvist item weights:

                                                             I
                                                                    T 2
                                                   σ̂x2t =
                                                             X
                                                                   wi,t σ̂xi,t
                                                             i=1


We use the values of each of these estimated variances to solve for the implied value of γt by
equating
                                                                                  
  Cov πtT , πtCP I                                                      V ar πtT
                          =                                                                       γt2
     V ar (πtCP I )                                Pn                    h                                             i
                              V ar (πtT ) + σδ2t         2         2 2       2 2       2 2
                                                    i=1 sit−1 + n σt σµt + σt σνt + σt σδt +    4
                                                                                                            σδ2t σν2t
                                                                                                                        (20)
using variables’ period t values then solving for γt .



Appendix B                      Index Calculation

Our price and quantity data are at a daily frequency, so we sum over quantity and expenditure
to find their monthly values. We then back out the monthly price by dividing. For all days



                                                              45
Dt in the month t, in each store s and JAN code j, we define

                                                         P
                                                            d∈Dt    pj,s,d qj,s,d
                                              pj,s,t =       P                                                              (21)
                                                                  d∈Dt qj,s,d


   We aggregate the daily item purchase and price data to a monthly frequency denoting
the sales-weighted average price charged by store s for JAN code j in month t as pj,s,t and the
corresponding sales quantity qj,s,t . In order to do the decompositions indicated in equation
4, we need to work with Törnqvist index that is composed of Törnqvist item indexes. Each
“item” level index is a Törnqvist index of the twelve-month within-store JAN code price
changes aggregated across all JAN codes that belong to an “official” item category. The
                                                   T
item-level Törnqvist index for item i in month t, πi,t , is defined as follows:

                                                                                          !w T
                                   T
                                                   Y               Y            pj,s,t        j,s,t

                             1+   πi,t   =
                                              j∈Ji,s,[t−12,t] s∈S[t−12,t]     pj,s,t−12


where Ji,s,[t−12,t] is the set of item i JAN codes sold in store s in months t − 12 and t; S[t−12,t]
                                                                 T
is the set of stores in the sample for months t − 12 and t; and wj,s,t is item Törnqvist weight
for JAN code j in store s, and month t given by


           T         sj,i,s,t + sj,i,s,t−12                                               pj,s,t qj,s,t
          wj,s,t =                               for sj,i,s,t = P                           P
                               2                                          j∈Ji,s,[t−12,t]     s∈S[t−12,t]   pj,s,t qj,s,t

The item Törnqvist index aggregates these indexes across items i = 1, ..., I, using a weighted
geometric average:



                                                            I                w T
                                                  πtT                   T
                                                            Y                   i,t
                                         1+             =          1 + πi,t                                                 (22)
                                                            i=1




                                                             46
                              T
with Törnqvist item weights, wi,t given by

                                                     P                     P
              T       si,t + si,t−12                     j∈Ji,s,[t−12,t]      s∈S[t−12,t]   pj,s,t qj,s,t
             wi,t   =                  for si,t = PI                                                            .
                            2
                                                          P                    P
                                                    i=1     j∈Ji,s,[t−12,t]      s∈S[t−12,t]    pj,s,t qj,s,t

19




                                                                     
     In the theory section, we make the approximation that ln 1 + πtT = πtT , but equation 22 does not make
     19

this approximation. This has virtually no impact on the results.


                                                    47
