NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADDRESSING GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXTERNALITIES:
TRANSACTION COSTS CONSIDERATIONS
Gary D. Libecap
Working Paper 19501
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19501

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013
I have benefitted from detailed comments provided by Janet Currie and three referees, as well as by
Eric Edwards, Marc Law, Bryan Leonard, Trevor O’Grady, and Rebecca Toseland who reviewed various
drafts. Other useful suggestions were provided by Doug Allen, Lee Alston, Terry Anderson, Chris
Costello, Zack Donohew, Ted Groves, Rögnvaldur Hannesson, P.J. Hill, Charles Kolstad, Dean Lueck,
Nick Parker, Mary Shirley, and participants in the All Chicago Area Economic History Workshop,
May 3, 2012; ISNIE conferences June 14-16, 2012 and June 20-22, 2013; the PERC Lone Mountain
Workshop August 6, 2012 and “Tackling the Global Fisheries Challenge” Conference, November
14-15, 2012; and the ASU-MBL Workshop on History of Sustainability Science, Woods Hole, May
16-22, 2013, as well as seminars at Whitman College, October 26, 2011 and Carleton College, May
2, 2013. Literature recommendations were provided by Arun Agrawal, Marty Anderies, Krister Andersson,
Stephen Ansolabehere, Susan Aaronson, Mike Bordo, Dan Cole, Tom Evans, Burnell Fischer, Clark
Gibson, Doug Irwin, Marco Janssen, Kerry Krutilla Mike McGinnis, Amelia Porges, Amy Poteete,
Ty Robbins, Chris Severen, Edella Schlager, Michael Schoon, and David Victor. Excellent research
assistance was provided by Serena Canaan, Karin Donhowe, and Andrew Knauer. Research support
was given by the Earhart Foundation, the Lone Mountain Fellowship (PERC), and the Hoover Institution’s
Property Rights Task Force, Stanford. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Addressing Global Environmental Externalities: Transaction Costs Considerations
Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 19501
October 2013
JEL No. D23,D62,H87,N5,Q2,Q3,Q38,Q5
ABSTRACT
Is there a way to understand why some global environmental externalities are addressed effectively
whereas others are not? The transaction costs of defining the property rights to mitigation benefits
and costs is a useful framework for such analysis. This approach views international cooperation as
a contractual process among country leaders to assign those property rights. Leaders cooperate when
it serves domestic interests to do so. The demand for property rights comes from those who value and
stand to gain from multilateral action. Property rights are supplied by international agreements that
specify resource access and use, assign costs and benefits including outlining the size and duration
of compensating transfer payments and determining who will pay and who will receive them. Four
factors raise the transaction costs of assigning property rights: (i) scientific uncertainty regarding mitigation
benefits and costs; (ii) varying preferences and perceptions across heterogeneous populations; (iii)
asymmetric information; and (iv) the extent of compliance and new entry. These factors are used to
examine the role of transaction costs in the establishment and allocation of property rights to provide
globally-valued national parks, implement the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered
Species (CITES), execute the Montreal Protocol to control emissions that damage the stratospheric
ozone layer, set limits on harvest of highly-migratory ocean fish stocks, and control greenhouse gas
emissions (GHG).

Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and ICER
and also NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu

Many of the world’s most challenging environmental externalities are broadly spread,
inflicting costs in terms of lost biodiversity and damaged ecosystems, depletion of terrestrial and
marine species, and emissions that harm human health and generate climate change. Some are
truly global, for instance, greenhouse gas (GHG) releases. Others are more regional but either
involve global agents, as with the harvest of migratory wild-ocean fish stocks, or are globally
valued but locally depleted, as the reduction of unique ecosystems. This review focuses on these
expansive externalities. “Global environmental externalities” is an umbrella term that refers to
the negative environmental consequences of direct natural resource use and human production
and consumption activities arising in broad spatial settings in the presence of incomplete
property rights. It does not include externalities that occur in trans-boundary resource use by
parties from adjacent nations.
Since 1920 there have been more than 140 international environmental agreements to
confront such externalities, with over half signed since 1973. Including more informal
conventions raises the number beyond 700 (Barrett 2005, 133-95, 165-94; O’Neill 2009, 1-2, 3436; 73-5; Mitchell 2012). Among these are generally successful multinational efforts to protect
globally-valued, unique ecosystems, animal and plant species, and to control certain damaging
emissions. As of 2012 there were at least 610 United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) biosphere reserves in 117 countries (UNESCO World
Network of Biosphere Reserves)2 and nearly 7,000 national parks classified by the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as Category II protected areas. 3 The Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) regulates the trade in endangered wild

2

http://www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/ecological-sciences/biosphere-reserves/worldnetwork-wnbr/wnbr/
3
http://www.iucn.org/about/work/programmes/gpap_home/gpap_quality/gpap_pacategories/gpap_pacategory2/
1

animals and plants.4 As of September 2012, 176 nations were parties to CITES which covers
5,000 animal and 29,000 plant types (Barbier et al 1990, Bulte and van Kooten 1999, Kremer
and Morcom 2000, Missios 2004).5 The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone
Layer of 1987 phased out of the production of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in developed
countries and halted their trade among all countries. By 2009 the Protocol had been ratified by
196 governments (Beron et al 2003; Parson 2003; Barrett 2005, 221-53; Velders et al 2007;
Young 2010, 23-52).6
In sharp contrast, there have been no effective international agreements to reduce
harvests of many valuable, highly-migratory fish species. Fishing capacity and vessel numbers
are increasing and stocks continue to be driven down to unsustainable levels (Upton and Vitalis
2003; Myers and Worm 2003; Devine et al. 2006; Maguire et al. 2006; Beddington et al. 2007;
Worm et al. 2009; McWhinnie 2009; Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) 2010; 2012, 4,
54-55; and Pinsky et al. 2011).7 Similarly, there have been no sustained multilateral controls on
the anthropogenic release of greenhouse gases that contribute to climate change. The Kyoto
Protocol of 1997 called for developed countries to reduce GHG emissions by at least 5% from
1990 levels by 2008-2012.8 Less-developed countries were exempted, and the U.S. did not ratify

4

http://www.iucn.org/. International agreements for the protection of endangered species have a long history among
developed economies. Prominent examples include the 1900 and 1933 London Conventions on conservation largely
in Africa, the 1940 Washington Convention on Nature Protection and Wildlife Preservation in the Western
Hemisphere, and the 1972 Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals.
5
See http://www.cites.org/eng/app/appendices.php for the species listed in CITES Appendices as examined below.
6
A list of the chemicals is in Brief primer on the Montreal Protocol
http://ozone.unep.org/Publications/MP_Brief_Primer_on_MP-E.pdf.
7
China has the largest growth in share of world fish production from both wild capture and aquaculture, increasing
from 7% in 1961 to 35% in 2010 (FAO 2012, 3). Vukas and Vidas (2001) and Food and Agricultural Organization
(2012, 17-18) discuss flags of convenience as a source of new entry. The overall annual losses are estimated to be
$50 billion or more relative to more optimal fishing practices (Arnason et al. 2009); Lischewski 2010). Agnew et al
(2009) estimate the costs of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing alone at $10-23.5 billion annually
8
unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/items/2830.php. The Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) was adopted at the third session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 3) in Kyoto, Japan and
came into force after 55 Parties to the UNFCCC in Annex I (regulated economies), accounting for at least 55 % of
total CO2 emissions in 1990 ratified the agreement.
2

the Protocol, which was terminated in 2012 with no replacement framework.9 Overall, GHG
emissions have grown, primarily from sources in developing countries (Barrett 2010, 241; Victor
2011, 32-9, 204, 208).10
What is an economist to make of this variation in the success of international collective
efforts to address global environmental externalities? What are the underlying factors that
promote or inhibit action? And what are the opportunities for new research? This review focuses
on the transaction costs of domestic and international negotiations to assign property rights to
rents arising from mitigation to explain different cooperative responses. There is no significant
literature that applies transaction costs to the analysis of environmental externalities. This review
provides a framework for theoretical modeling and for empirical research. It outlines testable
implications and illustrates how they can be applied to the analysis of a range of global
environmental externalities where transaction costs and cooperative results vary.
The role of property rights in defining who bears the costs and benefits of decision
making in resource use are described by Libecap 1989a; Barzel 1997; and Merrill and Smith
2010. If property rights fully specify access and uses, rent dissipation is avoided (Gordon 1954;
Hardin 1968; Cheung 1970) and private and social costs and benefits are aligned (Pigou 1920;
Buchanan and Stubblebine 1962; Baumol 1972; Meade 1973; Dahlman 1979). Property rights
institutions, however, are costly to introduce (Demsetz 1967) and are necessarily incomplete
(Coase 1960). The relevant assets must be measured, bounded, and enforced (Barzel 1982); some
parties must be excluded; and, in environmental contexts, consumption must often be delayed or
foregone. Prices rise to reflect social costs, potentially lowering real incomes for consumers and

9

http://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/status_of_ratification/items/2613.php.
http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/dec/16/russia-canada-kyoto-protocol.
10
Accordingly, attention is directed to a “post-Kyoto world” (Aldy and Stavins 2007, 2010). For emissions, see
http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/IEDIndex3.cfm?tid=90&pid=44&aid=8.
3

input suppliers. Some resources like the global atmosphere are not boundable so mitigation
benefits are not appropriable. There may be ancillary health benefits or gains from avoiding
costly climatic change that are captured by agents in specific regions but the broader atmosphere
itself is not excludable. Free riding on mitigation is an impediment to international cooperation.
Defining property rights to broad, fugitive resources, such as highly-migratory fish stocks or to
the benefits and costs of policies to protect the atmosphere, therefore presents important
challenges.
The assignment of property rights is a contractual process that occurs informally within
local groups to address small-scale externalities (Ostrom 1990); more formally within countries
through domestic political processes to confront broader externalities (Libecap 1978, 1989a,
2007); and through multilateral agreements to control transnational ones (Hannesson 2004). The
latter are naturally most complex because they involve representatives of diverse, sovereign
countries. Countries are collections of heterogeneous interests who will benefit (or be harmed) in
different ways from non-cooperation or cooperation, or importantly, from different distributions
of property rights. How these interests respond to the anticipated costs and benefits of the
property rights assigned through international collective action affects the positions taken by
country leaders in multilateral negotiations and in the cooperative mitigation that is proposed.
Although the establishment of property rights institutions increases total rents, the resulting
distribution of rents is not equal unless transfer payments are made. The negotiations underlying
the definition of transfer payments themselves, however, change the size and flow of rents
achievable. Distributional conflicts are inherent in property rights definition and enforcement,
and they critically influence the nature and timing of the rights that emerge (Libecap 1989a).
In terms of global environmental externalities, international agreements that assign

4

property rights to control open-access losses are potentially most straightforward for natural
resources such as fisheries (Hannesson 2004). International conventions grant nations control
over a portion of the multinational resource and country leaders, in turn, either assign direct
property rights within their jurisdiction to users (for example, individual transferable quotas in
fisheries) or regulate access and use in ways that grant short-term rents to specified parties (for
example, those fishers who receive annual licenses under limited licensing regimes).
The property rights arising from international cooperation to control the external costs
from production and consumption on the natural environment, such as releases of CFCs or
GHGs, are less straightforward. International agreements assign mitigation responsibilities to
entities within designated countries via mandated changes in production processes and
consumption patterns and through designation of transfer payments within and across nations.
These actions, which shift consumption and production to better reflect social costs, necessarily
impose private costs that are borne by producers, consumers, and input suppliers in regulated
jurisdictions. Concerns regarding their incidence within countries can be addressed by transfers.
But transfers across countries may also be needed to achieve international cooperation. It is
costly to reach agreement over the parties to be compensated, who will pay, the amounts
involved, the duration of payments, and the institutions for delivery. There also are compliance
and enforcement costs. International mitigation policies determine the size and assignment of
these costs across countries and among populations within them.
The benefits of international environmental agreements often are not appropriable.
Protection of biodiversity, unique habitats, endangered plant and animal species, and reduction in
harmful CFC or GHG emissions generate broad global public goods that, by definition, are not
excludable. Even so, some parties value or benefit from those public goods more than do others

5

and they gain more from their provision. Hence, these parties capture rents or added value from
mitigation. In this review, the delegation of costs and benefits through international
environmental agreements are viewed as property rights to the rents arising from mitigation. The
costs and benefits are not allocated proportionately across countries or among parties inside
them. Negotiations over distributions are the focus of bargaining to achieve cooperative efforts in
addressing global environmental externalities.
One should think of the demand for international cooperation and the demand for
property rights for broad externality control as synonymous. The demand comes from those who
greatly value externality mitigation and expect to capture rents. Property rights are supplied by
international agreements, either through direct controls on natural resource access and use or
through controls on the external environmental effects of production. Country leaders cooperate
when it serves their domestic interests to do so. When this is the case, international arrangements
for mitigation are self-enforcing and collectively rational, relative to unilateral defection (Barrett
1994; 2005, 33, 55-78, 195; McGinty 2007; Chander and Tulkens 2008).
Transaction costs are the costs of establishing and maintaining property rights to the rents
gained from mitigation within and across countries. This definition builds on Allen (1991, 2000)
and Barzel (1985). Both follow Coase (1960, 1992), who used transaction costs to examine
market exchange and firm organization.11Demsetz (1968) and Williamson (1979, 2010) apply
transaction costs to explain firm behavior. Krutilla and Krause (2010) are among the few to use
transaction costs to examine the determinants of environmental policy.
In the context of global environmental externality mitigation, four factors raise
transaction costs: (1) scientific uncertainty; (2) varying preferences and perceptions; (3)

11

Useful summaries of key points made by Coase are in Cooper (1995); DeMeza (1998); and Medema and Zerbe
(2000).
6

asymmetric information; and (4) lack of compliance and new entry. These factors suggest four
testable implications regarding the effect of transaction costs on the likelihood of international
collective action to address externalities:
(1) The greater the scientific uncertainty about the size, timing, and distribution of
externality costs (mitigation benefits) and the costs of addressing them, the less likely
there will be agreement on property rights.
(2) The greater the diversity of preferences and perceptions across parties over the value
and costs of externality control, the less likely there will be agreement on property rights.
(3) The greater the asymmetry of information about contributions to the externality,
natural system responses, and compliance, the less likely there will be agreement on
property rights.
(4) The greater the anticipation of agreement violations and new entry, the less likely
there will be agreement on property rights.
These four implications are referred to throughout the review in suggesting research
agendas. They also highlight variables to be included in theoretical modeling of transaction costs
and cooperation to confront global environmental externalities.
There is a relatively large game-theoretic literature that investigates international
environmental agreements (IEAs) by analyzing the strategic interactions of countries in the
presence of a multinational environmental externality. The principal focus is on cooperation to
control GHG emissions. In this literature, countries are modeled as individual players who
choose whether to cooperate with other players in their abatement decisions. The extent of
cooperation typically is measured by the number of countries that voluntarily agree to mitigate
the externality relative to a non-cooperative outcome.

7

The basic approach of the IEA literature and some of its key contributions are reviewed
below. This is followed by a discussion of limitations to this methodology and how incorporating
a transaction costs framework can further our analysis of multinational efforts. Some of the IEA
literature incorporates institutional features into the game theoretic framework.12 Overall,
however, the current IEA approach is not well suited to examine the institutional details involved
in developing, coordinating, and enforcing such agreements. To motivate a transaction costs
approach, the literature on transaction costs and local common pool resources (CPRs) is
reviewed after the discussion of the IEA literature. Insights from CPR literature are then used to
discuss how varying transaction costs impact the definition of property rights and the likelihood
of cooperation in the context of several different international environmental externalities.
II. The International Environmental Agreements Literature and Transaction Costs
The defining characteristic of global externality abatement and the provision of global
public goods is that there is no single institution empowered to coerce cooperation among
sovereign nations. Successful agreements must be self-enforcing (Barrett 1994, 1999, 2005).
The early game-theoretic work on IEAs is similar to the cartel literature (d’Aspremont et al
1983; Donsimoni et al 1986) in that it focuses on the formation of stable coalitions. The
dominant model follows a general two-stage setup proposed by Barrett (1994). In the first stage,
countries simultaneously decide whether to join a cooperative IEA. The second stage has two
sub-stages. In the first sub-stage, members of the IEA are assumed to choose actions that
maximize their joint payoff. In the second sub-stage, non-members are assumed to choose
actions that maximize their individual payoff, taking the actions of the coalition as given.13

12

See Finus (2001) for examples of models that endogenize the choice of policy instruments.
The second stage is therefore characteristic of a Stackelberg game where the cooperating coalition plays the role
of Stackelberg leader with the expectation that fringe nations outside the IEA will free ride on their actions (Rubio
and Ulph 2006). Carraro and Siniscalco (1993) and Hoel and Schneider (1997) propose similar models in which
13

8

Given this setup, it is clear the size of the coalition changes payoffs for both members and nonmembers. For an agreement to be self-enforcing the coalition must be stable such that member
countries cannot do better by unilaterally withdrawing from the agreement (internal stability) and
non-member countries cannot do better by unilaterally joining the agreement (external stability)
(Rubio and Ulph 2006). The basic insight of the Barrett-type model is that self-enforcing IEAs
can achieve extensive participation, but only when the gains from cooperation are small.14
A second strand of the literature models IEAs as repeated games. These games typically
are infinitely repeating with an agreement reached in the first stage and sustained in following
periods if punishment threats are credible (Barrett 1999, 2003). For punishment to be credible,
an equilibrium agreement cannot be renegotiated if there is defection by any party (Farrell and
Maskin 1989; Barrett 1999). Defection is detected without cost. Punishment, however, can be
costly because if a member defects, all others abandon the agreement and lose the public good.15
Under this scenario, a player can defect from an agreement knowing that punishment is not
individually rational and the equilibrium breaks down. To address this problem, Froyn and Hovi
(2008) limit the number of nations that punish non-compliance to make punishment less costly
and more credible, and hence, international environmental agreements more stable.
Much of the IEA literature focuses on whether a stable coalition forms, rather than on the
structure of the coalition or on the nature of the outcomes. Some papers, however, investigate
the coalitions that are possible. Barrett (2002) defines two general cases of “narrow but deep”
and “broad but shallow” cooperation whereby a stable IEA is achieved with a few countries
mitigating much or many countries mitigating little. Dellink and Finus (2012) and Finus and
coalition members exhibit Cournot behavior.
14
This prediction is contrary to that made by Demsetz (1967) who argued, using transaction cost reasoning, that
property rights institutions emerge when the net gains from defining them rise relative to the costs.
15
Tarui et al (2008) examine cooperation in the management of renewable resources, where noncompliance is costly
to observe.
9

Pintassilgo (2013) allow for the formation of multiple, more homogeneous coalitions so that
countries can find smaller coalitions that better align their interests and achieve broader
mitigation through transfer payments. Asheim et al (2006) posit that more public goods could be
provided by two regional coalitions of fewer participants than by one large agreement.
The IEA literature also examines uncertainty in mitigation benefits and costs. The
literature generally is pessimistic about the impact of the resolution of uncertainty through
learning on cooperation. One of the earliest papers to address this issue is by Na and Shin
(1998). Within their model, countries cooperate when they are equally ignorant about expected
benefits. New knowledge reduces uncertainty but also exposes differences in expected returns
and results in the breakdown of cooperation. This finding is replicated in other work (Ulph and
Ulph 1997; Ulph 1998; Ulph 2004; Kolstad 2007; Kolstad and Ulph 2008, 2009). The
relationship between learning and cooperation depends on whether or not the coalition of
countries is fixed. When a group of countries initially commits, learning bolsters cooperation by
revealing collaborative benefits, and countries that did not join cannot subsequently do so. When
the coalition has variable membership and forms each period, learning may result in less
cooperation as countries act strategically when new information is disclosed (Ulph 2004; Kolstad
and Ulph 2008).
Kolstad and Ulph (2008, 2011) examine the effects on cooperation of no learning, partial
learning, and complete learning. No learning occurs when countries join and learn only after
deciding on abatement. Partial learning occurs when countries learn the benefits of cooperation
after joining, but before deciding on abatement. Complete learning occurs when countries learn
the benefits prior to joining. Each has different implications for cooperation. Uncertainty with
complete learning leads to larger membership, but lower aggregate abatement. Uncertainty with

10

partial learning leads to lower membership and less abatement than the cases of no learning or
complete learning.
Uncertainty and learning also raise a timing problem for each country. Should it adopt
preemptive policies and invest in capital for mitigation or should it wait until more is known?
There are two potential irreversibilities, one associated with cumulative externality effects and
the other with sunk technology investments that could lead to a non-optimal capital stock. The
response depends on relative costs that could be difficult to assess (Kolstad 1996a, 1996b).
The role of country heterogeneity in international environmental agreements is complex.
Heterogeneity may lead to broader, more durable agreements, but with lower aggregate benefits
(Carraro and Siniscalco 1993; Chander and Tulkens 1995, 1997). Barrett (2001) and Kolstad
(2007) point out that agreement is particularly hard when there is substantial variation across
countries with regard to the interpretation of uncertain benefits and costs of IEA membership.16
Differences across countries in estimated damages and discount rates limit cooperation and lower
aggregate welfare benefits (Haag and Lagunoff 2007) or they reduce the size of the cooperating
coalition (Hannesson 2010). On the other hand, heterogeneous damages can promote
cooperation when heterogeneity allows for gains from trade and the use of transfer payments
(Carraro and Siniscalco 1993; Barrett 2001; Asheim and Holtsmark 2009; Kolstad 2010; Dellink
and Finus 2012; Finus and Pintassilgo 2013). For example, low-marginal damage or lowabatement cost countries could potentially receive transfer payments from high-damage, highcost countries to join collective efforts. This trade reduces abatement costs and creates a surplus
to fund transfers (Barrett 2001, McGinty 2007). Heterogeneous levels of wealth and economic
development across countries in the presence of preferences for the well-being of others, equity,
16

Kolstad (2007, 1-2) notes that, due to uncertainty about the effects of climate change and hence, the benefits of
immediate mitigation, the U.S. did not ratify the Kyoto Protocol, preferring to wait until there was more conclusive
evidence. In contrast, the European Union concluded that something must be done before it is too late.
11

and fairness also can facilitate cooperation through transfers and other concessions (Rose et al
1998; Fehr and Schmidt 1999; Kolstad 2011; Dellink and Finus 2012; Finus and Pintassilgo
2013).
Overall, the thrust of the IEA literature is that cooperation, even in simplified settings
where countries are viewed as individual, rational actors is difficult and achievable only under
specific conditions. The IEA literature does not, however, examine the institutional structure
through which cooperation takes place nor the transaction costs encountered (Gilligan 2010).
It is plausible that transaction costs could be incorporated into a game-theoretic IEA
model without adding so much complexity that the model becomes intractable. Even so, adding
the details of the institutional setting, how it is put into place, and how it affects cooperation and
outcomes is inherently challenging. A more expansive examination of cooperation to confront
global environmental externalities reveals that where transactions costs are lower, collective
action is possible and that where transaction costs are high, significant cooperation is less
feasible.
A transaction costs approach recognizes that costs arise from the structure and process of
the game itself. These affect coalition composition, timing, durability, and performance.
Although the IEA literature points out that transfer payments may entice greater cooperation, it
does not provide insight on how the additional costs of negotiating transfers will reduce the
overall gains from cooperation and the likelihood of agreement. The key role of transaction costs
in molding economic institutions and behavior is emphasized by Coase (1960, 1992) and
Williamson (1979, 2010), and those costs affect international agreements.
Multilateral cooperation among sovereign nations is an inherently contractual procedure.
Rents are created and costs are borne whenever behavioral constraints are agreed upon.

12

International agreements implicitly assign those costs and benefits as property rights. Country
leaders participate when it is in the interest of major constituents to do so. Countries are
composed of varying interests who are affected in different ways from a different distribution of
property rights. Accordingly, they organize and lobby to influence country positions in
international negotiations and treaty compliance. Cooperation is not a single event, but can take
many forms and occur at different times with important implications for the timing, extent, and
duration of cooperative mitigation.
A transaction costs approach allows for more texture and detail in the institutional
structure of the international agreement than is provided in the IEA literature. It examines the
costs of aggregating disparate country interests into national positions and representing them in
international cooperative institutions—treaties, governance structures, transfer mechanisms, and
enforcement arrangements. It also analyzes how preference aggregation and bargaining among
heterogeneous interests across countries influences outcomes. Transaction costs predict how
uncertainty, differential preferences and perceptions, asymmetric information, and enforcement
costs among heterogeneous parties determine the property rights that can be agreed upon.17
Thus far, there has been little analytical modeling of transaction costs in international
environmental agreements. Krutilla and Krause (2010) provide an overview of some of the
literature and insights for further modeling and testing. Systematic empirical analysis of the
factors affecting international collaboration across settings also is very limited. Hence, this
review suggests opportunities for research. Future work can take advantage of the over 700
international environmental agreements and informal conventions in Ronald Mitchell’s (2012)

17

Cooper (1989, 180-1) discusses the difficulties encountered in achieving successful international collective action
to control infectious diseases, which took over 100 years to establish.
13

database.18 Basic information on IEA agreements is provided by subject, date, membership,
performance, secretariat websites, and relevant literature. With these data it is possible to analyze
negotiations; identify the positions taken by country representatives; examine exchanges made;
locate the parties in the coalition and those that did not join; show what actions were feasible and
which ones were rejected; and to outline the distribution of costs and benefits.
In the absence of an existing conceptual/theoretical framework to guide the empirical
analysis of transaction costs and multinational externality control, it is useful to briefly review
the large literature on common-pool resource (CPR) where local actions to control CPR
externalities occur without overarching formal enforcement as is the case with global CPRs, but
with low transaction costs. This literature points out what is possible when transaction costs are
minimal, and what happens for cooperation when transaction costs rise.
III. Local Common-Pool Resources (CPRs) and Transaction Costs.
The local CPR literature is extensive and generally reports success in controlling
externalities. It includes case studies and experimental analyses that use the game theory of
common property regimes as their theoretical framework (Ostrom 1990, 2000;19Ostrom et al.
1994, 2002; Varughese and Ostrom 2001). Other work includes Acheson (1975, 1988, 2003);
Wade (1988); Berkes et al (1989); Baland and Platteau (1996, 1997, 1998); Bardhan (2000);
Dayton-Johnson (2000a, 2000b); Gardner et al. (2000); Chermak and Krause (2002); DaytonJohnson and Bardhan (2002); Acheson and Gardner (2005); Faysse (2005); Adhikari and Lovett
(2006); Ruttan (2008); and Deacon et al. (2013). The empirical cases cover groundwater basins,
communal irrigation systems, local forest lands, pastures, inshore or artisanal fisheries, and
offshore regional fisheries.

18
19

http://iea.uoregon.edu/.
For a concise summary of Ostrom’s work and its impact see Bergstrom (2010).
14

Conditions for successful collective action to reduce externality losses are generalized by
Wade (1988, 215-16); Ostrom (1990, 88-102); Baland and Platteau (1996, 286-90); and Cox et al
(2010).20 These conditions indicate low transaction costs: little scientific uncertainty; similar
preferences and perceptions among the population; minimal asymmetric information; and
widespread compliance. Uncertainty is low because the resource is well-understood,
measureable, and boundable; there are past experiences with externality control; the response of
the resource to cooperation is observable; and mitigation rents are appropriable. There are similar
preferences and perceptions regarding the CPR problem because populations are small,
socioeconomically homogeneous, characterized by trust, repeat exchange, and communication,
and there is a proportionate sharing of mitigation benefits and costs to align incentives (Cox et al
2010, Table 4). Enforcement costs are lowered via restrictions on entry, use of monitors who are
accountable to users, existence of institutions for arbitrating disputes and applying sanctions, and
acceptance of local governance regimes by higher levels of government.
Although the literature centers on local CPRs, there is growing discussion on how the
findings might be scaled up for addressing global externalities (Young 1994, 429-31; 2011, 6;
Keohane and Ostrom eds 1995; Ostrom et al 1999; Cash et al 2006; McGinnis and Ostrom 2008,
189-211; O’Neill 2009, 11-15; Jaffe and Stavins 2010, 139-44; and Ostrom 2011, 2012). Scaling
up in this literature, however, often is presented quite abstractly. Accordingly, it is not
immediately obvious how to apply the lessons of local CPRs to global externality control.
It is nevertheless possible to illustrate more specifically how the insights from successful
local CPR management can be applied to a larger level. This involves one of two approaches: (i)

20

Because this research is interdisciplinary, encompassing a wide variety of analytical approaches, there have been
efforts to provide a unifying structure for research (Agrawal 2001; Ostrom 2009; Poteete et al 2010; and the dataset
on CPR cases maintained at the Center for the Study of Institutional Diversity, Arizona State University:
http://seslibrary.asu.edu/.)
15

identifying settings where local or regional CPR management importantly affects the
performance of wider mitigation; and (ii) examining local and regional CPR cases where
transaction costs are higher, undermining efforts to assign property rights to control the
externality. Examination of such cases yields implications for the effect of transaction costs on
the success of broader collective action efforts.
Research along these lines provides intuition for scaling the lessons of local CPRs to
international ones. Investigators can draw upon the dataset on CPR cases at the Center for the
Study of Institutional Diversity, Arizona State University,21 and the International Environmental
Agreements Database Project at the University of Oregon.22 The four testable implications
regarding uncertainty, varying preferences and perceptions, asymmetric information, and
enforcement presented in Section I can then be used to analyze not only local CPR cases but also
to explain the diversity of international cooperative outcomes.
In terms of the first approach that points to linkages between local CPR management and
the success of more global efforts, consider the United Nations initiative for Reducing Emissions
from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries, (UN-REDD), launched in
2008.23 Some 20% of annual GHG emissions may come from deforestation; reductions in timber
harvest can therefore play an important abatement role. UN-REDD is an offset scheme for
carbon markets in which emitters in industrialized countries pay for tropical forest protection and
gain carbon credits at lower cost than with direct abatement. The success of global mitigation
through forest protection, however, depends upon local cooperation and program design that
reflects existing communal CPR management practices. Many tropical forests are inhabited, are
vital sources of local goods and services, and are administered by informal community rules
21

http://seslibrary.asu.edu.
http://iea.uoregon.edu/.
23
www.un-redd.org/.
22

16

(Poteete and Ostrom 2004; Gibson et al 2005; Alston and Andersson 2011; Alston et al 2013;
Pfaff et al 2013). Effective carbon sequestration land-use controls require aligning broad
mitigation objectives with the incentives of residents and taking advantage of their specific
knowledge.
Alston and Andersson (2011) describe a case where this is not happening, potentially
undercutting GHG abatement goals. These authors point out that external regulation as part of
REDD can make local property rights less secure and raise suspicion among inhabitants who
have little experience with outsiders and have different preferences and perceptions over
resource use. Under these circumstances, local users have less incentive to cooperate with
REDD’s forest-protection policies. To enlist support, Alston and Andersson recommend
surveying forest users and their property institutions as a first-order requirement along with
collecting baseline forest biomass and using indigenous organizations for the distribution of
REDD funds and contract enforcement.24
Similarly, because international mitigation can disrupt indigenous CPR practices, Busch
(2013) argues that payments to native populations for forest and biodiversity protection should
be structured as compensation for their opportunity costs rather than as abstract carbon-offset
fees. Such an approach makes it clear who should receive payments, specifies amounts
necessary, and helps ensure that REDD’s activities are sensitive to existing informal property
rights.
To illustrate the second approach—examining the impact of higher transaction costs on
local and regional CPR management and their implications for broader mitigation—two cases
are summarized from U.S. economic history. In these examples, the costs of defining property

24

Plantinga and Richards (2010) discuss program design for forest carbon sequestration and emphasize blending
projects with any post-Kyoto international mitigation policies.
17

rights are greater due to more scientific uncertainty, different perceptions and preferences,
asymmetric information, and higher enforcement costs. The cases also have longitudinal and
cross-sectional empirical detail that often is not available in the local CPR literature. This data
advantage reveals the benefits of analyzing economic history to identify the determinants of
collaboration in externality mitigation.25
U.S. Oil and Gas Exploration and Production.
Oil and gas reservoirs in the U.S. are CPRs exploited by multiple production lease
holders, where open-access losses resulting from competition for resource rents have been a
long-standing concern. Oil-producing firms gain use of reservoirs through leases granted by
surface land owners. Where surface ownership is fragmented, many firms compete for the same
oil and gas because the hydrocarbons migrate within the reservoir across lease lines. Hence lease
holders have incentives to rapidly drill wells and drain. In 1914 the U.S. Bureau of Mines
estimated costs of excessive capital at a quarter of the value of total U.S. production. In 1926 the
Federal Oil Conservation Board estimated recovery rates at 20-25% as compared to 89-90% with
more restrained extraction (Libecap and Smith 2002, S592-3). On the giant East Texas field the
American Petroleum Institute in 1937 estimated the capital costs of unnecessary wells at over
$200 million--over $3 billion in 2011 dollars (Libecap and Wiggins 1985, 694). The Prudhoe
Bay reservoir in Alaska, discovered in 1968 and more than double the size of the East Texas
field, began producing in 1977, but went into decline in 1988, not because of waning deposits,
but because of competitive extraction of natural gas that could have forced out additional
petroleum (Libecap and Smith 1999, 545).
25

For example, when property rights are not well defined and new entry is not controlled, holdout is possible. This is
referred to as the anti-commons (Heller 1998). Rosenthal (1990) makes use of extensive archival data on
collaborative efforts to develop irrigation systems in France and their effects on agricultural output in the 18 th and
19th centuries. He shows that the French revolution was necessary to redefine property rights and strengthen the
power of eminent domain against holdout in order to lower transaction costs.
18

CPR management to control technological externalities occurs at the field, state, and
interstate levels. Lease holders attempt to define property rights in the reservoir through output
prorationing, assigning shares in a field-wide production unit, or lease consolidation. As the
losses above indicate, however, their efforts have been surprisingly incomplete due to transaction
costs. Scientific uncertainty about the resource and the impact of competitive production from
separate leases impedes agreement. Wiggins and Libecap (1985, 372-76) model the problem of
uncertainty. Reservoirs are not uniform and engineering knowledge of key parameters affecting
the value of individual leases and their contribution to production externalities is limited. These
circumstances make it difficult for lease owners to agree either on lease sales for consolidation or
on unitization whereby a single firm develops the oil field and distributes the rents as unit shares,
thereby avoiding competitive extraction.26 Wiggins and Libecap (1985, 377-83) examine detailed
unitization share negotiations for 7 fields in Texas and New Mexico discovered between the
1930s and 1950s and find that time to settlement ranged from 4 to 9 years. One unit agreement
required 6 years of negotiations and at least 58 rounds of voting on different property rights
assignments. Despite losses from competitive production, consolidation of major Prudhoe Bay
leases took 32 years (Libecap and Smith 1999; 2001; 2002, S593-72002).
Heterogeneous perceptions of externality costs among lease owners also hinder
agreement. Leases above the deepest part of the reservoir with the largest per-acre production
potential and situated to capture subsurface oil flows are less affected by the externality than are
leases located on the field periphery. Wiggins and Libecap (1985, 376) show that strategicallypositioned lease owners holdout in unitization negotiations, and disagreements on lease values
block consensus on transfers to overcome opposition. Asymmetric information further raises

26

Crothers and Nelson (2007) and Kaffine and Costello (2010) examine unitization in other natural resources to
avoid open-access losses.
19

transaction costs. Lease potential is revealed in public and private information (Wiggins and
Libecap 1985, 370-5). Public information includes cumulative oil production and lease surface
size, and private information includes the extent of subsurface deposits and hydrocarbon flows.
Disagreement on private information and its interpretation for lease values delays agreement on
assigning property rights in the field. Finally, there are problems of enforcement and new entry.
State regulation of lease production occurs via annual output caps (Libecap and Smith 2002,
S594-5), but lease holders have different incentives to comply. Small lease owners who
internalize fewer of the field-wide losses often cheat. For example, in 1931, rampant violation of
output controls by numerous small producers led the Governor of Texas to temporarily place the
East Texas field under martial law (Wiggins and Libecap 1987, 4 and Libecap 1989b, 838).
In addition to efforts at controlling externalities at the field level, there also have been
interstate actions to limit the dissipation of pecuniary rents, but these cooperative actions have
also been thwarted by high transaction costs. The major oil-producing states coordinated output
for 40 years from 1933-1972 through the Interstate Oil Compact Commission (IOCC) that
provided a recommended annual aggregate production cap distributed across states (Libecap
1989b, 834). Cartelization, however, remained only loosely centralized and it was not structured
in a manner to maximize rents. In this instance, uncertainty was not a major problem. The
benefits of higher cartel prices were clear and more rents could have been earned and shared, had
the IOCC been delegated the authority to fix state output levels. There were, however,
differential preferences and perceptions across the states regarding the costs and benefits of
cooperation. Even though Texas was by far the largest producer, it did not disproportionately
reduce its output to fix prices. Moreover, oil-producing states were unwilling to cede control
over such a critical industry to an outside interstate agency or to the federal government to better

20

facilitate cartelization. Instead, each state regulatory agency determined state production policies
in response to internal political pressures. The Texas Railroad Commission exempted influential
owners of high-cost stripper wells. Reducing their production would have been the efficient way
to meet the state’s quota. Instead, Texas imposed regulation on low-cost firms from out of state
(Libecap and Wiggins 1984, 91-6; 1985, 710-12).
Incomplete local, state and interstate regulation of competitive oil output has taken place
within one country with reasonably accurate information on aggregate externality losses,
production, and compliance, all of which could have promoted greater cooperation. The fact that
agreement has not occurred shows how transactions costs limit collaborative mitigation efforts
even under comparatively favorable circumstances. It also illustrates how the internal politicaleconomy determines the regulatory discretion that can be delegated to outside bodies. These
issues are even more problematic when confronting broader environmental externalities across
nations where the benefits of cooperation are less obvious and less appropriable by critical
within-country constituencies. Such factors are not examined in the current IEA literature.
Further, Libecap and Smith (2002) show that more cooperative externality mitigation has taken
place as resource values have risen, counter to the IEA argument that cooperation is greatest
when the gains are small (Barrett 1994).
The Maine Lobster Fishery.
This second CPR case is instructive because of the lessons revealed when external formal
rules are imposed on local property rights and management practices. Such extensions of
regulation are inherent in international coordination to address broad externalities. When
transaction costs are high, regulations can be resisted by local parties because a cooperative
arrangement with regulators cannot be reached. In the case of the Maine lobster fishery, local

21

fishers established informal property rights and harvest supervision with generally favorable
outcomes beginning in the late 19th century (Acheson 1988; Acheson 2003, 1, 17-18, 57-145,
217-221; Acheson and Gardner 2005). Conflicts arose when these practices were viewed as
inadequate and the fishery was placed under formal federal regulation in 1977 by the Fisheries
Conservation and Management Act of 1976 (FCMA, P.L. 94-265). Local fishers and federal
regulators within the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), however, did not agree on
proposed stricter federal harvest controls.
Stock uncertainty, asymmetric information, and differential perceptions and preferences
for more restrictive regulation led to conflicting views between fishers and NMFS officials. The
former relied upon local knowledge and historical environmental conditions whereas the latter
relied upon formal modeling and simulations that suggested that existing harvests were
unsustainable. Neither party could successfully convey their assessment of stock status to the
other party and achieve cooperation. An impasse ensued for nearly 20 years. In 1995, regulatory
authority was delegated to the industry and the states to devise a regional lobster management
plan, which was implemented in 1997 (Acheson, 2003 169-179, 182). Under the new
institutional arrangement, the parties had similar information, modeling approaches, views of the
fishing externality, and preferences for addressing it. Hence, they were better able to agree upon
stock conditions and the regulations to be imposed.
At the heart of this example is a scientific dispute concerning the effect of production
externalities relative to natural stock fluctuation. When scientific evidence regarding the
externality is inconclusive or its implications differentially interpreted, uncertainty about
mitigation rents reinforces differential preferences for taking action. Transaction costs therefore
rise. In other fisheries conflicts arise for very similar reasons (Normile 2009; Polacheck 2012).

22

As the range of environmental externalities expands there will be more heterogeneous
assessments of problems and of how to confront them. Options exist, however, for lowering
transaction costs including investment in new knowledge that reduces uncertainty in the level
and distribution of benefits and costs; provision of neutral sources of information to reduce
asymmetries (these may or may not involve regulatory agencies); distribution of transfer
payments to offset differential preferences for collaborative abatement and varying opportunity
costs; and objective, reliable enforcement.
The effects of new information on uncertainty and transfers to confront heterogeneous
preferences have been examined in the IEA literature (Carraro and Siniscalco 1993; Barrett
2001; Kolstad and Ulph 2008, 2009), but these relationships have not been systematically
analyzed empirically. There is potential for further analysis of how varying transaction costs
affect cooperative outcomes. The following section discusses several examples of multilateral
externalities, moving from low to high transaction cost cases. These cases illustrate how the four
testable implications outlined in Section I regarding uncertainty, varying preferences and
perceptions, asymmetric information, and enforcement costs influence property rights definition
and the likelihood that global environmental externalities are addressed.
IV. Global Externalities: The Implications of Scientific Uncertainty, Different Preferences
and Perceptions, Asymmetric Information, and Enforcement.
Global environmental externalities are those that arise when parties in one country
endanger a widely-valued resource, such as a site with an exceptional ecosystem or a distinctive
population of plants, animals, birds, or fish, and when parties from many nations deplete or
depredate a broader resource, such as migratory fish stocks or the atmosphere. In either case
mitigation requires multinational cooperation. Table 1 lists the global environmental externality
cases examined in this section according to the transaction costs of property rights definition,
23

ranging from low to medium to high. There is a transaction-cost continuum and the cases
presented here illustrate what international collaboration is possible along that continuum.
The examples in column (1) demonstrate that when low transaction costs are low,
cooperation on property rights is straightforward; those in column (2) involve higher transaction
costs because more countries are involved, but cooperation remains possible; and those in
column (3) have much higher transaction costs due to scientific uncertainty, varying preferences
and perceptions for externality mitigation, asymmetric information, and high enforcement costs.
In these cases agreement on property rights and cooperation has not been successful. These
results align with the testable implications outlined in Section I.
Table 1: Categorizing Transaction Costs in Addressing Global Environmental Externalities

Examples:

(1)
Low Transaction
Costs: Externality
Mitigation occurs
within in a Single
Country
Globally valued
ecosystems: National
Parks

Scientific Uncertainty
Varying Perceptions and
Preferences

Low
Limited: Addressed
through Transfers

Asymmetric Information

Low

Convention on
International Trade of
Endangered Species
(CITES); Montreal
Protocol on Substances
that Deplete the Ozone
Layer
Medium
Limited to Medium:
Addressed through
Transfers
Low to Medium

Low

Low to Medium

Enforcement Costs and
New Entry Potential

(2)
Medium Transaction
Costs: Externality
Mitigation occurs across
Selected Countries

(3)
High Transaction Costs:
Externality Mitigation
occurs across Multiple
Countries
International Commission
for the Conservation of
Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT);
Kyoto Protocol to Control
Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
Emissions
Medium to High
High involving Populations
in Many Countries.
Transfers incomplete.
High in Contribution to the
Externality, Mitigation
Response, and Compliance
High

Category (1) Examples: National Parks.
Biodiversity, unique habitats, and plant and animal species are valued by many parties
globally, particularly within developed countries. The scientific benefits of reserving particular

24

sites are typically known because of extensive studies and observation by researchers and
wildlife advocates from western economies. Locations and species at risk, however, often are in
developing regions where property rights are unclear or not enforced and where local preferences
for resource use do not include biodiversity and habitat protection to the same degree as desired
elsewhere. For these reasons, critical, vulnerable resources are exploited more intensely than is
preferred by parties in developed countries who lose value or rents unless constraints on access
and use are implemented. Different perceptions raise transaction costs, and agreement on
property rights requires transfers.
The demanders of property rights are parties from high-income, developed countries who
place importance on site protection. Demanders assemble as interest groups to lobby country
leaders to support boundary designation and enforcement, provide subsidies for operation, and
make payments to those who no longer have the same right of entry or use. The supply of
property rights is determined by the international treaties reached with developing-country
officials who define and enforce national park borders in exchange for compensatory payments
and funding for operations costs. Because directly affected populations are limited and are
relatively homogeneous—often indigenous herders, farmers, and hunters—opportunity costs can
be determined at low cost and the necessary transfers are small. In some cases, indigenous
occupants have not been organized or recognized politically so that offsetting their costs has not
played a major role in multinational negotiations.
Globally, there are nearly 7,000 national parks that the International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classifies as Category II protected areas, and most are in lessdeveloped regions of the world. The IUCN is a global environmental organization made up of
representatives of governments, international organizations, and environmental NGOs that

25

establishes and monitors national parks. The organization, founded in 1948 initially as the
International Union for the Preservation of Nature,27 is funded by contributions from developed
countries, such as the Ford Foundation. Table 2 lists four representative national parks
established in the 20th century and the types of transaction costs encountered.
Table 2: National Parks to Protect Globally-Valued Ecosystems
National Parks

Manú, Peru
Kruger, South Africa
Nairobi, Kenya
Serengeti, Tanzania

Years
Established

1926-1973

Property Rights
Demanders and Funds
Providers
Citizens of developed
countries; NGOs; World
Bank, UN, and other
international agencies

Property
Rights
Suppliers
Colonial and National
Governments as
defined by
International
Agreements

Transaction Costs
Different preferences
of occupants;
Displacement;
Dispute over transfer
amounts;
Enforcement

The Manú National Park or Biosphere Reserve was created in 1973 by the Peruvian
Government to protect unique biological and ecological resources. It is the largest national park
in Peru, covering a total area of 18,811 km² with one of highest levels of biodiversity of any park
in the world. Within its boundaries are more than 15,000 plant species, over 1,000 bird species,
and one of the highest concentrations of land vertebrates in Latin American. Protection of this
remote reserve was sought by researchers and environmental groups in the U.S. In return for
restrictions on occupancy and land use, the government of Peru receives financial support from
the World Wildlife Fund, U.S. Debt-for-Nature Swaps, and other international organizations.
Indigenous inhabitants remain in the park and given limited numbers and traditional use
practices their continued occupancy is consistent with park objectives (Shepard et al 2010).28
Overall, the transaction costs behind designation of Manú were low. The scientific value of the

27

www.iucn.org.
Funding also is from the UN Development Program (UNDP), the World Bank, International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), and the Global Environment Facility (GEF), www.thegef.org/. The park
is described in Olson et al (2001).
28

26

site was understood; demanders of property rights for the reserved area were organized; the
affected population was small; transfers were made; and boundary infringement limited.
Kruger National Park was established in 1926 to safeguard exceptional African wildlife
species. Kruger is one of the largest reserves in Africa, covering an area of 19,633 km² and has
the most species of large mammals in the continent. The initial transaction costs of property
rights definition to the protected area were minimal because the park was established under
colonial rule at the request of organized British citizens, who valued the distinctive wildlife in
the reserve. The indigenous native population participated little in original boundary and land use
concessions (Mabunda et al. 2003). Subsequent property rights negotiations, however, have
involved representatives of the South African Government and those of developed countries to
incorporate broader conservation principles of the IUCN, the Convention on Biological Diversity
of 1992,29 and the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora. Funding for operations and transfer payments are provided by the UN Development
Program and the Global Environment Facility,30 environmental NGOs, and eco-tourism.
Similarly, Nairobi National Park was founded in 1946 under colonial rule at the behest of
British conservationists who valued the site adjacent to the city of Nairobi because of its rich,
accessible animal populations. The park covers an area of 117.21 km2 and has diverse wildlife,
including a rhinoceros sanctuary. Establishing the park displaced the resident Maasai population
(Prins and Grootenhuis 2000). Foreign tourism, the Kenyan government, and international
environmental organizations provide funding for operations and site protection.
A similar history lies behind the Serengeti National Park, created in 1940 at the urging of
members of a British group, the Society for the Preservation of Fauna of the Empire (Child and

29
30

www.cbd.int/convention/.
www.thegef.org/.
27

Lyman 2005). The park covers 14,763 km2, including much of the Serengeti ecosystem, and is
home to a wide array of wildlife. Compensation comes from tourism, the World Bank, the
Global Environmental Facility, and other NGOs. When the park was set up native inhabitants
were relocated; there are continuing negotiations over compensation (Sinclair 1995; Polasky et al
2008).
Category (2) Examples: Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species
(CITES) and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Stratospheric Ozone
Layer
The next examples of global externalities involve somewhat higher transaction costs.
These two examples are representative of the most common international environmental
agreements (Mitchell 2012). Compared to Category (1) cases, cooperation of multiple countries
with more varied populations is required. Category (2) international environmental agreements
are nevertheless common because there are reasonably low transaction costs in property rights
definition. In terms of the four implications outlined in Section I, scientific uncertainty is limited;
differential preferences and perceptions of the externality between parties in developed countries
and those in developing ones are overcome through transfers; asymmetric information is not a
major obstacle because the externality itself and the contributors to them are observable; and
enforcement is feasible through standard monitoring institutions and technologies.
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
CITES was initiated in 1963 and implemented in 1975. As of May 2013, 178 nations had
ratified the Convention.31 Its objective is to protect endangered animal and plant species by
reducing their exploitation value through international trade restrictions. The implementation of
CITES trade constraints generally proceeds as follows. Citizens of developed countries,
multinational corporations, and international conservation NGOs lobby for trade limits and
31

www.cites.org/eng/disc/parties/.
28

contribute funding to the CITES Trust Fund (Reeve 2002).32 In response, representatives of
developing countries where many endangered species are at risk consider trade policies that vary
according to CITES listings in three appendices: Appendix I is the strictest, whereby trade in a
wild species is prohibited; Appendix II is for species-at-risk, but not immediately threatened,
whereby international trade is monitored via export permits; and Appendix III has the loosest
trade controls for species that are locally at risk, but not so elsewhere (Gehring and Ruffing
2008, 124-36).
A CITES listing can be proposed by any signatory party at a Conference of Parties (COP)
meeting, whether or not they represent countries with resident species’ populations. The trade
constraints imposed, the compensation provided to designated parties, and enforcement
determine the property rights defined by CITES listings. Considerable negotiations may be
necessary as indicated in the COP meeting summaries.33 Signatory countries can opt out of a
listing. Incentives for compliance are provided through transfer payments, and enforcement is
through monitoring, media reports of trade violations, and external political pressure on noncomplying national leaders to carry out treaty provisions.
As with national parks, country residents that are directly affected may or may not be
represented in property rights assignments. Possingham et al. (2002) point out that a CITES
listing can paradoxically threaten a species’ survival if host country inhabitants are not
compensated for the constraints imposed upon them and have different assessments of its status
than do representatives of developed countries who propose listing (Bulte and van Kooten 1999,
453-4; Gehring and Ruffing 2008, 135; Missios 2004).34 Different perceptions and preferences

32

http://www.cites.org/eng/disc/fund.php.
These are found at http://www.cites.org/eng/cop/index.php.
34
A similar point is made by Lueck and Michael (2003) who argue that the U.S. Endangered Species Act had a
negative impact on endangered red-cockaded woodpeckers because enforcement of the law created an incentive for
33

29

raise transaction costs. For instance, the ban on ivory trade to protect threatened African elephant
populations was proposed in 1989 at COP 7 meeting among representatives from the U.S., other
developed countries, and environmental NGOs. Listing was resisted by delegates from southern
African countries led by Zimbabwe, who claimed that their elephant populations were not at risk
and attempted to halt Appendix I listing at COP 8 meeting in 1992 (Barbier et al 1990, Bulte and
van Kooten 1999, Kremer and Morcom 2000). Although these delegates were not successful,
they continued to lobby and eventually achieved adoption of stricter Appendix I listing criteria
and exemptions for specific populations at the 1994 COP 9 meeting (Gehring and Ruffing 2008,
130). Although CITES remains popular internationally there is considerable debate as to whether
trade bans are an effective way to protect endangered species (Brown and Layton 2001; Horan
and Shogren 2003; Fischer 2004; and Bulte and Barbier 2005).
The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.
The excessive release of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and related substances creates a
serious global externality that thins the stratospheric ozone layer that blocks solar ultraviolet
radiation. Such radiation is especially harmful among Caucasian populations in northern
latitudes who have a higher incidence of skin cancer. Ultraviolet radiation also has damaging
effects on plant and marine life (Barrett 2005, 1-3, 7, 361; 2007, 75-84; Dimitrov 2006, 58-60).
Accordingly, the main demanders of mitigation property rights are citizens of the U.S. and
Western Europe, where most CFC production has taken place and where there are appropriable
private benefits from broad externality alleviation. Indeed, Murdoch and Sandler (1997) view the
phase out of CFCs by the U.S. as an example of private provision of a public good because of the
extent to which the U.S. was able to capture the benefits of its own abatement activities. The

land owners to change their timber harvest practices.
30

major international bargaining issue involved enticing cooperation of less-developed countries in
bans on new production and trade in CFCs through transfers of funds and technologies.
The literature on negotiations among country representatives leading to the Montreal
Protocol of 1987 is unusually large, allowing for a better understanding of the transaction costs
encountered, how they were overcome, and how the negotiations influenced the agreement that
finally emerged. Most of the empirical detail concerns the evolution of scientific knowledge;
adoption of substitute chemicals; bargaining between politicians and industry representatives
within the U.S. and western Europe; negotiations among U.S. and western European officials
and representatives of transitional economies in Eastern Europe and developing countries over
transfer payments and preferential treaty provisions; and the effects of subsequent CFC control
on the stratospheric ozone layer. Representative work on the Montreal Protocol includes Nangle
(1989, 531-43); Benedict (1991); Enders and Porges (1992); Ling (1992); Litfin (1994); Hollick
and Cooper (1997, 157); United Nations Ozone Secretariat (1995, 1998); Beron et al (2003);
Auffhammer et al (2005); Barrett (2005, 221-37; 346-51); Dimitrov (2006, 53-57); and Victor
(2011, 43-6, 89).
Concern about the externality in the U.S. followed Molina and Roland’s (1974) and
Stolarski and Cicerone’s (1974) hypothesized linkages between CFCs and thinning of the ozone
layer. The U.S. unilaterally banned CFC-based aerosol sales in 1978. International negotiations
followed the discovery of on an expanding Antarctic ozone “hole” and the development of lowcost CFC alternatives that reduced the cost of CFC phase out. The first major multinational
agreement was the 1985 Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer (Vienna

31

Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, May 2, 1985, Treaty Doc. No. 9, 99th
Congress 1st Sess., 1985). It was followed by the 1987 Montreal Protocol.35
Differential perceptions and preferences for mitigation between representatives of
northern developed countries and those from less-developed tropical countries were the primary
sources of transaction costs. In tropical regions the externality was seen as less harmful, and
CFCs were useful for low-cost refrigeration and industrial solvents. These differing views are
reflected in cross-country patterns of participation, treaty ratification, and transfer payments. In
the initial Montreal negotiations, 22 of the 50 countries whose representatives participated were
from developed countries and 86% of them signed. In contrast, only 19 developing-country
representatives were involved and 47% signed. The remaining representatives were from
transitional economies. As financial and technological transfers were expanded for developing
countries, adoption spread. Under the notion of “common but differentiated responsibilities”
less-developed countries were allowed 10 years more than developed countries to reach lower
production targets. The Multilateral Fund (MLF) and the Global Environmental Facility were
established to provide financial and technical assistance for the gradual elimination of CFCs and
HCFCs (hydro chlorofluorocarbons), chemicals that are less toxic to the ozone layer than CFCs
and also are used as inexpensive refrigerants. Through 2012, approximately $2.8 billion has been
disbursed from the MLF to 140 developing countries with by far the largest amounts going to
India and China.36 Most contributions to the MLF have come from northern latitude countries-Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, U.K., and the U.S.37 CFC production has
plummeted under the Protocol. HCFCs, however, remain problematic, as shown in Figure 1, with
35

ozone.unep.org/new_site/en/montreal_protocol.php.
www.worldbank.org/mp/publications; www.unep.org/ozone. By 2012 China had received $930 million and India
$248 million. Mexico and Brazil followed with $100 million and $92 million --Julia Anne Dearing, Information
Management Officer, Montreal Protocol Multilateral Fund Secretariat, jamdearing@unmfs.org.
37
Fund sources are listed in http://www.multilateralfund.org/67/English/1/6739.pdf).
36

32

most production coming from China and India.38 Figure 2 traces MLF payments to China and
India, the two largest recipients, and their total production of HCFCs. Figure 3 tracks the size of
the ozone hole, indicating stability and some recent decline in area.
Figure 1: Total CFC and HCFC Production
45
40
1,000
35
800

30
25

600
20
400

15
10

200
5
0

HCFC produc on
Ozone deple on poten al (thousand tons)

CFC produc on
Ozone deple on poten al (thousand tons)

1,200

CFC produc on
(ozone deple on
poten al tons)

HCFC produc on
(ozone deple on
poten al tons)

0
1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

2011

Source: http://ozone.unep.org/new_site/en/ozone_data_tools_access.php. Data compiled by Annex Group A/I
(CFCs) and C/I (HCFCs) for all countries.

38

http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/ENVIRONMENT/EXTTMP/0,,contentMDK:21795271~
menuPK:5079015~pagePK:148956~piPK:216618~theSitePK:408230,00.ht. The Montreal Protocol and compliance
with it are addressed in Velders et al (2007) and the United Nations Ozone Secretariat (2010).
33

Figure 2: HCFC Production and Multilateral Fund Distributions in China and India

Source: Ozone: http://ozone.unep.org/new_site/en/ozone_data_tools_access.php; Data provided by Julia Anne
Dearing, Information Management Officer, Montreal Protocol Multilateral Fund Secretariat,
jamdearing@unmfs.org.

Figure3: Ozone Hole Area
35

MIllion km squared

30
25
Ozone Hole Area (million km
squared) Maximum Daily

20

15

Ozone Hole Area (million km
squared) Average 07 Sept-13
Oct

10
5
2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

0

Source: http://ozonewatch.gsfc.nasa.gov/meteorology/annual_data.html;
http://ozonewatch.gsfc.nasa.gov/facts/hole.html.

Category (3) Examples: Highly-Migratory Ocean Fisheries as Illustrated by the Atlantic
Bluefin Tuna, and Greenhouse Gas Emission Controls.
Category (3) cases have the highest transaction costs of assigning property rights to
mitigation rents. Scientific uncertainty regarding the extent, spread, and timing of externality
losses, responses to controls, and mitigation costs are far greater than for the other two

34

categories. Differences in preferences and perceptions of the value of externality control across
global populations are more critical. Given the broader scope of these externalities, there is more
asymmetric information about contributions to the problem, compliance, and regional or
localized resource reaction to controls. Enforcement costs are much higher. Moreover, new
entry is relatively easy. In the case of highly-migratory wild-ocean fisheries, this phenomenon is
termed the “new country” problem as fishers from other countries are attracted to the rents
created by harvest restrictions (Munro 2000; Balton 2001). In the case of GHG emission
restrictions, it is termed “leakage” as producers in participating countries either migrate to other
countries to avoid regulatory compliance costs, or shift away from fossil fuels, which lowers
their prices and encourages their use in unregulated jurisdictions. (Bushnell and Mansur 2011).
Mitigation rents are not easily boundable or capturable, particularly by the parties that bear the
greatest costs. For these reasons, property rights in Category (3) cases are incomplete or absent.
Wild Ocean Highly-Migratory Fisheries.
Many highly-migratory fish populations roam far across the vast oceans of the planet.
They cross the high seas, well beyond the 200-mile exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of coastal
states recognized by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).39 Highlymigratory stocks are subject to competitive fishing by vessels from multiple countries, and many
stocks have declined significantly. UNCLOS, the 1995 Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, and the 1995 UN Agreement on the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish and Highly-Migratory Fish Stocks (UNFSA)

39

The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea followed the third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS
III) adopted in 1982. UNCLOS Annex 1 lists Highly-Migratory Species (UN 1982). See Stokke (2001) for
discussion.
35

call for international cooperation to control harvests.40 Stock assessments that show deteriorating
conditions indicate that little has been achieved (Upton and Vitalis 2003; Myers and Worm 2003;
Devine et al 2006; Maguire et al. 2006; Beddington et al. 2007; Worm, et al. 2009; McWhinnie
2009; Food and Agricultural Organization 2010; 2012, 4, 54-55; and Pinsky et al 2011).
In contrast, there are some bilateral treaties among adjacent countries on management of
trans-boundary fish stocks, and if stocks remain generally within cooperating countries’ EEZs,
the transaction costs of negotiating property rights agreements are low enough to ensure greater
success.41 In these bilateral cases there generally is less scientific uncertainty regarding fish
stocks, harvest externalities, or stock recovery; fewer differences in management objectives;
fewer informational asymmetries; and compliance and entry can be policed within the EEZ.
Transfers to achieve constituent support take place within each country through preferential
property rights, limits on property rights trading to protect particular interests, such as local
fishing communities, and compensation for vessel reduction (buybacks) and other payments. The
North Pacific halibut fishery, shared by the U.S. and Canada, is a good example of a case where
property rights have been established within each country’s EEZ and stocks and values have
rebounded (Casey et al 1995; Grafton et al 2000; Fox et al 2003; Herrmann and Criddle 2006;
and McDorman 2009).

40

A summary of UNCLOS is available here:
http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_historical_perspective.htm. The 200-mile EEZ
was establishe by the third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III) held between 1973 and
1982.UNCLOS came into force on November 16, 1994. The 1995 Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries is
described at FAO (1995) and ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/005/v9878e/v9878e00.pdf, and the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks can be
found at http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/fish_stocks_agreement/CONF164_37.htm.
41
Ocean Law ICS provides a list of multilateral and bilateral agreements. The project website is
http://www.oceanlaw.net/projects/current/ifa.html. The most recent FAO report on their Fisheries Agreements
Register (FARISIS) is from 1999. See http://www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/W9885E.htm. 91 of the agreements in
FARISIS are bilateral.
36

The transactions costs of assigning property rights over highly-migratory ocean fisheries
are far greater than over regional ones. The main demanders for property rights are fishers from
developed countries with existing capital and expertise in the fishery. They stand to capture the
greatest rents from stock rebounds.42 The supply of property rights requires agreement among
delegates from established-fishing countries and with those from newly-entering countries that
are attracted by fishery rents. Fishers from new-entrant countries cannot be excluded because
international maritime law requires exploitation of the seas beyond country exclusive economic
zones be open to nationals of all nations.43
Although scientific uncertainty regarding fish stocks, their location, and response to
conservation plays a role in limiting agreement on property rights, the key impediments are
differential preferences, asymmetric information, and enforcement incentives among fishers
from developed and developing countries and their political representatives. Regional Fishing
Management Organizations (RFMOs), established by the Law of the Sea to manage highmigratory species, set an annual total allowable catch (TAC) consistent with maximum
sustainable yield or other criteria and allocate the quotas across RFMO members. Member
countries, in turn, distribute the quota among their fishing fleets. As new fleets enter the fishery,
however, existing property rights holders cannot capture mitigation rents (Bjørndal et al 2000).
Accordingly, developed countries seek to grandfather existing fleets and historical harvest levels
while developing countries join the RFMO and seek quota reallocation and expansion of their

42

Johnson and Libecap (1982) demonstrate that higher-skilled fishers will support property rights if their
differential talents and the inframarginal rents earned under open access are respected in any formal rights
assignment.
31
Convention on the Law of the Sea Article, 116, Dec. 10, 1982, 1833 U.N.T.S. 397 and Articles 8, 10, and 11 of
the 1995 UN Agreement on the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish and Highly-Migratory Fish
Stocks.
37

fishing rights (Pintassilgo and Duarte 2000; Rayfuse 2006, 4-6; Crothers and Nelson 2007, 342;
Grafton et al 2010; Van Dyke 2010, 165 and Korman 2011, 742).
Perhaps no fishery better reflects the high transaction costs of assigning property rights
than the Atlantic bluefin tuna (Fromentin and Powers 2005; Fromentin 2010; Allen et al eds
2010). Bluefin tuna are the world’s most valuable fish by weight (Korman 2010, 701). Prices are
often greater than $100,000 per fish; in January 2013, a 489-pound tuna sold for $1.78 million at
Tokyo's Tsukiji fish market.44 Worldwide, five RFMOs manage tunas and other highlymigratory species in their jurisdictions: the Inter American Tropical Tuna Commission, the
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, the
Commission for the Conservation of Southern bluefin Tuna, and the International Commission
for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas for the Atlantic (ICCAT) (Cullis-Suzuki and Pauly
2010).45
The ICCAT, which covers the Atlantic, the Mediterranean Sea, and the Gulf of Mexico,
was established in 1969 in response to declines in the two Atlantic bluefin stocks. It is the oldest
RFMO, preceding UNCLOS.46 Figure 4 illustrates ICCAT’s management area, the two stocks
within its jurisdiction (divided by ICCAT along the 45°W meridian), and their perceived
migratory patterns and spawning grounds. Despite this early organizational effort, the Atlantic
bluefin tuna is currently the most vulnerable bluefin tuna species (National Research Council
1994; Ellis 2008; Lischewski 2010, xiii). Stocks in the eastern and western Atlantic have
steadily declined from historic levels, and current harvests appear unsustainable (Miyake et al

44

http://en.mercopress.com/2013/01/12/bluefin-tuna-opens-2013-with-record-auction-price-at-tsukiji-1.78-milliondollars. It should be noted, however, that very high January prices are partly driven by ceremonial factors and are
higher than average.
45
A broad map of these RFMOs can be found at: http://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/cfp/international/rfmo/index_en.htm.
46
International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas opened for signature May 14, 1966, 673 U.N.T.S.
63, 20 U.S.T. 2887.
38

2004; Bjørndal and Brasão 2006, 193-7; Ellis 2008; Webster, 2010, 328; Korman 2011, 701-3,
740).
Figure 4: ICCAT Management Area and Bluefin Tuna Migration Patterns

Source: ICCAT Convention Area http://www.iccat.int/en/convarea.htm. Map of the spatial distribution of Atlantic
Bluefin tuna, main migration routes and spawning grounds. The vertical dashed line depicts the stock delimitation
between the two current ICCAT management units (modified after Fromentin and Powers 2005).

Figure 5 presents the spawning stock biomass and total allowable catch for the eastern
and western Atlantic bluefin stocks.47 As shown, the biomass for both has fallen. The eastern
stock peaked around 315,000 metric tons in 1958 and the western at 52,000 metric tons in 1973.
TACs were first assigned to the eastern stock in 1998 and in the early 1980s for the western
stock (International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) 2011, 634;
2012, 80). Even so, there has not been sufficient agreement among the members to reduce the
TACs sufficiently to rebuild the stocks.

47

SSB is the biomass of mature adult fish measured in metric tons. According to the 2010 stock assessment, bluefin
in the eastern fishery reach maturity around age 4 and those in the western fishery around age 9 (International
Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) 2011, 3)
http://www.iccat.int/Documents/CVSP/CV066_2011/no_2/CV066020505.pdf.
39

Figure 5: Atlantic Bluefin Spawning Stock Biomass and TACs by Region

Source: Spawning stock biomass (SSB) and TACs are both reported in metric tons. TAC information comes from
(International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) 2011, 633-634);
http://tagagiant.org/policy/atlantic/atlantic-international; and )
http://www.iccat.es/Documents/BienRep/REP_EN_10-11_II_2.pdf. SSB data is imputed from (International
Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) 2011, 648, 672). Eastern SSB was imputed from the
Run 13 data reported in Figure 22. Stock levels were determined for unreported years linearly interpolating from
information contained in the document text as follows: 230,000 (1950), 315,000 (1958), 230,000 (1963), 305,000
(1975), 200,000 (1985), 179,550 (2009). Western SSB was imputed from the data reported in Figure 53. Stock
levels were determined in the same manner from information contained in the document text as follows: 51,000
(1970), 52,000 (1973), 19,000 (1981), 15,000 (1985), 12,000 (1994), 15,000 (1998), 10,710 (2003), 14,790 (2009).

There is scientific uncertainty about stock status. Although the species has been well
studied, its mobility makes stock assessments and determination of the impact of regional fishing
on broader stocks imprecise (International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
(ICCAT) 2008; Joseph et al 2010, 12-13; Korman 2010).48 ICCAT country delegates interpret
stock uncertainty differently, widening the scope for disagreement on property rights. More
importantly, there are differences in preferences for stricter controls among ICCAT members
(Barkin 2004).
Between 1983 and 1991, ICCAT quota allocations were heavily weighted by historical
harvest. At the insistence of new members, more weight has been given to coastal state
proximity to the fishery and developing country fishing industries (Grafton et al 2010, 156-7;
Joseph et al 2010, 19). This TAC distribution encourages entry and reduces support for major
TAC reductions among all RFMO members. As shown in Table 3, by 2010, developing
48

The ICCAT Standing Committee on Research and Statistics (SCRS) provides stock assessments for TACs
consistent with MSY and for coordinating the research activities of the various member nations.
40

countries had increased their share of the bluefin tuna fishery.49 The number of ICCAT members
grew from 9 in 1970 to 48 in 2008, and most new members are developing countries.50
Table 3: Entry into the Eastern Atlantic Bluefin Tuna Fishery
Country
Group

Year
Joined
ICCAT

Number of
Active
Vessels

1980 Harvest
Share (%)

2008 Harvest
Share (%)

Developed1

1970-2004

356

85.5

59.2

Developing2

1969-2007

656

14.5

41.8

\

1

Developed countries include: European Union (France, Spain, Italy, Greece, Malta, Cyprus, Portugal, Ireland, and
Denmark), Norway, Japan, Iceland, and Korea.
2
Developing countries include: Morocco, Croatia, Tunisia, Libya, Turkey, Algeria, China, Egypt, Syria, Yugoslavia,
Panama, and Chinese Taipei.
Source: Year joined : http://www.iccat.int/en/contracting.htm; Vessels: http://www.iccat.int/en/vesselsrecord.asp;
Harvest data: International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) ( 2011, 614-17).

Member country coalitions form to block changes in management policies (Pintassilgo
and Duarte 2000, 361-3; Duarte et al 2000; Lindroos 2002; Bjørndal and Brasão 2006; Alcock
2010, 251-68). In 2010, a proposal to list the Atlantic bluefin tuna under CITES, which would
prohibit its international trade, failed by a vote of 20 to 68 with 30 abstentions, largely along
developing/developed country lines (Crook 2010, Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) 2010, 2). Representatives from
developing countries opposed CITES listing because of tighter constraints on bluefin trade.
Asymmetric information about harvests and their effects on the stock also raise
transaction costs. Individual fishing vessels have information on their catch that may not be
accurately presented to country regulators because it fills their quota. Further, the harvest of
juveniles below the allowed size is unlikely to be reported to the ICCAT. Illegal harvests can
49

ICCAT maintains an online database of vessels authorized to fish actively for Bluefin tuna in the eastern Atlantic
and Mediterranean Sea. See http://www.iccat.int/en/vesselsrecord.asp.
50
A list of ICCAT Contracting Parties is available online at http://www.iccat.int/en/contracting.htm
41

only be roughly estimated.51 Finally, enforcement of ICCAT rules is costly given the broad
expanse of jurisdiction (as shown in Figure 4) as well as the ease of entry. Trade sanctions also
appear to have been relatively ineffective instruments (Barrett 2005, 326-7; Hallman, et al 2010,
197-8; Webster 2010, 325-7).
Bluefin and other tunas fare better in another RFMO, the Western and Central Fisheries
Commission (WCPFC), where property rights can be made more definite.52 Established in 2004,
WCPFC involves the cooperation of fourteen Pacific Island countries and eight territories whose
exclusive economic zones overlap most of the relevant sea. Entry is limited because this setting
more closely satisfies Scott’s (1955) sole ownership condition. There is less scientific
uncertainty about stock conditions because of the narrower spatial range of the RFMO. The
membership also has similar preferences, and there are fewer information asymmetries. The
countries in the WCPFC are comparatively homogeneous in terms of their economic
development; they do not have significant domestic fleets but instead have processing industries;
and eight of the countries coordinate management through the Parties to the Nauru Agreement of
1982. These factors lower the transaction costs of agreement on property rights. Under the Nauru
Agreement an annual total allowable effort is set and distributed as tradable vessel days among
licensed vessels (Gillet 2010; McClurg 2012). Local cooperation to address this broad
externality is successful because it meets Ostrom’s design criteria (McClurg 2012).
GHG Emission Controls.
Collective reduction of GHG emissions from sources within sovereign nations is by far
the most difficult international collective action problem. For this reason, this case is described

51

ICCAT maintains a list of IUU vessels available online at http://www.iccat.es/en/IUU.asp. Many IUU vessels are
of unknown nationality. Among vessels with a known flag, Indonesia is listed seven times and Bolivia, Columbia,
Georgia, Guinea are each listed once.
52
www.wcpfc.int/.
42

in more detail than the others in the review. Settling on international property rights for
mitigation involves all four of the sources of high transaction costs outlined in Section I: extreme
scientific uncertainty, pronounced differences in preferences and perceptions of the costs and
benefits of mitigation across global populations, asymmetric information regarding costs and
benefits and contributions to the problem, and new entry and enforcement difficulties.
Of all of the examples, the potentially negative effects of the GHG externality are the
most truly global. Releases spread throughout the atmosphere so that abatement efforts within
one country benefit populations in other countries. Emission reductions by particular producers
and consumers are therefore a global public good. The benefits of reducing the extent of climate
change cannot be exclusively captured by cooperating countries or interests within them. As the
IEA literature predicts, free riding is possible even when non-cooperation can be observed. An
analysis of transaction costs reveals the underlying impediments to contractual arrangements
among international leaders.
Multilateral efforts to limit emissions, whether they take the form of cap-and-trade in
emission allowances, carbon taxes, or other regulations, define property rights to the rents from
mitigation. Neither the costs nor the benefits, however, are distributed uniformly. This creates a
major bargaining problem. Residents of regulated countries must incur costs but the benefits of
their abatement efforts are spread over the planet in unknown ways. Because of the high level of
scientific uncertainty regarding the distribution of damages avoided through mitigation, it is not
surprising that international agreement on property rights to address the externality has not
occurred. A brief review of the GHG policy literature is provided and then each of the sources
of high transaction costs is examined in more depth.

43

Anthropogenic GHG sources come from virtually all human consumption and production
activities. Archer (2007, 2009) summarizes anthropogenic contribution to warming with
historical data and projections of emissions and temperature increases. Abatement to stabilize
atmospheric GHG concentrations at levels sufficient to avoid future serious global climatic
reaction requires significant declines in fossil fuel use across major economies involving at least
the 3-4 dozen of the largest emitters (Aldy et al 2010, 925-8), raising current energy costs and
likely forcing economy-wide adjustments in income and consumption (Greenstone and Looney
2012). There is a large literature on the GHG externality including Barrett (2005, 359-406) who
compares climate-change negotiations with the far-easier-to-negotiate Montreal Protocol.
Abatement policies are described in Goulder and Parry (2008); Metcalf (2009); Aldy et al
(2010); Victor (2011, 30-58, 241-62); Aldy and Stavins eds (2010); and Fullerton and Wolfram
eds (2012); and Metcalf et al (2012).
The primary demanders of international controls on GHG releases are citizens’ groups
within developed or industrialized nations, their political representatives, and related
environmental NGOs. These nations are termed “Annex I” countries as parties to the United
Nations Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).53 Under the Kyoto Protocol of 1997,
delegates from these countries agreed to reduce GHG emissions by an average of 5% relative to
their 1990 levels by 2012.54 The U.S. was alone among industrialized nations in not ratifying the
Protocol. In contrast with most developed countries, however, citizens of less-developed
countries and their political leaders have been less willing to assume the costs of mitigation, even
though they are expected to be the primary beneficiaries.55 In a manner similar to the Montreal

53

A list of Annex I countries is found at http://unfccc.int/parties_and_observers/parties/annex_i/items/2774.php.
http://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/items/2830.php.
55
See discussions in http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/impacts-adaptation/international.html;
http://unfccc.int/essential_background/background_publications_htmlpdf/climate_change_information_kit/items/28
54

44

Protocol, these countries were exempted from emission controls in the Kyoto Protocol that
expired in 2012 under the notion of “common, but differentiated responsibilities.” Equity
arguments for this distribution are outlined in Lasse et al (2002) and Agarwala (2010, 182-5).
The supply of mitigation property rights is determined by the internal and international
control policies agreed upon by politicians of major-emitting countries. China, the U.S., India,
Russia, Japan, Canada, plus the E.U. account for roughly 75% of GHG releases.56 While, as a
minimum, it is necessary for these countries to participate in any future international
environmental agreement, the cooperation of other rapidly-growing countries, such as South
Korea, Brazil, South Africa, Indonesia, and Mexico is also needed to constrain emissions.
Several papers explore how regional and national cap-and-trade, taxation, or regulatory policies
that are more usual in the E.U. and U.S. might be integrated into a global network among
countries that have dissimilar macroeconomic, political, and governance conditions (Becker et al
2010; Cooper 2010, 154-71; Jaffe and Stavins 2010, 122, 129, 133-40; Frankel 2010a; Keohane
and Raustiala 2010, 374; McKibbin et al 2010).
Among the policies considered, a cap-and-trade system of emission allowances has
emerged as the most common GHG-control mechanism. It was the primary component of the
Kyoto Protocol. In 2003 the European Union implemented a community-wide Emissions
Trading Scheme (the EU ETS) to meet its Kyoto targets, creating the most ambitious
international emission allowance market. Gradually-tightening caps on total GHG discharges
were set across E.U. member nations and allowances were distributed to units in the largest
emitting sectors. Trading began in 2005 with an inaugural Phase I that ran through 2007; Phase

8.php; and the April 2007 article by Gregg Easterbrook in the Atlantic Magazine,
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2007/04/global-warming-who-loses-and-who-wins/305698/.
56
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/ghgemissions/global.html.
45

II ran from 2008 to 2012; and Phase III runs from 2013 to 2020 (Ellerman and Buchner 2007;
Ellerman 2010; Creti et al 2013).
Stavins (2008, 305-58) and Keohane (2009) provide comprehensive discussions of the
design of a similar U.S. cap-and-trade program. The U.S. considered one in 2009-2010 with the
Waxman-Markey bill that did not pass Congress.57 Instead, regional cap-and-trade policies have
been adopted, including the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) of nine New England
and Mid-Atlantic states where cross-state trading began in 2009 with the objective of lowering
GHG releases to 10% below 1990 levels by 2020; and the nascent California AB 32 (California
Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006) designed to lower GHG discharges among regulated
entities to 1990 levels by 2020. Trading began under AB 32 in November 2011.
Nevertheless, the future of cap-and-trade for emissions regulation is uncertain. The
highest RGGI allowance auction price was $3.51 in March 2009, and since that time, prices have
trended down, clearing at the end of 2012 at $1.93/allowance for one ton of released CO2.58 This
price is far lower than any of the available estimates (which vary widely, depending on the
underlying assumptions) of the social cost of carbon (SCC). The U.S. Interagency Working
Group on Social Cost of Carbon (2010) estimates an average SCC of $21.59 It is too soon to
assess the effectiveness of California cap-and-trade system. Bailey et al (2013) argue that statemandated renewable energy portfolio standards, low carbon fuel standards, and new fuel
economy and energy standards could undermine permit demand and permit prices, thereby
reducing incentives for private investment in abatement technologies. Indeed, as shown in Figure
6, EU ETS permit prices have trended downward from a peak of around 30€ in 2006 and 2008 to

57

American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009, HR 2454.
http://www.rggi.org/market/co2_auctions/results; RGGI Annual Report for 2012, http://rggi.org/.
59
For discussion of the SCC see Pindyck (2013). The SCC has recently been updated to $33.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/social_cost_of_carbon_for_ria_2013_update.pdf Table 2.
58

46

a spot price of 3.89€ in June 2013, again undercutting any effect allowance prices might have on
investment and energy consumption to meet E.U. emission targets.60 Delegates from E.U.
member countries with different economic growth rates and energy and abatement costs have not
agreed upon allowance supply reductions to raise prices (Ellerman 2010, 115).61

Price (€/ton CO2)

Figure 6: EU ETS Allowance Prices
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Phase I
Phase II

Source: Price data from: http://www.c2es.org/docUploads/EU-ETS-In-Perspective- Report.pdf;
http://www.c2es.org/docUploads/EU-ETS-In-Perspective- Report.pdf ;
http://downloads.theccc.org.uk/docs/21667%20CCC%20Report%20Chapter%202.pdf;
http://www.ecotrade.pt/?m=201201&cat=10&lang=en;
http://www.bloomberg.com/quote/EECXSYR1:INDhttp://www.chaireeconomieduclimat.org/?page_id=225
9&lang=en.

What is going on with cap-and-trade? How is this related to transaction costs and what do
they portend for regional and global GHG emission-allowance trading schemes? There now is
enough information on various allowance trading practices, ranging from the lead phase-out
program in the U.S. from 1982-87 (Newell and Rogers 2003) to the SO2 market, to the Regional
Clean Air Incentives Market (RECLAIM) of Southern California (Johnson and Pekelney 1996),
to RGGI (Metcalf 2009), and to the EU ETS for an analysis of policy designs and the implicit

60

ICE Futures Europe, June 2013 https://www.theice.com/homepage.jhtml
For example see discussion in the Economist Magazine April 20, 2013, “ETS, RIP?” at
http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21576388-failure-reform-europes-carbon-market-willreverberate-round-world-ets.
61

47

property rights to mitigation rents defined by them. Goulder (2013) and Newell et al (2013)
provide background for such research.
The checkered experience with cap-and-trade and the lack of robust political support for
it seems reflective of the broader transaction costs of international cooperation on climate
change. The efforts to confront the problem under the Kyoto Protocol have been unsuccessful in
meeting Kyoto’s objectives (Helm 2008). Figure 7 plots GHG releases from 1992 to 2010 for
developed and developing countries. The figure also shows the Kyoto emissions target for
developed economies and the cumulative number of transnational delegate meetings of the
Conference of Parties (COP) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
as well as the associated meetings of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation of the Protocol
(SBI) and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA).62 Despite
continued COP meetings to elicit cooperation, the Protocol did not achieve its goals and lapsed
in 2012. Although emissions from developed countries have been flat, in part due to
deteriorating macroeconomic conditions, those from developing countries have grown,
especially from China and India.63 With these facts in mind, it is important to examine in detail
the specific transaction costs that have bedeviled efforts to control GHG releases.

62

Four organizations meet as part of the COP-- the SBI, SBSTA, AWG-KP (Ad Hoc Working Group on Further
Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol), AWG-LCA (Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term
Cooperative Action under the Convention), and in 2012, the ADP (Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform
for Enhanced Action). The literature includes Clemencon (2008); Barrett (2010); and Aldy and Stavins (2012).
63
China’s emissions went from 2,449.162 million metric tons in 1992 to 8,320.963 million metric tons in 2010,
surpassing the United States at 5,610.108 million metric tons. India’s rose from 659.3701 in 1992 to 1,695.623
million metric tons in 2010 http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/IEDIndex3.cfm?tid=90&pid=44&aid=8
Cooper (2010, 152) argues that even if developed countries reduced emissions to zero over the next decade world
GHG totals would still be at 1990 levels or higher due to increases from developing countries.
48

Figure 7: GHG Releases by Origin Across Developed and Developing Countries and
Cumulative COP, SBI and SBSTA Meetings.

Source: CO2 emissions are in billions of tons. The data are compiled from the United States Energy
Information Administration, International Energy Statistics. The emissions target represents the 5.2%
decrease in emissions below the 1990 level, as agreed upon in the Kyoto Protocol. The cumulative number
of meetings includes those of the COP, SBI and SBSTA. They are taken from the UNFCCC. The figure
was adapted from Aldy and Stavins (2012).

Scientific Uncertainty.
Scientific uncertainty plagues all aspects of multinational climate change negotiations. It
is recognized in the literature, but its implications for the transaction costs of property rights
assignment are not developed. Pindyck (2013), Stern (2013) and Weitzman (2013) provide
valuable discussions of scientific uncertainty and the difficulty it poses for consensus
assessments of the costs of GHG accumulations. According, only key points of damage
uncertainty are reviewed here.
In large complex natural systems that characterize Category (3) externalities, damages
accumulate in unknown or uncertain ways across time and space. Not all parties assess damage
uncertainty in the same manner. This makes it difficult for affected parties to determine their
welfare under different control strategies and to value the costs and benefits associated with
different assignments of mitigation property rights. Hallegatte et al (2012, 3-5) refer to the
problem of deep uncertainty whereby analysts do not know or cannot agree on (i) models that
49

relate key climatic forces over time, (ii) parameter probability distributions, and/or (iii) the value
of alternative outcomes. Analysts rely upon historical weather and climate data and climate
models, but climate models cannot provide the equivalent of historical data for future
projections.
Hallegatte et al (2012, 6-10) claim that climate-change damage uncertainties arise for
four reasons. First, future GHG emissions are linked to demographic and socio-economic
conditions that will vary across the planet and across time in complex ways that are incompletely
understood. Second, understanding of global and regional climate systems, their interactions, and
feedbacks with rising GHG levels is highly imperfect. Third, knowledge of natural climatic
variability is very limited. Fourth, the reactions of ecological systems to climate change are
unpredictable, site-specific and non-linear.
General Circulation Models (GCMs) that are used to simulate the relationships between
GHG emissions growth and climate tend to predict similar broad patterns--more warming at high
latitudes than low, more precipitation at higher latitudes than in the tropics, and more
precipitation around the equator. Regional Climate Models (RCMs), however, perform poorly
with considerable measurement error (Kerr 2001; Deshpande and Greenstone 2010, 9; Aldy et al,
2010, 914-16).64 Natural variability due to shifting cloud cover and other factors is more
important at the regional than global scale, contributing to uncertainty about the effects of
climate change at a local level. Moreover reliable historical weather and climate data series for
the most vulnerable regions do not exist for linking global and local phenomena. Finally,
historical emission patterns are unlikely to persist in regions that are undergoing rapid economic
development and demographic shifts. Accordingly, it is much more difficult to predict future

64

See the special report on the Regional Impacts of Climate Change: Simulations using Statistical Downscaling and
Regional Climate Modeling Systems (http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/sres/regional/312.htm).
50

regional climates and the benefits of GHG abatement for specific populations and countries
across the planet than to predict global patterns.
For all regions, calculating probabilities of future climate changes based on projections
from climate models requires subjective, expert judgments. These vary with the assumptions
used and are likely to be extremely controversial, particularly if they are the basis for differential
constraints placed across populations on GHG releases, production patterns, and consumption
possibilities, as well as the determination of amounts and direction of international transfer
payments. What matters for local populations deciding whether to support GHG controls is the
anticipated impact on regional water supplies, crop yields, sea levels, temperatures, health, and
other related outcomes. Regional climate uncertainty makes it very difficult for local and
national leaders to forge a political consensus for taking action.
This situation reduces the willingness-to-pay to reduce GHG emissions and limits the
concessions country delegates are willing to offer to achieve international agreement. Using the
most recent information on the likely range of global GCM parameters, Pindyck (2012, 290)
estimates the fraction of consumption that a society would be willing to sacrifice in perpetuity to
limit temperature increases to 2-3ºC and reports willingness-to-pay estimates below 2% of GDP.
Similarly, Barrett (2005, 376-9) presents estimated climate change damages and abatement costs
that indicate very low benefit-cost ratios for aggressive mitigation in the U.S. Viscusi and
Zeckhauser (2006, 152, 161-3) also report low willingness-to-pay in their survey of Harvard
graduate and law students in 2004. New hazardous weather patterns, such as increases in
hurricane risk from global warming, however, induce a higher reported willingness-to-pay in
their survey. This suggests that uncertainty in mitigation benefits may be reduced in places
where climate change results in more extreme weather.

51

There also is uncertainty regarding the costs of mitigation (Barrett 2005, 377). Stern
(2007) suggests that the annual costs of stabilizing CO2e (CO2 equivalent) levels between 500
and 550 ppm (slightly less than double the 1900 stock estimates of 300 ppm) are around 1% of
global GDP. There is, however, considerable disagreement about these cost estimates, and they
may be higher or lower. Nordhaus (2007), Weitzman (2007), and Mendelsohn (2008), among
others, criticize Stern’s assumptions. Goulder and Perry (2008, 162) and Keohane (2009, 54)
also briefly discuss uncertainty in the performance of competing mitigation policies, especially
with regard to adoption of cap-and-trade programs relative to carbon taxes.
Meng (2013) combines an event study and prediction markets to gauge the impact of the
Waxman-Markey cap-and-trade bill on the market value of listed firms and the lobbying
expenditures made by managers of unlisted firms against the bill. He uses these data to estimate
the cost to regulated firms and finds that Waxman-Markey would have reduced the market value
of listed firms by $150 billion with the greatest expected losses for carbon and energy-intensive
firms. These figures do not include the effects on consumers from higher prices or on factor
suppliers from lower real incomes.
Investment in new technologies that provide substitutes for fossil fuels in energy
generation and consumption is a principal GHG abatement policy. There is considerable
uncertainty regarding which alternative technology investments to support. Hallegatte et al
(2012, 35) claim that with more known technologies, where uncertainty is shallow, expert
analysis can derive relative probabilities, calculate risk, and rank investments. For less-wellunderstood technologies that may be more transformative over the long term, deep uncertainty
makes such risk calculations and investment decisions much more difficult. Accordingly,
incentives for this type of technology investment are reduced (Harstad 2012). If investment is

52

delayed until more is known, catastrophic climate change may occur. Alternatively, if
preemptive technology investments are revealed to be the wrong ones and irreversibly change
the capital stock, society may be less able to address subsequent climate change (Kolstad 1996a,
1996b). Similar discussions of investment in abatement capital under uncertainty are found in
Kolstad and Ulph (2008) and Victor (2011, 39-41).
Differential Preferences and Perceptions within Countries of Mitigation Benefits.
Joining a coalition of countries to alleviate the global GHG externality requires domestic
support for the property rights implied by any international environmental agreement. As a
result, within-country differences in preferences and perceptions are relevant for international
cooperation. Public opinion surveys in developed countries suggest that backing for global
climate action, such as the Kyoto Protocol, is positively associated with education and the
business cycle (Kahn and Kotchen 2010, Tables 3-6, for the U.S.; Benegal and Scruggs 2012 for
29 European Countries).65 Within the U.S., political party (Democrat), gender (women), age
(younger to middle age), upper income levels, and education (college and higher) are significant
factors in explaining the demand for climate action.66
Public opinion surveys also reveal that populations value alleviation of local
environmental externalities more highly than broader, more abstract, global ones. Local
environmental problems are more easily understood (i.e. subject to less uncertainty), observable,
and the benefits of confronting them are appropriable. Consider the near-universal public
opposition to locating power plants in neighboring areas, even when these plants embody new
65

The role of macroeconomic conditions in affecting support for climate policy also is demonstrated in Scruggs and
Benegal (2012). The consumption preferences of individuals in the U.S. for provision of environmental public goods
are examined by Kahn (2007) and Kotchen and Moore (2007, 2008).
66
See Anthony Leiserowitz et al, Yale Project on Climate Change Communication.
http://environment.yale.edu/climate-communication/article/Climate-Beliefs-March-2012/ and Stephen
Ansolabehere, Harvard/MIT Energy Surveys, http://dvn.iq.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/energysurveys. See also McCright
(2010) for an analysis of 8 years of Gallup data on climate change knowledge and concern.
53

technologies that reduce GHG emissions (Ansolabehere and Konisky 2009, 571, 575;
Ansolabehere and Konisky 2012, 62; Fri and Ansolabehere 2012, 5-7). Ansolabehere and
Konisky (2012, 68-9) also find that the choice of fuels for energy generation is determined more
by concerns about local particulate emissions and toxic waste releases in regional air and water
supplies than global CO2 discharges. Similarly, Nesbet and Myers’ (2007, 445-62) analysis of
20 years of public opinion regarding global warming shows that while there is growing
awareness of the problem, alarm remains focused on local pollution. Reiner et al (2006, 2095-7)
surveyed citizens in the U.S., U.K., Sweden, and Japan and found that in the U.S. narrow
environmental problems dominate global ones. Additionally, in both the U.S. and U.K. unease
about the effects of global warming is confined to its impact within each country and there is no
support for greater foreign aid to address the problem elsewhere. Finally, Tingley and Tomz
(2012) report results of public opinion surveys in the U.S. and 25 other developed and lessdeveloped countries. Although there is general backing for addressing the problem in some
manner, there is little enthusiasm for more specific policies, such as reciprocal cross-country
reductions in fossil-fuel use. This evidence of mixed support reduces the payoff to politicians in
major emitting countries from adopting costly policies to lower GHG emissions.
A related problem is the incidence of abatement costs that affects preferences for taking
action. GHG emissions controls like emissions taxes, tradable emissions allowances (cap-andtrade), performance standards, and green technology/renewable energy mandates result in higher
and more unstable energy prices, at least in the short run. They also induce changes in
consumption patterns towards products and services that are less polluting and shift investment
toward new energy technologies via subsidies and away from other investment options (Goulder
and Parry 2008). In general, these policies are regressive; hence, as information about the costs

54

of climate change policies becomes more widespread, lower-income groups and the politicians
who represent them may oppose abatement unless transfers are provided. Wiener (2007, 106-13)
discusses the legal and political barriers to assembling internal transfers of the magnitude that
may be required.
The literature recognizes the distributional effects of carbon taxes or cap-and-trade in
emission allowances. Goulder and Parry (2008) argue that the costs of these environmental
policies depend upon whether they are designed for revenue recycling (i.e. to be revenueneutral). If revenue neutral, funds generated from taxes or emission-permit auctions could be
used to reduce distortive income taxes, especially for low-income groups. In this way, climate
change policies could be both efficiency-enhancing and progressive (Cooper 2010, 167-9;
Metcalf 2009, 67-9; Metcalf et al 2012).
The amounts involved potentially are large. Rausch and Reilly (2012, 2) report
Congressional Budget Office revenue estimates of $1.25 trillion over 10 years from a carbon tax
of $20/ton applied in 2013 and rising in real terms at 4% annually, an amount equivalent to 54%
of the total revenues ($2.3 trillion) collected by the federal government in fiscal year 2011.67
There is scant attention in the literature, however, on the conditions under which politicians can
commit to long-term revenue neutrality and avoid using the funds to finance narrow political
agendas. Metcalf and Weisbach (2009) and Brunner et al (2012) suggest delegation of tax-rate
setting to an independent agency to avoid political manipulation and policy reversal. Brett and
Keen’s (2000) model of environmental taxation predicts that instead of revenue recycling, funds
will be targeted by green politicians toward earmarks in order to lock-in environmental
programs.68 Earmarks, however, may not be of much use in tackling global environmental

67
68

http://www.cbo.gov/publication/43153.
Anesi (2006) also models the use of earmarking as a means of constraining the range of future political budget
55

problems and regressive policy effects. Instead, they often are viewed as political pork that
rewards specific constituencies instead of providing broad public goods (Shepsle and Weingast
1981; Weingast, Shepsle, and Johnsen 1981; Weingast 1994; Bickers and Stein 2000).
There are related questions of how higher and more uncertain energy prices arising from
carbon taxes, cap-and-trade, or mandates for renewable energy sources would affect consumer
prices, real factor returns, and the supply of labor and other inputs (i.e. the so-called “taxinteraction” effects). Metcalf (2009, 69-74) reviews some of the possible general equilibrium
effects of higher consumer prices resulting from abatement policies. Deschênes (2012) uses
state-level panel data from 1976-2007 to estimate the relationship between real electricity prices
and labor market activity in the U.S. He finds weak effects for the overall economy, but negative
impacts for particular sectors, such as agriculture and transportation. Internal politics, however,
are driven by such effects because they loom large in political jurisdictions where those sectors
are dominant. The influence of the agricultural lobby in the U.S. in achieving particularistic
beneficial legislation, for example, is well known. Hahn (2009) argues that political economy
factors could easily undermine GHG policy objectives. The absence of much scholarly attention
to the problem of long-term political commitment to global environmental policies may be
attributed to the fact that the IEA literature models countries as uniform entities and downplays
the extensive work on how interest-group politics influence public policies, including classics by
Buchanan and Tullock (1962), Olson (1965), Peltzman (1976), and Becker (1983). Volden and
Wiseman (2007) model bargaining between politicians and interest groups in the provision of
public and particularistic private benefits from a given budget. Their model illustrates interestgroup pressures on politicians in budget allocations.

expenditures. Singhal (2008) empirically examines the allocation of tobacco-settlement trust funds and how it
deviated from initial health investment objectives.
56

More empirical research on how long-term political commitments have been secured for
regional and national environmental policies and whether these might apply to global policies
would be an important contribution. Since the 1970s there has been major expansion of
environmental regulation at the federal, state, and local level. Analysis of political support for
those policies; how they are affected by uncertainty, differential preferences and perceptions,
asymmetric information, and enforcement; what transfers have been required for adoption; and
political responses to shifting program costs and benefits would provide valuable insights into
the likelihood and durability of international cooperation to address climate change.
Differential Preferences and Perceptions of Mitigation Benefits across Countries.
Because leaders of multiple countries must cooperate in confronting global
environmental externalities, heterogeneous preferences and perceptions of the problem across
countries make it difficult to reach consensus. Preferences and perceptions are affected by the
great heterogeneity in baseline economic conditions across countries. Populations differ in per
capita incomes, wealth, marginal values of consumption, discount rates, energy intensity, and
production units. There are widely-differing views as to what policies countries should take in
light of this heterogeneity.
Agarwala (2010, 182, 194-8) describes the gulf between citizens of developed and
developing countries in their views of the GHG externality and who should bear the costs of
confronting it. He argues that developed countries must assume the greatest costs because of
their historical contributions to GHG stocks, even though populations of developing countries
are likely more at risk from climate change and benefit disproportionately from mitigation. Any
carbon-cost estimate implies that current populations in developed countries owe compensation
in the neighborhood of hundreds of billions of dollars or more to present and future generations

57

in developing countries. Agarwala also claims that given high consumption expectations within
developing countries, more-than-commensurate reductions are required from consumers in highincome countries if global abatement goals are to be met. Along these lines Aldy et al (2010,
909) suggest that developed countries might bear two-thirds or more of discounted global
abatement costs over the next century. Using a global emissions trading scheme to simulate
cross-country distributional effects of reaching emissions targets, Jacoby et al (2010, 754-64,
781-2) estimate that compensation to hold CO2e concentrations at 450 ppm from the US alone
could amount to $200 billion in 2020 annually, or 10 times the current US development
assistance budget.
Because the social cost of carbon in developed countries like the U.S. is higher than the
marginal abatement cost (as reflected in the discounted value of reduced consumption due to the
imposition of GHG emission controls) in developing countries like China, it is Pareto-improving
for developed countries to compensate developing countries for their abatement efforts.
Deshpande and Greenstone (2010, 9) estimate that the value of such payments from the U.S. to
China could be as high as $5.3 trillion. Whether U.S. political interest groups would interpret
these payments as Pareto-improving is unclear, however, especially given the magnitudes
involved.69 There are also thorny and unresolved issues of how these payments would be
credibly distributed among members of a heterogeneous population as compensation for the
opportunity costs of foregone consumption without creating enormous opportunities for
corruption on the part of politicians and bureaucrats of recipient countries.
Differences in per-capita incomes, economic growth, and consumption aspirations within
developing nations also affect country positions in international bargaining and treaty
69

Becker et al (2010) have a more cautious assessment of the potential for international collaboration when there are
large differences in marginal rates of substitution between current and future consumption across populations in
developed and undeveloped countries.
58

compliance. Abebe and Masur (2010) examine the eastern and western regions of China and
argue that climate-change policies that raise energy costs and reduce economic growth in the
less-developed west may not be consistent with preserving domestic political stability. Although
internationally-funded internal transfers are possible, Abebe and Masur (2010, 342-56, 370-4,
384-5) point to limited data and uncertainty about income growth, energy consumption, and
population-growth patterns, as well as to corruption that could make it difficult to adequately
compensate residents of western China. In related work Auffhammer and Carson (2008, 237,
244) use Chinese province-level GDP data, population density, industrial composition, and other
controls to forecast China’s CO2 releases. These authors forecast emissions far higher than those
reported elsewhere. Their findings underscore the uncertainty associated with projecting
business-as-usual (BAU) emissions in rapidly-growing developing countries where conditions
vary and often are not well known by nor under the control of the central government.
Frankel (2010a, 41-9) provides numerical targets for CO2 emissions for all regions across
the planet for the 21st century to illustrate how an international agreement might play out. In his
framework, developed countries that participated in the Kyoto Agreement adhere to caps
consistent with or greater than their Kyoto commitments while the U.S. implements an earlier
version of Waxman-Markey legislation (Frankel 2010a, 37-9, 52-57). Leaders of developing
countries, such as China, follow BAU paths until threshold levels of per-capita income and/or
per-capita emissions are reached, whereupon predesigned tighter caps kick in as they catch up
with abatement by developed countries (Frankel 2010a, 33, 58-68). Within these national caps,
emission permits are traded in a global market (Frankel 2010a, 68-69; Keohane and Raustiala
2010, 382-3). Simulations reveal allowance prices reaching around $120/ton of carbon prior to
2050, and nearly $700-$800 by 2100 (Frankel 2010a, 75-77).

59

Because of the critical role of BAU paths in determining when abatement caps become
binding for developing countries, Frankel argues that authority should be delegated to an
international expert body with BAU estimates updated every decade (Frankel 2010a, 33-6¸ 50,
63-8). He points to the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the European Economic and
Monetary Union as institutional models. These, however, may not be ideal templates. The WTO
has no independent enforcement authority70 and the European Union incorporates a collection of
countries that are far more homogeneous and culturally tied together than is the case for the rest
of the world (Ellerman 2010, 115).
The BAU estimation problems demonstrated by Auffhammer and Carson (2008)
combined with weak local/regional governance and limited central government authority present
challenges for providing data to any regulatory body. McKibbin et al (2010) also examine
international cooperation in the presence of varying macroeconomic shocks that could be
transmitted across countries through global emission permit trading.71The transmission of such
shocks could generate internal political pressure within affected countries to reduce
commitments to international abatement efforts.
There is no past experience of global collaboration of the scale required to achieve
lasting, broad-based GHG emission reductions where abatement outcomes are uncertain, benefits
generally are not appropriable, and the reallocation of rents through differential mitigation
regulation across countries is large. Aldy and Stavins (2010, 5) point out that approximately 50
rapidly-growing and GHG-emitting developing economies have greater per-capita incomes than
the poorest industrialized countries that were targeted for controls under the Kyoto Protocol.

70

www.wto.org.
Heutel (2012) uses a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium real business cycle model to examine the relationship
between regulated CO2 emissions and macroeconomic conditions. He finds that optimal policies are procyclical.
71

60

Whether multinational fairness norms can hold international collective action together remains
unclear (Frankel 2010a, 33, 39, 51, 57).
A variety of mechanisms were included in the Kyoto Protocol to entice the involvement
of leaders of developing nations, including the Clean Development Mechanism, whereby
developed-country emitters secure lower-cost abatement credits from mitigation investments in
developing countries rather than undertaking more costly reduction actions at home (Barrett
2005, 380-2; Newell 2010);72 the Global Environment Facility to oversee financial flows from
developed to developing countries;73 the Least Developed Countries Fund;74 the Adaptation
Fund;75 the Special Climate Change Fund;76 the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation in
Developing Countries program (REDD);77 and the Green Climate Fund.78 These programs
potentially involve very large financial and technological flows from developed to developing
countries in exchange for abatement, and as such reflect the underlying property rights
distribution defined by the Kyoto Protocol.
Asymmetric information.
The key problem here is gathering accurate data on historical emissions from individual

72

For CDM accounting see cdm.unfccc.int/; Joint Implementation (JI) projects among parties in regulated or Annex
B countries in http://ji.unfccc.int/index.html. CDM has been criticized for supporting projects that would have been
undertaken anyway and for setting up perverse incentives (Agarwala 2010, 187; Bushnell, 2012, 201; Keohane and
Raustiala 2010, 376; and Victor (2010, 645; 2011, 77, 90-99). Aldy and Stavins (2012) are more positive.
73
http://unfccc.int/cooperation_and_support/financial_mechanism/items/2807.php, discussed at the COP meeting at
Geneva 1996.
74
http://unfccc.int/cooperation_support/least_developed_countries_portal/ldc_fund/items/4723.php, discussed at
(COP) meetings of 2001 in Bonn and 2003 in Milan.
75
http://unfccc.int/cooperation_and_support/financial_mechanism/adaptation_fund/items/3659.php, discussed at the
COP meetings of 2000 in The Hague, 2001 in Bonn and 2008 in Poznan.
76
http://unfccc.int/cooperation_and_support/financial_mechanism/special_climate_change_fund/items/3657.php,
discussed at the COP meetings in 2001 in Bonn and 2003 in Milan.
77
http://www.un-redd.org/, discussed at the COP meeting in Montreal 2005 and Bali 2007. A critical analysis of
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation in Developing Countries or REDD is provided in Alston and Andersson
(2011). Other discussions of REDD’s challenges and possibilities are in Myers (2007); Stickler et al. (2009); Taconi
(2009); Blom et al (2010); and Busch (2013).
78
http://unfccc.int/cooperation_and_support/financial_mechanism/green_climate_fund/items/5869.php, discussed at
the COP 2010 meeting in Cancun and 2011 in Durban.
61

installations to project the costs of regulation, assign permits allocations (if grandfathering of
allowances is used in cap and trade), and to determine compliance targets. Local entities have
far more information than do central government regulators. They have incentives to manipulate
the data in order to gain greater transfers or exemptions, more emission permits, or demonstrate
compliance. There is little analysis of this problem in the literature on GHG emission controls.
The primary case that has been examined is the EU ETS. Ellerman and Buchner (2007, 69-77)
describe the problems of asymmetric and incomplete information at the unit level across member
countries that confounded the calculation and distribution of emission allowances across EU
countries, particularly in Phase I of the regime.
Enforcement.
Enforcement is critical for the durability of property rights. If parties do not adhere to a
multilateral cooperation agreement, then global mitigation objectives are not met and transaction
costs are increased as a new round of negotiations becomes necessary. Global GHG emissionsdetection technologies may be insufficient to identify breaches when there are many sources of
the externality that vary in size, location, timing, production technologies, and sectors
(Deshpande and Greenstone 2010, 11; Sigman 2012; Borenstein 2012; and Greenstone and
Looney 2012, 27). It also is difficult to separate observed unit and sector-level compliance from
the effects of business cycles and technology shocks. National economic recessions could mask
a lack of compliance that would be revealed during an economic rebound, and new technology
could change BAU trajectories and country caps associated with them (Hallegatte et al 2012, 2).
There also is the politically-sensitive issue of leakage whereby firms in developed
economies move to less-regulated developing economies, or for carbon intensity to increase in
developing countries as fossil fuel prices decline following reductions in demand in developed

62

economies (Barrett 2005, 383; Bushnell and Mansur 2011). Leakage concerns were behind the
Byrd-Hagel Resolution, which passed by a vote of 95-0 in the US Senate in July 1997, requiring
the cooperation of developing countries in any future climate treaty beyond Kyoto as a condition
for US participation (S. Res 98 105th Cong.). Mattoo et al (2009, 2) briefly summarize the
literature on production leakage due to unilateral cuts in industrial countries. Although they find
that aggregate effects appear to be small, there are more substantial sector impacts in energyintensive industries, such as cement, steel, and aluminum. Elliott et al (2012) use a computable
general equilibrium model to analyze emission reductions from a carbon tax in industrialized
countries and expected carbon leakage.
The major enforcement mechanisms that have emerged in the literature are carbon tariffs
and related trade sanctions on non-adhering exporters in international trade (Barrett 1997; Ulph
2001; Houser 2008; Victor 2011, 85; Young 2011, 4). Elliott et al (2012, 3, 21-36) discuss the
use of border taxes on carbon-intensive imports and rebates of domestic carbon taxes on exports.
Mattoo et al (2009, 3) simulate various carbon tax/tariff regimes and find that the least damaging
to international trade are those that symmetrically tax exports and imports on their carbon
content in domestic production. Metcalf and Weisbach (2009, 40-52) similarly discuss different
carbon border-tax effects; measurement problems when fuels and technologies vary across
international trading units; and harmonization with existing WTO practices. Frankel (2010b,
503-23) examines four environmental cases of alleged discrimination against foreign
products/producers to see how the WTO responded and finds that environmental regulations
were not held as discriminatory. He also discusses trade policies to enforce GHG controls and
points to the challenge of determining the carbon content of manufactured goods using U.S.
production techniques as a guide when factor costs vary sharply worldwide. Frankel suggests

63

that trade policy in GHG control be delegated to independent experts and not to politicians, given
the amounts at stake and the measurement problems involved. As noted above, more attention to
political models and the circumstances when politicians would agree to such delegation is
necessary to assess the feasibility of such proposals.
Despite the importance of border taxes and trade sanctions in the GHG policy literature,
too-little attention has been paid to the empirical literature on international trade and trade
agreements that examines how international agreement was secured on the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the World Trade Organization (WTO); what trade policies
have worked and which ones have not; and how sensitive the trading framework might be to the
use of trade sanctions and carbon tariffs as GHG enforcement mechanisms. The use of trade
policy to enforce GHG mitigation could strain the multinational trading structure (Barrett 2005,
382-8; 2010, 246-8; Bown 2004b; Copeland and Taylor 2005; Hufbauer et al 2009; Keohane
and Raustiala 2010, 379; Kaufman and Weber 2011).
Eichengreen and Irwin (2009), Irwin and O’Rourke (2011), Mansfield and Milner (2012),
and Bordo et al (2013) describe the complicated negotiations in the early 20th century that
created the foundations for modern international trade. Most agreements were among
representatives of developed countries with relatively similar political, monetary, and economic
structures, at least as compared to those of developing countries today. The breakdown of the
international trading system during the 1930s is discussed by Irwin (2011). As a response to this
breakdown, the GATT was implemented in 1947, lasting until 1994 when it was replaced by the
WTO in 1995. Bown (2004a) empirically examines the determinants of country adherence to
GATT rules and legal safeguards and non-tariff provisions adopted between 1973 and 1994.
Bagwell and Staiger (2011) provide similar empirical analysis of the WTO from 1995-2005.

64

Bown (2013) explores the use of temporary trade barriers (TTB), such as safeguard policy (SG),
antidumping (AD), and countervailing duties (CVD) that apply to imports from only one
country. These are viewed as non-discriminatory by the WTO. Antidumping actions are a close
analogy to carbon tariffs because both are designed to level differential costs due to “unfair”
production practices or non-compliance. Bown (2013) finds (i) that there is a proliferation of
temporary trade barriers; (ii) that developed countries are more likely to use them against exports
of developing countries, particularly as counter-cyclical trade responses; and (iii) that they work
to counter the benefits of low worldwide tariffs.
The success of the GATT and the WTO is due to the fact that they provide mechanisms
through which country leaders can credibly commit to lowering tariffs and other trade barriers,
generating broad economic benefits to domestic constituencies that would otherwise have been
politically difficult to capture. These benefits are spread via Most-Favored-Nation clauses.
Violation by any country results in the loss of tangible benefits, which provides leverage for
enforcement (Odell 2006; Hoekman and Mavroidis 2007). Mechanisms like these may not work
so well to spread the benefits of carbon tariffs or related trade policies. GHG reduction is a
public good and therefore not excludable. Measurement of carbon content, which would be
required for sanctions to be implemented, is costly and the potential for protectionism may be
high. Accordingly, the scope for carbon tariffs and other trade sanctions to enforce GHG
reductions may not be as great as the GHG-policy literature suggests.
In the presence of possible irreversibilities from global externalities, such as catastrophic
climate effects of GHG buildup or the ongoing depletion of highly-migratory fish stocks, there is
cause for concern when international mitigation agreements cannot be reached. The discussion
of bargaining complexities for Category (3) externalities is not meant to be nihilistic, but rather

65

to indicate key sources of transaction costs and where attention can be directed most
productively for moving forward. Thinking about transactions costs in a structured way suggests
what will be helpful for solving the negotiation problems encountered when heterogeneous
interests within and across nations must cooperate in the presence of deep uncertainties about the
benefits and costs of mitigation.
In the case of reaching multilateral emission controls, our discussion of transaction costs
suggests that mobilizing durable internal political support for significant preemptive action by
major developed countries will be difficult at this time. What is needed is a more credible
demonstration of the benefits of costly mitigation to populations in those countries as well as to
populations in rapidly-developing countries, so that the latter begin limited emissions reductions
that gradually become more binding (Frankel 2010a). As discussed earlier, public-opinion
surveys suggest that individuals are most concerned about local effects. This suggests that
reducing scientific uncertainty about regional climatic reactions to GHG accumulations and
associated economic damage functions will have a large payoff. Some of this information may
come through observed, harmful localized shifts in weather patterns attributable to global climate
change. More positively, however, the reduction in regional scientific uncertainty can come
from more research on regional climatic feedbacks from GHG accumulations and their economic
consequences. If politically-influential parties in key emitting countries can better perceive the
net benefits of cooperation, political leaders will be more likely to commit to long-lasting
mitigation policies, such as carbon taxes or cap-and-trade. It will also be easier to devise transfer
payments to offset differential preferences and perceptions of the externality, internally and
across countries. With more information about regional impacts, country leaders will have a
clearer sense of the specific gains to their populations from mitigation; of the corresponding

66

willingness-to-pay from key demanders for property rights; and of the transfers necessary both to
secure domestic political support and to obtain the collaboration of rapidly-growing countries.
Bargaining positions will converge with new, public knowledge about regional costs and
benefits. Further, technological innovations (such as satellite monitoring and photography) can
make observing and verifying emissions more feasible and will make any agreed-upon
international property rights regime more durable. Measurement advances also will make
identification of carbon content in products easier when imposing border tariffs to enforce
international agreements.
In the case of highly-migratory fish species, scientific advances that reduce uncertainty
about the effects of local harvests on global stocks and that help distinguish the effects of
environmental fluctuations from harvest also will lower transaction costs and narrow distances
among bargaining positions. The primary impediments to international cooperation are
differential preferences between existing and new fishing nations, fueled by uncertainty and open
entry in the high seas. Local catches may provisionally remain at high levels even as overall
stocks plummet. More convincing evidence of the linkages among regional fishing practices,
falling global stocks, and related declines in catch-per-unit of effort can promote agreement.
Additionally, international law that allows for virtual open access into regional fishing
management organizations (RFMOs), particularly by developing countries with limited fishing
histories, must be revised to limit entry. Only then will property rights be stable. Restrictions on
regional entry into a global resource require compensating transfers. Greater clarity on stock
conditions and the economic effects of new harvest pressure from developing countries can
facilitate the calculation of such payments.

67

V. Concluding Remarks.
This review examines collective action to address global environmental externalities. It
uses a transaction costs framework to understand why the results are so mixed. Multinational
cooperation to mitigate environmental externalities requires that transaction costs be overcome.
These transaction costs are low for mobilizing cooperation to protect biodiversity and unique
ecosystems from over exploitation. They are somewhat higher in achieving cooperation to limit
the international trade in endangered plant and animal species and to constrain the release of
gases that harm the stratospheric ozone layer. Even more costly are cooperative efforts for
multinational controls on the harvest of highly migratory, valuable fish, such as bluefin tuna.
Finally, international cooperation on the reduction of GHG emissions that contribute to global
warming involves transaction costs that are higher still.
International cooperation is a contractual process among country leaders to assign
property rights that internalize the externality. Property rights are assigned when restrictions are
placed on natural resources that otherwise are subject to broad, open-access entry by parties from
many nations. Property rights are also established by assigning abatement responsibilities to
entities in specified countries to reduce the external effects of production on the natural
environment and that assign benefits to various groups across the planet. In either case,
mitigation generates rents and cross-country negotiations allocate those rents. Country leaders
cooperate in international environmental agreements when it serves influential domestic interests
to do so. Specific country constituencies demand that policies be undertaken to reduce
externality losses. These policies generate benefits and costs and their levels and distributions
depend upon the details of the agreement. The reaction of country constituencies to proposed
property rights distributions and the response of country politicians in internal and multinational

68

negotiations mold the nature and timing of the property rights that emerge and their effectiveness
in abatement.
Four factors raise the transaction costs of assigning property rights via abatement
negotiations: (i) scientific uncertainty regarding the benefits and costs of mitigation and the
reaction of natural systems to collective efforts; (ii) varying preferences and perceptions across
global populations to taking action; (iii) asymmetric information among the parties regarding
contributions to the problem, mitigation net benefits, and enforcement; and (iv) a lack of
compliance and new entry.
The losses due to resource exploitation under incomplete property rights occur along all
spatial dimensions. Rents are saved in many local common-property settings though communal
institutions. These are successful because transaction costs are low. Property rights are
embodied in community rules that define when and how resources are to be exploited. The local
CPR literature defines the conditions that underlie successful collective action. Although these
conditions cannot be replicated when externalities expand, they nevertheless define baseline
conditions that must be met for cooperation to occur. Even for relatively narrow CPRs, when
these conditions are not met, transaction costs rise. An understanding of how property rights
over the costs and benefits of mitigation break down in the context of somewhat broader CPRs is
therefore useful for the analysis of global externalities. An examination of how higher
transaction costs impede agreement in these intermediate settings, such as U.S. oil and gas
development and the Maine lobster fishery, sheds light on the likelihood of collective action to
address even more challenging and expansive externalities. Scaling localized CPR lessons to
global mitigation efforts also is straightforward when multinational action, such as with controls
on GHG buildup, involves local actors, as is the case with forest management to promote carbon

69

sequestration. If effective linkage is to occur, local institutions and practices must be
incorporated in broader actions.
The IEA literature provides direction for understanding when multinational cooperation
is likely and when it is not. The general prediction is that collaboration among uniform countries
is collectively rational when the stakes are low—there is little gained in the aggregate and little
reason for defection or when the benefits of international cooperation are narrowly directed to
specific countries. These conditions are broadly consistent with low-transaction costs cases
examined above—set asides for national parks and biodiversity, limits on the trade in endangered
species (CITES), and controls on the release of CFCs. Transaction costs are greater for
achieving controls on the harvest of highly-migratory fish stocks and on GHG emissions, two
instances where effective agreements have not generally been forthcoming.
The IEA literature approach is grounded in theoretical modeling, simulation, and
laboratory experiments. It has not been an empirical literature. The approach outlined here
provides a framework for expanded modeling of international cooperation and for empirical
investigation. It focuses on the sources of transaction costs that affect the assignment of property
rights in international environmental agreements. Comparative, in-depth, empirical analysis of
the wide range of international environmental agreements that encounter varying transaction
costs would reveal how those costs were overcome and how doing so affected the structure of the
final agreement and the mitigation that was possible. At the same time, empirical research can be
better directed by additional conceptual analysis that incorporates transaction costs into models
of international environmental externality control. Numerous areas that have been discussed in
this review are ripe for research using the four testable implications presented in Section I.

70

The review highlights the need for more analysis of the variation in success among
international environmental agreements and the role of transaction costs in determining those
results: how they influence long-term political commitments to environmental policies; how they
affect interest group politics in setting the positions of country leaders in multinational
negotiations; how they impact the design and operation of cap-and-trade and other mitigation
policies; how they mold development of transfers within and across countries and how those
transfers in turn affect the structure and timing of the agreement; how they influence the
incentives of national politicians to delegate administration of treaties and covenants and the
property rights associated with them to independent agencies; and how they impact treaty
enforcement mechanisms, including the use of trade sanctions and carbon tariffs.
Growing international concerns about global environmental externalities, the need for
multinational cooperation to address them, and the very uneven record of successfully doing so,
suggest that greater attention to the details of the transaction costs encountered may pay
important returns. The transaction costs approach better identifies what international mitigation
is possible at any point in time. It also indicates what must be done in order to facilitate
multinational agreement. Transaction costs are the constraints on what is possible, and what is
possible changes as transaction costs are reduced. A focus on the costs of defining property
rights makes it clear what can and cannot be accomplished in multilateral efforts to control
global environmental externalities.

71

References
Abebe, Daniel, and Jonathan S. Masur. 2010. “International Agreements and Internal
Heterogeneity: The 'Two Chinas' Problem.” Virginia Journal of International Law 50 (2):
325-89.
Acheson, James M. 1975. “The Lobster Fiefs: Economic and Ecological Effects of Territoriality
in the Maine Lobster Industry.” Human Ecology 3: 183-207.
Acheson, James M. 1988. The Lobster Gangs of Maine, Hanover: University Press of New
England.
Acheson, James M. 2003. Capturing the Commons: Devising Institutions to Manage the Maine
Lobster Industry, Hanover: University Press of New England.
Acheson, James M., and Roy Gardner. 2005.“Spatial Strategies and Territoriality in the Maine
Lobster Industry.” Rationality and Society 17 (3): 309-41.
Adhikari, Bhim, and Jon C. Lovett. 2006. “Institutions and Collective Action: Does
Heterogeneity Matter in Community-Based Resource Management?” Journal of
Development Studies, 42(3), 426-445.
Agarwala, Ramgopal. 2010. “Towards a Global Compact for Managing Climate Change,” in
Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N. Stavins, eds, Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy:
Implementing Architectures for Agreement, New York: Cambridge University Press,
179-200.
Agnew, David J., John Pearce, Ganapathiraju Pramod, Tom Peatman, Reg Watson, John R.
Beddington, and Tony J. Pitcher. 2009. “Estimating the Worldwide Extent of Illegal
Fishing.” PLoS ONE 4 (2): e4570.
Agrawal, Arun. 2001. “Common Property Institutions and Sustainable Governance of
Resources.” World Development 29 (10): 1623-48.
Alcock, Frank. 2010. “Prospects for Use Rights in Tuna Regional Fisheries Management
Organizations.” in Robin Allen, James Joseph and Dale Squires eds, Conservation and
Management of Transnational Tuna Fisheries, Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 249-268.
Aldy, Joseph E and Robert N. Stavins, eds. 2007. Architectures for Agreement: Addressing
Global Climate Change in the Post-Kyoto World, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Aldy, Joseph E. and Robert N. Stavins, eds. 2010. Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy:
Implementing Architectures for Agreement New York: Cambridge University Press.
Aldy, Joseph E. and Robert N. Stavins. 2010. “Introduction.” in Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N.
Stavins, eds, Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy: Implementing Architectures for
Agreement, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1-30.
Aldy, Joseph E. and Robert N. Stavins. 2012. “Climate Negotiators Create and Opportunity for
Scholars,” Science 337: 1043-4.
Aldy, Joseph E., Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell, Ian W.H. Parry, and William A. Pizer.
2010. “Designing Climate Mitigation Policy.” Journal of Economic Literature 48 (4):
903-34.
Allen, Douglas W. 1991. “What are Transaction Costs?” Research in Law and Economics 14: 118.
Allen, Douglas W. 2000. “Transaction Costs.” in Boudewijn Bouckaert and Gerrit De Geest,
eds., The Encyclopedia of Law and Economics, Vol.1. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 893926.
72

Allen, Robin, William Bayliff, James Joseph, and Dale Squires. 2010. “The Benefits and Costs
of Transformation of Open Access on the High Seas,” in Conservation and Management
of Transnational Tuna Fisheries, edited by Robin Allen, James Joseph and Dale Squires,
Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 65-86.
Allen, Robin, James Joseph, and Dale Squires eds. 2010. Conservation and Management of
Transnational Tuna Fisheries, Ames: Wiley-Blackwell.
Alston, Lee J. and Krister Andersson. 2011. “Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Forest
Protection: The Transaction Costs of Implementing REDD.” Climate Law 2: 281–89.
Alston, Lee J., Krister Andersson, and Stephen M.Smith. 2013. “Payments for Environmental
Services,” Annual Review of Resource Economics, forthcoming.
Anesi, Vincent. 2006. “Earmarked Taxation and Political Competition,” Journal of Public
Economics 90: 679-701.
Ansolabehere, Stephen D., and David M. Konisky. 2009. “Public Attitudes toward Construction
of New Power Plants." Public Opinion Quarterly 73 (3): 566-77.
Ansolabehere, Stephen D., and David M. Konisky. 2012. “The American Public's Energy
Choice" Daedalus 141 (2): 61-71.
Archer, David. 2007. Global Warming: Understanding the Forecast. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Archer, David. 2009. The Long Thaw. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Arnason, Ragnar, Kieran Kelleher, and Rolf Willmann. 2009. The Sunken Billions: The
Economic Justification for Fisheries Reform. Washington D.C.: The World Bank and
FAO.
Asheim, Geir B., Camilla Bretteville Froyn, Jon Hovi, and Fredric C. Menz. 2006. "Regional
Versus Global Cooperation for Climate Control." Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 51: 93-109.
Asheim, Geir B. and Bjart Holtsmark. 2009. “Renegotiation-Proof Climate Agreements with Full
Participation: Conditions for Pareto-Efficiency.” Environmental and Resource Economics
43: 519-533.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Bernard J. Morzuch, and John K. Stranlund. 2005. “Production of
Chlorofluorocarbons in Anticipation of the Montreal Protocol.” Environmental and
Resource Economics 30: 377-91.
Auffhammer, Maximillian, and Richard T. Carson. 2008. “Forecasting the Path of China’s CO2
Emissions Using Province-Level Information.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 55(3): 229-47.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2011. “What do Trade Negotiators Negotiate about?
Empirical Evidence from the World Trade Organization. American Economic Review
101(4): 1238-73.
Bailey, Elizabeth M., Severin Borenstein, James Bushnell, Frank A. Wolak, and Matthew
Zaragoza-Watkins. 2013. “Forecasting Supply and Demand Balance in California’s
Greenhouse Gas Cap and Trade Market.” Working paper. Palo Alto: Program on Energy
and Sustainable Development, Stanford University.
Baland, Jean-Marie, and Jean-Philippe Platteau. 1996. Halting Degradation of Natural
Resources : Is There a Role for Rural Communities ? Oxford: Oxford University Press
and FAO.
Baland, Jean-Marie, and Jean-Philippe Platteau.1997. “Wealth Inequality and Efficiency in the
Commons. Part I: The Unregulated Case.” Oxford Economic Papers 49: 451–82.

73

Baland, Jean-Marie, and Jean-Philippe Platteau. 1998. Wealth Inequality and Efficiency in the
Commons. Part II: The Regulated Case.” Oxford Economic Papers 50: 1–22.
Balton, David A. 2001. “The Bering Sea Doughnut Hole Convention: Regional Solution, Global
Implications,” in Olav Schram Stokke, ed. 2001. Governing High Seas Fisheries: The
Interplay of Global and Regional Regimes. New York: Oxford University Press 143-77.
Barbier, Edward B., Joanne C. Burgess, Timothy M. Swanson, and David W. Pearce. 1990.
Elephants, Economics, and Ivory London: Earthscan Publications.
Bardhan, Pranab K. 2000. “Irrigation and Cooperation: An Empirical Analysis of Cooperation on
Irrigation in South India.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 48: 847–65.
Barkin, J. Samuel. 2004. “Time Horizons and Multilateral Enforcement in International
Cooperation.” International Studies Quarterly 48 (2): 363-82.
Barrett, Scott. 1994. “Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements.” Oxford
Economic Papers 46: 878–94.
Barrett, Scott. 1997. “The Strategy of Trade Sanctions in International Environmental
Agreements,” Resource and Energy Economics 19(4): 345-61.
Barrett, Scott. 1999. “A Theory of Full International Cooperation,” Journal of Theoretical
Politics, 11: 519‐41.
Barrett, Scott. 2001. “International Cooperation for Sale.” European Economic Review, 45
(10):1835–50.
Barrett, Scott. 2002. “Consensus Treaties.” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics
158: 529-547.
Barrett, Scott. 2005. Environment and Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental Treaty-Making,
Oxford: Oxford University Press paperback edition.
Barrett, Scott. 2007. Why Cooperate: The Incentive to Supply Global Public Goods. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Barrett, Scott. 2010. “A Portfolio of Climate Treaties.” in Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N. Stavins,
eds, Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy: Implementing Architectures for
Agreement, New York: Cambridge University Press, 240-72.
Barzel, Yoram.1982. “Measurement Costs and the Organization of Markets.” Journal of Law
and Economics 25 (1): 27-48.
Barzel, Yoram. 1985. “Transaction Costs: Are they Just Costs?,” Journal of Institutional and
Theoretical Economics 141: 4-16.
Barzel, Yoram. 1997. Economic Analysis of Property Rights. 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Baumol, William. J. 1972. “On Taxation and the Control of Externalities.” American Economic
Review 62 (3): 307-22.
Becker, Gary S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political
Influence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (3): 371-400.
Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel. 2010. “On the Economics of Climate
Policy,” working paper 234, Chicago: University of Chicago George J. Stigler Center for
the Study of the Economy and the State.
Beddington, John. R., David. J. Agnew and Colin W. Clark. 2007. “Current Problems in the
Management of Marine Fisheries.” Science 316: 1713-6.
Benedict, Richard E. 1991. Ozone Diplomacy: New Directions in Safeguarding the Planet,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

74

Benegal, Salil and Lyle Scruggs. 2012. American Exceptionalism or Economic Erosion: What
Explains Changing Attitudes to Global Warming? working paper, Department of Political
Science, University of Connecticut.
Bergstrom, Theodore C. 2010. “The Uncommon Insight of Elinor Ostrom,” Scandinavian
Journal of Economics 112 (2): 245-61.
Berkes, Fikret, David Feeny, Bonnie McCay, and James M. Acheson. 1989."The Benefits of the
Commons," Nature 340: 91–93.
Beron, Kurt J., James C. Murdoch, and Wim P. M. Vijverberg. 2003. “Why Cooperate? Public
Goods, Economic Power, and the Montreal Protocol.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 85 (2): 286-97.
Bickers, Kenneth N. and Robert M. Stein. 2000. "The Congressional Pork Barrel in a Republican
Era," Journal of Politics, 62 (4): 1070-86.
Bjørndal, Trond and Ana Brasão. 2006. “The East Atlantic Bluefin Tuna Fisheries: Stock
Collapse or Recovery?” Marine Resource Economics 21:193–210.
Bjørndal, Trond, Veijo Kaitala, Marko Lindroos, and Gordon R. Munro. 2000. “The
Management of High Seas Fisheries.” Annals of Operations Research 94 (1-4): 183-96.
Blom, Benjamin, Terry Sunderland, and Daniel Murdiyarso. 2010. “Getting REDD to Work
Locally: Lessons Learned from Integrated Conservation and Development Projects”,
Environmental Science and Policy 13(2): 164-72.
Bordo, Michael D., Owen F. Humpage and Anna J. Schwartz. 2013. Strained Relations: U.S.
Monetary Policy and Foreign-Exchange Operations in the Twentieth Century,
http://www.nber.org/chapters/c12908, forthcoming University of Chicago Press and
NBER.
Borenstein, Severin. 2012. “Markets for Anthropogenic Carbon with the Larger Carbon Cycle,”
in Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram, eds, The Design and Implementation of US
Climate Policy, Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press, 93-102.
Bown, Chad P. 2004a. “Trade Disputes and the Implementation of Protection under the GATT:
An Empirical Assessment.” Journal of International Economics 62: 263-94.
Bown, Chad P. 2004b. "On the Economic Success of GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement," The
Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (3): 811-23.
Bown, Chad P. 2013. “How Different Are Safeguards from Antidumping? Evidence from US
Trade Policies toward Steel.” Review of Industrial Organization 42(4): 449-81.
Brett, Craig and Michael Keen. 2000. “Political Uncertainty and the Earmarking of
Environmental Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics 75: 315-40.
Brown, Gardner. Jr. and David F. Layton. 2001. A Market Solution for Preserving Biodiversity:
the Black Rhino. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brunner, Steffen, Christian Flachsland, and Robert Marschinski. 2012. “Credible Commitment in
Carbon Policy,” Climate Policy 12 (2): 255-271.
Buchanan, James M. and William Craig Stubblebine. 1962. “Externality,” Economica 29(116):
371-84.
Buchanan, James M. and Gordon R. Tullock. 1962. The Calculus of Consent, Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Bulte, Edwin H. and G. Cornelis van Kooten. 1999. “Economics of Antipoaching Enforcement
and the Ivory Trade Ban,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 81 (2): 453-66.
Bulte, Erwin H. and Edward B. Barbier. 2005. “Trade and Renewable Resources in a SecondBest World: An Overview.” Environmental and Resource Economics 30(4): 423-63.
75

Busch, Jonah. 2013. “Supplementing REDD+ with Biodiversity Payments: The Paradox of
Paying for Multiple Ecosystem Services,” Land Economics 89(4), forthcoming.
Bushnell, James B. and Erin J. Mansur. 2011. “Vertical Targeting and Leakage in Carbon
Policy,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 10 (3): 263-7.
Carraro, Carlo, and Domenico Siniscalco. 1993. "Strategies for the International Protection of
the Environment." Journal of Public Economics 52: 309-328.
Casey, Keith E., Christopher M. Dewees, Bruce R. Turris, and James E. Wilen. 1995. “The
Effects of Individual Vessel Quotas in the British Columbia Halibut Fishery.” Marine
Resource Economics 10: 211-230.
Cash, David W., W. Neil Adger, Fikret Berkes, Po Garden, Louis Lebel, Per Olsson, Lowell
Pritchard, and Oran Young. 2006. “Scale and Cross-Scale Dynamics: Governance and
Information in a Multilevel World.” Ecology and Society 11(2): 8. URL:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss2/art8/.
Chander, Parkash and Henry Tulkens. 1995. “A Core-Theoretic Solution for the Design of
Cooperative Agreements on Transfrontier Pollution.” International Tax and Public
Finance 2: 279–293.
Chander, Parkash and Henry Tulkens. 1997. The Core of an Economy with Multilateral
Environmental Externalities. International Journal of Game Theory 26: 379–401.
Chander, Parkash and Henry Tulkens. 2008. Cooperation, Stability, and Self-Enforcement in
International Environmental Agreements: A Conceptual Discussion," in Roger Guesnerie
and Henry Tulkens eds., The Design of Climate Policy, CESifo Seminar Series.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Chermak, Janie M., and Kate Krause. 2002. " Individual Response, Information, and
Intergenerational Common Pool Problems." Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 43 (1): 47-70.
Cheung, Steven N.S. 1970. “The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a Non-Exclusive
Resource.” Journal of Law and Economics 13 (1): 49-70.
Child, Brian, and Martha West Lyman. 2005. Natural Resources as Community Assets: Lessons
from Two Continents. Madison: Sand County Foundation
Christy, Francis, T., Jr. 1973. “Fisherman Quotas: A Tentative Suggestion for Domestic
Management.” Occasional Paper No. 19 of the Law of the Sea Institute, University of
Rhode Island.

Clemencon, Raymond. 2008. “The Bali Road Map: A First Step on the Difficult Journey to a
Post-Kyoto Protocol Agreement,” Journal of Environment and Development 17 (1): 7094.
Coase, Ronald. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics 3: 1–44.
Coase, Ronald. 1992. "The Institutional Structure of Production", American Economic Review
82 (4): 713–719.
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).
2010. "Summary record of the eighth session of Committee I." Fifteenth Meeting of the
Conference of the Parties (CoP15). Doha, Qatar, 13-25 March 2010,
http://www.cites.org/eng/cop/15/sum/E15-Com-I-Rec08.pdf.
http://www.cites.org/eng/cop/15/sum/index.shtml
76

Cooper, Richard N. 1989. “International Cooperation in Public Health as a Prologue to
Macroeconomic Cooperation.” in Richard N. Cooper, Barry Eichengreen, C. Randall
Henning, Gerald Holtham, and Robert D. Putnam, eds. Can Nations Agree? Issues in
International Economic Cooperation. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. 178-254.
Cooper, Richard N. 1995. “The Coase Theorem and International Economic Relations.” Japan
and the World Economy. 7:29-44.
Cooper, Richard N. 2010. “The Case for Charges on Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” in Joseph E.
Aldy and Robert N. Stavins, eds, Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy: Implementing
Architectures for Agreement, New York: Cambridge University Press, 151-78.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor. 2005. “Free Trade and Global Warming: A Trade
Theory View of the Kyoto Protocol,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 49 (2): 205–234.
Cox, Michael, Gwen Arnold, and Sergio Villamayor Tomás. 2010. A Review of Design
Principles for Community-Based Natural Resource Management. Ecology and Society
15(4): 38-52, http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol15/iss4/art38.
Creti, Anna, Pierra-André Jouvet, and Valérie Mignon. 2012. “Carbon Price Drivers: Phase I
Versus Phase II Equilibrium?” Energy Economics 34: 327-34.
Crook, John R. 2010. U.S. “Efforts to Gain CITES Protection for Atlantic Bluefin Tuna, Sharks,
and Polar Bears Unsuccessful.” The American Journal of International Law 104 (2): 28990.
Crothers, G.T. (Stan) and Lindie Nelson. 2007. “High Seas Fisheries Governance: A Framework
for the Future?” Marine Resource Economics 21: 341–53.
Cullis-Suzuki, Sarika and Daniel Pauly. 2010. “Failing the High Seas: A Global Evaluation of
Regional Fisheries Management Organizations.” Marine Policy 34: 1036-42.
Dahlman, Carl.1979. "The Problem of Externality." Journal of Law and Economics 22: 141-62.
d’Aspremont, Claude, Alexis Jacquemin, Jean Jaskold Gabszewicz and John A. Weymark. 1983.
“On the Stability of Collusive Price Leadership,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 16
(1):17-25.
Donsimoni, M. P., Nicholas S. Economides, and Herakles M. Polemarcharkis.1986. “Stable
Cartels,” International Economic Review, 27 (2): 317-27.
Dayton-Johnson, Jeff. 2000a. “Choosing Rules to Govern the Commons: A Model with
Evidence from Mexico" Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 42: 19–41.
Dayton-Johnson, Jeff. 2000b. “Determinants of Collective Actions on the Local Commons: A
Model with Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics 62: 81–208.
Dayton-Johnson, Jeff, and Pranab K. Bardhan. 2002. “Inequality and Conservation on the Local
Commons: A Theoretical Exercise”. Economic Journal 112: 577–602.
Deacon, Robert T., Dominic P. Parker, and Christopher Costello. 2013. “Reforming Fisheries:
Lesson from a Self-Selected Cooperative,” Journal of Law and Economics, 56(1): 83125.
Dellink, Rob and Michael Finus. 2012.“Uncertainty and Climate Treaties: Does Ignorance Pay?”
Resource and Energy Economics 34(4): 565-84.
DeMeza, David. 1998. “Coase Theorem.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and
The Law. P. Newman, ed. New York: Macmillan, Vol. 1: 1270-82.
Demsetz, Harold.1967. “Toward a Theory of Property Rights.” American Economic Review 57:
347-59.

77

Demsetz, Harold. 1968. “The Cost of Transacting.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 82 (1): 3353.
Deschênes, Olivier. 2012b. “Climate Policy and Labor Markets,” in Don Fullerton and Catherine
Wolfram, eds, The Design and Implementation of US Climate Policy, Chicago: NBER
and University of Chicago Press, 37-48.
Deshpande, Manasi and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Comment on ‘On the Economics of
Climate Policy’: Is Climate Change Mitigation the Ultimate Arbitrage Opportunity?” The
B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 10.2. Article 20;
http//hdl.handle.net/1721.1/71249.
Devine, Jennifer A., Krista D. Baker, and Richard L. Haedrich. 2006. “Deep-Sea Fishes Qualify
as Endangered.” Nature 439 (7072): 29.
Dimitrov, Radoslav S. 2006. Science and International Environmental Policy: Regimes and
Nonregimes in Global Governance. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield.
Duarte, Clara Costa, Ana Brasão, Pedro Pintassilgo. 2000. “Management of Northern Atlantic
Bluefin tuna: An application of C-Games.” Marine Resource Economics 15 (1):21-36.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas Irwin. 2009.“Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the
1930s,” Journal of Economic History 45, 925-946.
Ellerman, A. Denny. 2010. “The EU Emission Trading Scheme: A Prototype Global System?” in
Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N. Stavins, eds, Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy:
Implementing Architectures for Agreement, New York: Cambridge University Press, 88118.
Ellerman, A. Denny and Barbara K. Buchner. 2007. “The European Union Emissions Trading
Scheme: Origins, Allocation, and Early Results.” Review of Environmental Economics
and Policy 1(1): 66-87.
Elliott, Joshua, Ian Foster, Sam Kortum, Gita Khun Jush, Todd Minson, and David Weisbach,
2012, "Unilateral Carbon Taxes, Border Tax Adjustments, and Carbon Leakage,”
University of Chicago Law School, Institute for Law and Economics working paper 600,
2nd series.
Ellis, Richard. 2008. “The Bluefin Tuna in Peril.” Scientific American 298: 70-77.
Enders, Alice and Amelia Porges. 1992. “Successful Conventions and Conventional Success:
Saving the Ozone Layer.” In Kym Anderson and Richard Blackhurst, eds. The Greening
of World Trade Issues. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 130-44.
Farrell, Joseph, and Eric Maskin. 1989. “Renegotiation in Repeated Games.” Games and
Economic Behavior 1: 327-360.
Faysse, Nicolas. 2005. “Coping with the Tragedy of the Commons: Game Structure and Design
of Rules.” Journal of Economic Surveys 19(2): 239-61.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt. 1999. “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3): 817 -68.
Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter. 2000. Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods
Experiments. American Economic Review, 90(4): 980–94.
Finus, Michael. 2001. Game Theory and International Environmental Cooperation. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Finus, Michael and Pedro Pintassilgo. 2013. “The Role of Uncertainty and Learning for the
Success of International Climate Agreements.” Journal of Public Economics, 103: 29-43.
Fischer, Carolyn. 2004. “The Complex Interactions of markets for Endangered Species
Products.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 48(2): 926-53.
78

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 1995. Code of Conduct for
Responsible Fisheries. Rome: FAO.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2002. Report of the NorwayFAO Expert Consultation on the Management of Shared Fish Stocks. Bergen, Norway, 710 October. FAO Fisheries Report. No. 695. Rome: FAO.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2010. The State of World
Fisheries and Aquaculture 2010. Rome: FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2012. The State of World
Fisheries and Aquaculture 2012. Rome: FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department.
Fox, Kevin J., R. Quentin Grafton, James Kirkley, and Dales Squires. 2003. “Property Rights in
a Fishery: Regulatory Change and Firm Performance.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 46: 156-77.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Paul Romer. 1999. “Does Trade cause Growth?” American Economic
Review 89 (3): 379-99.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 2010a. “An Elaborated Proposal for a Global Climate Policy Architecture:
Specific Formulas and Emission Targets for All Countries in All Decades,” in Joseph E.
Aldy and Robert N. Stavins, eds., Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy: Implementing
Architectures for Agreement, New York: Cambridge University Press, 31-87.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 2010b. “Global Environment and Trade Policy,” in Joseph E. Aldy and
Robert N. Stavins, eds, Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy: Implementing
Architectures for Agreement, New York: Cambridge University Press, 493-529.
Fri, Robert W. and Stephen Ansolabehere. 2012. “The Alternative Energy Future: Challenges for
Technological Change,” Daedalus 141(2): 5-9.
Fromentin Jean-Marc and Joseph Powers. 2005. “Atlantic Bluefin Tuna: Population Dynamics,
Ecology, Fisheries and Management,” Fish and Fisheries 6(4), 281-306.
Fromentin, Jean-Marc. 2010. “The Fate of Atlantic Bluefin Tuna.” Science 327(March):5971.
Froyn, Camilla Bretteville, and Jon Hovi. 2008. "A Climate Agreement With Full Participation."
Economics Letters 99: 317-319.
Fullerton, Don and Catherine Wolfram, eds, The Design and Implementation of US Climate
Policy, Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press.
Gardner, Roy, Andrew Herr, Elinor Ostrom, and James A. Walker. 2000. “Power and
Limitations of Proportional Cutbacks in Common-Pool Resources.” Journal of
Development Economics. 62: 515-33.
Gehring, Thomas and Eva Ruffing. 2008. "When Arguments Prevail Over Power: The CITES
Procedure for the Listing of Endangered Species." Global Environmental Politics 8.2
(2008): 123-148.
Gibson, Clark C., John T. Williams, and Elinor Ostrom. 2005. “Local Enforcement and Better
Forests.” World Development 33 (2): 273–284.
Gillett, Robert. 2010. Marine Fishery Resources of the Pacific Islands. FAO Fisheries and
Aquaculture Technical Paper. No. 537. Rome, FAO.
Gilligan, Michael J. 2010. “The Transactions Costs Approach to International Institutions,”
Manuscript, Department of Politics, New York University,
http://as.nyu.edu/docs/IO/2601/TransactionsCostsApproach.pdf.
Gordon, H. Scott. 1954. “The Economic Theory of a Common-Property Resource: The Fishery”
Journal of Political Economy 62 (2): 124–42.

79

Goulder, Lawrence H. 2013. “Markets for Pollution Allowances: What Are the (New) Lessons?
Journal of Economic Perspective 27(1): 87–102.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Ian W. H. Parry. 2008. “Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy.”
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 2 (2): 152-74.
Grafton, R. Quentin, Dale Squires, and Kevin J. Fox. 2000. “Private Property and Economic
Efficiency: A Study of a Common-Pool Resource.” Journal of Law and Economics
43 (2): 679–713.
Grafton, R. Quentin, Rögnvaldur Hannesson, Bruce Shallard, Daryl R. Sykes, and Joseph
Terry. 2010. “The Economics of Allocation in Tuna Regional Fisheries Management
Organizations,” in Conservation and Management of Transnational Tuna Fisheries,
edited by Robin Allen, James Joseph and Dale Squires, Oxford, UK: WileyBlackwell, 155-62.
Greenstone, Michael and Adam Looney. 2012. “Paying Too Much for Energy? The True
Costs of Our Energy Choices,” Daedalus 141(2): 10-30.
Haag, Matthew, and Roger Lagunoff. 2007. “On the Size and Structure of Group
Cooperation.” Journal of Economic Theory 135 (1), 68-89.
Hahn, Robert W. 2009. “Greenhouse Gas Auctions and Taxes: Some Political Economy
Considerations.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(2): 167-88.
Hallegatte, Stéphane, Ankur Shah, Robert Lempert, Casey Brown, and Stuart Gill. 2012.
“Investment Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty: Application to Climate
Change,” Policy Research Working Paper 6193, WPS6193, Sustainable
Development Network, Washington DC: World Bank.
Hallman, Brian, Scott Barrett, Raymond P. Clarke, James Joseph, and Dale Squires. 2010.
“Limited Access in Transnational Tuna Fisheries,” in Conservation and
Management of Transnational Tuna Fisheries, edited by Robin Allen, James Joseph
and Dale Squires, Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 195-214.
Hannesson, Rögnvaldur. 2004. The Privatization of the Oceans. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Hannesson, Rögnvaldur. 2010. “The Coalition of the Willing: Effect of Country Diversity on an
Environmental Treaty Game.” The Review of International Organizations 5(4): 461-74.
Hardin, Garrett. 1968. “The Tragedy of the Commons.” Science 162: 1243-8.
Harstad, Bård 2012. “Climate Contracts: A Game of Emissions, Investments, Negotiations, and
Renegotiations,” Review of Economic Studies 79(4), 1527–57.
Heller, Michael. 1998. “The Tragedy of the Anticommons: Property in the Transition from Marx
to Markets.” Harvard Law Review 111(3): 621-88.
Helm, Dieter. 2008. "Climate-Change Policy: Why Has So Little Been Achieved?" Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 24 (2) 211–38.
Heutel, Garth. 2012. “How Should Environmental Policy Respond to Business Cycles? Optimal
Policy Under Persistent Productivity Shocks.” Review of Economic Dynamics 15: 244-64.
Herrmann, Mark and Keith Criddle. 2006. “An Econometric Market Model for the Pacific
Halibut Fishery.” Marine Resource Economics 21: 129–58.
Hoekman, Bernard M. and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2007. The World Trade Organization: Law,
Economics and Politics. London: Routledge.
Hoel, Michael and Kirsten Schneider .1997. “Incentives to Participate in an International
Environmental Agreement.” Environment and Resource Economics. 9 (2): 154-170.

80

Hollick, Ann L. and Richard N. Cooper. 1997. “Global Commons: Can They Be Managed?” In
Partha Dasgupta, Karl-Göran Mäler, and Alessandro Vercelli, eds. The Economics of
Transnational Commons, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 141-71.
Houser, Trevor. 2008. Leveling the Carbon Playing Field: International Competition and US
Climate Policy Design. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Horan, Richard D. and Jason F. Shogren. 2003. “Elephants: Comment.” American Economic
Review 93(4): 1437-45.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Steve Charnovitz and Jisun Kim. 2009. Global Warming and the World
Trading System. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT). 2008. Report of the
2008 Atlantic Bluefin Tuna Stock Assessment Session (Sept. 29–Oct. 3, 2008).
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT). 2011. “Report of the
2010 Atlantic Bluefin Tuna Stock Assessment Session (Madrid, Spain – September 6 to
12, 2010).” ICCAT Collective Volume of Scientific Papers 66(2): 505-714.
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT). 2012. Report for
Biennial Period, 2010-2011, Part II, Vol. 2. Madrid, Spain.
Irwin, Douglas A. 2011. Trade Policy Disaster: Lessons from the 1930s. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Irwin, Douglas A and Kevin H. O’Rourke. 2011. “Coping with Shocks and Shifts: The
Multilateral Trading System in Historical Perspective.”NBER Working Paper w17598,
Cambridge, MA.
Jacoby, Henry D., Mustafa H. Babiker, Sergey Paltsev, and John M. Reilly. 2010. “Sharing the
Burden of GHG Reductions,” in Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N. Stavins, eds, Post-Kyoto
International Climate Policy: Implementing Architectures for Agreement, New York:
Cambridge University Press, 753-85.
Jaffe, Judson and Robert N. Stavins. 2010. “Linkage of Tradable Permit Systems in International
Climate Policy Architecture,” in Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N. Stavins, eds, Post-Kyoto
International Climate Policy: Implementing Architectures for Agreement, New York:
Cambridge University Press, 119-50.
Johnson, Ronald N. and Gary D. Libecap. 1982. Contracting Problems and Regulation: The Case
of the Fishery.” American Economic Review 72 (5):1005-22.
Johnson, Scott L. and David M. Pekelney. 1996. "Economic Assessment of the Regional Clean
Air Incentives Market: A New Emissions Trading Program for Los Angeles." Land
Economics 72(3): 277-297.
Joseph, James, Dale Squires, William Bayliff, and Theodore Groves. 2010. “Addressing the
Problem of Excess Fishing Capacity in Tuna Fisheries,” in Conservation and
Management of Transnational Tuna Fisheries, edited by Robin Allen, James Joseph and
Dale Squires, Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 11-38.
Kaffine, Daniel T. and Christopher J. Costello. 2010. “Unitization of Spatially Connected
Renewable Resources.” NBER Working Paper 16338.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2007. “Do Greens Drive Hummers or Hybrids? Environmental Ideology as a
Determinant of Consumer Choice,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 54(2): 129-45.
Kahn, Matthew E. and Matthew J. Kotchen. 2010. “Environmental Concern and the Business
Cycle: The Chilling Effect of Recession.” NBER Working Paper 16241.
Kaufman, Christine and Rolf H. Weber. 2011. "Carbon-Related Border Tax Adjustment:
Mitigating Climate Change or Restricting International Trade?" World Trade Review 10
81

(4): 497-525.
Keohane, Robert O. and Elinor Ostrom, eds. 1995. Local Commons and Global
Interdependence: Heterogeneity and Cooperation in Two Domains London: Sage
Publications.
Keohane, Nathaniel O. 2009. “Cap-and-Trade, Rehabilitated: Using Tradable Permits to Control
Greenhouse Gases.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1): 42-62.
Keohane, Robert O. and Kal Raustiala. 2010. “Toward a Post-Kyoto Climate Change
Architecture: A Political Analysis,” in Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N. Stavins, eds, PostKyoto International Climate Policy: Implementing Architectures for Agreement, New
York: Cambridge University Press, 372-402.
Kerr, Richard A. 2001. “Rising Global Temperature, Rising Uncertainty.” Science 292 (5515):
192-4.
Kolstad, Charles D. 1996 a. "Fundamental Irreversibilities in Stock Externalities.” Journal
of Public Economics, 60(2): 221-33.
Kolstad, Charles D. 1996 a. "Fundamental Irreversibilities in Stock Externalities.” Journal of
Public Economics, 60(2): 221-33.
Kolstad, Charles D. 1996b. "Learning and Stock Effects in Environmental Regulation; the Case
of Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
31 (1): 1-18.
Kolstad, Charles D. 2007. “Systematic Uncertainty in Self-Enforcing International
Environmental Agreements.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
53(1): 68-79.
Kolstad, Charles D. 2010. “Equity, Heterogeneity and International Environmental Agreements,”
B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy
10(2).http://ideas.repec.org/a/bpj/bejeap/v10y2010i2n3.html.
Kolstad, Charles D. 2011. “Public Goods Agreements with Other-Regarding Preferences,” NBER
Working Paper No. 17017.http://www.nber.org/papers/w17017.
Kolstad, Charles D. and Alistair Ulph. 2008. “Learning and International Environmental
Agreements,” Climatic Change 89: 125-41.
Kolstad, Chares D. and Alistair Ulph. 2011. “Uncertainty, Learning and Heterogeneity in
International Environmental Agreements.” Environmental and Resource
Economics, 50(3): 389-403.
Korman, Seth. 2011. “International Management of a High Seas Fishery: Political and PropertyRights Solutions and the Atlantic Bluefin.” Virginia Journal of International Law 51 (3):
697-748.
Kotchen, Matthew J. and Michael R. Moore (2007a). “Private Provision of Environmental Public
Goods: Household Participation in Green-Electricity Programs.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 53 (1): 1-16.
Kotchen, Matthew J. and Michael R. Moore (2007b). “Conservation from Voluntary Restraint to
a Voluntary Price Premium.” Environmental Resource Economics 40: 195-215.
Kremer, Michael and Charles Morcom. 2000. “Elephants.” The American Economic Review 90
(1):212-34.
Krutilla, Kerry and Rachel Krause. 2010. "Transaction Costs and Environmental Policy: An
Assessment Framework and Literature Review." International Review of Environmental
and Resource Economics 4: 261–354.
Lasse, Ringius, Asbjorn Torvanger and Arild Underdal. 2002. “Burden Sharing and Fairness
82

Principles in International Climate Policy,” International Environmental Agreements:
Politics, Law and Economics 2(1): 1-22.
Libecap, Gary D. 1978. “Economic Variables and the Development of the Law: The Case of
Western Mineral Rights.” Journal of Economic History 38 (2): 338-62.
Libecap, Gary D. 1989a. Contracting for Property Rights, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Libecap, Gary D. 1989b. “The Political Economy of Crude Oil Cartelization in the United States,
1933-1972.” Journal of Economic History 49(4): 833-55.
Libecap, Gary D. and James L. Smith. 1999. “The Self-Enforcing Provisions of Oil and Gas Unit
Operating Agreements: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization 15 (2): 526-48.
Libecap, Gary D. and James L. Smith. 2001. “Regulatory Remedies to the Common Pool: the
Limits of Oil Field Unitization,” Energy Journal 22 (1): 1-26.
Libecap, Gary D. and James L. Smith. 2002. “The Economic Evolution of Petroleum Property
Rights in the United States.” Journal of Legal Studies 31 (2, Pt. 2): S589-S608.
Libecap, Gary D. and Steven N. Wiggins. 1984. “Contractual Responses to the Common Pool:
Prorationing of Crude Oil Production,” The American Economic Review, 74 (1): 87-98.
Libecap, Gary D. and Steven N. Wiggins. 1985. “The Influence of Private Contractual Failure on
Regulation: The Case of Oil Field Unitization,” Journal of Political Economy 93 (4):
690-714.
Lischewski, Christopher. 2010. “Preface” in Robin Allen, James Joseph, and Dale Squires eds,
(2010), Conservation and Management of Transnational Tuna Fisheries, Ames: WileyBlackwell, pp. xi-xvi.
Ling, Bing.1992. “Developing Countries and Ozone Layer Protection: Issues, Principles, and
Implications, Tulane Environmental Law Journal 6:91.
Lindroos, Marko. 2002. “Coalitions in Fisheries.” Working paper. Helsinki School of
Economics.
Litfin, Karen T. 1994. Ozone Discourse: Science and Politics in Global Environmental
Cooperation. New York: Columbia University Press.
Lueck, Dean and Jeffrey A. Michael. 2003. “Preemptive Habitat Destruction Under the
Endangered Species Act,” Journal of Law and Economics, 46: 27-60.
Mabunda, David, Danie J. Pienaar, and Johan Verhoef. 2003. “The Kruger National Park: A
Century of Management and Research.” In Harry C. Biggs, Johan T. du Toit, Kevin H.
Rogers, Anthony R.E. Sinclair eds, The Kruger Experience: Ecology and Management of
Savanna Heterogeneity, Washington, DC: Island Press, 3-21.
Maguire, Jean-Jacques, Michael Sissenwine, Jorge Csirke, Richard Grainger and Serge Garcia.
2006. “The State of World Highly Migratory, Straddling and Other High Seas Fishery
Resources and Associated Species,” FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 495 Rome: United
Nations Food and Agricultural Organization.
Mansfield, Edward D. and Helen V. Milner. 2012. Votes, Vetoes and International Trade
Agreements: The Domestic and International Politics of Preferential Trade Agreements.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mattoo, Aaditya, Arvind Subramanian, Dominique van der Mensbrugghe, and Jianwu He. 2009.
"Reconciling Climate Change and Trade Policy." World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper 5123. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
McClurg, Tom. 2012. “A Case Study of High Seas Fisheries Governance: The PNA
83

Agreement,” paper presented at Tackling the Global Fisheries Challenge, PERC,
Bozeman, MT, November 14-15.
McCright, Aaron M. 2010. “The Effects of Gender on Climate Change Knowledge and Concern
in the American Public.” Population and Environment 32 (1): 66-87.
McDorman, Ted L. 2009. “Canada-United States Cooperative Approaches to Shared Marine
Fishery Resources: Territorial Subversion” Michigan Journal of International Law 30:
665-87.
McGinnis, Michael and Elinor Ostrom. 2008. “Will Lessons from Small-Scale Social Dilemmas
Scale Up?” In New Issues and Paradigms in Research on Social Dilemmas, ed. Anders
Biel, Daniel Eek, Tommy Gärling, and Mathias Gustaffson, Berlin: Springer, 189–211.
McGinty, Matthew, 2007. "International Environmental Agreements among Asymmetric
Nations." Oxford Economic Papers 59 (1) : 45-62.
McKibbin, Warwick J., Adele Morris, and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 2010. “Expecting the Unexpected:
Macroeconomic Volatility and Climate Policy,” in Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N. Stavins,
eds, Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy: Implementing Architectures for
Agreement, New York: Cambridge University Press, 857-888.
McWhinnie, Stephanie F. 2009. “The Tragedy of the Commons in International Fisheries: An
Empirical Examination.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 57 (3):
321-33.
Meade, James E. 1973. The Theory of Economic Externalities: The Control of Environmental
Pollution. Geneva: Institut Universitaire de Hautes Etudes Internationales.
Medema, Steven G. and Rochard O Zerbe, Jr. 2000. “The Coase Theorem.” In Boudewijn
Bouckaert and Gerrit De Geest, eds, The Enclyclopedia of Law and Economics
Aldershot: Edward Elgar, 418-55.
Mendelsohn, Robert. 2008. “Is the Stern Review an Economic Analysis?” Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy 2: 45–60.
Meng, Kyle. 2013. “The Cost of Potential Cap-and-Trade Policy; An Event Study using
Prediction Markets and Lobbying Records,” working paper, Columbia University,
Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences.
Merrill, Thomas W. and Henry E. Smith. 2010. Property, New York: Oxford University Press.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2009. “Designing a Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions.”
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1): 63-83.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., Aparna Mathur, and Kevin A. Hassett. 2012. “Distributional Impacts in a
Comprehensive Climate Policy,” in Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram, eds, The
Design and Implementation of US Climate Policy, Chicago: NBER and University of
Chicago Press, 21-36.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and David A. Weisbach. 2009. "The Design of a Carbon Tax." Harvard
Environmental Law Review 33(2): 499-556.
Missios, Paul C. 2004. “Wildlife Trade and Endangered Species Protection.” Australian Journal
of Agricultural and Resource Economics 48 (4): 613-27.
Mitchell, Ronald B. 2010. International Politics and the Environment, Los Angeles: Sage.
Mitchell, Ronald B. 2012. International Environmental Agreements Database Project
http://iea.uoregon.edu/.
Miyake, Makoto Peter, Naozumi Miyabe, Hideki Nakano. 2004. Historical Trends of Tuna
Catches in the World, Rome: FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 467, Rome: FAO.
Molina, Mario J. and F. Sherwood Rowland. 1974. “Stratospheric Sink for
84

Chlorofluoromethanes: Chlorine AtomicCatalyzed Destruction of Ozone.” Nature 249:
810 – 2.
Munro, Gordon R. 2000. “The United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement of 1995: History and
Problems of Implementation.” Marine Resource Economics 15 (4):265–80.
Murdoch, James C. and Todd, Sandler. 1997. “The Voluntary Provision of a Pure Public Good:
The Case of Reduced CFC Emissions and the Montreal Protocol.” Journal of Public
Economics 63: 331-49.
Myers, Ransom A. and Boris Worm. 2003. “Rapid Worldwide Depletion of Predatory Fish
Communities.” Nature 423 (6937): 280-3.
Myers, Erin C. 2007. “Policies to Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation
(REDD) in Developing Countries: An Examination of the Issues Facing the Incorporation
of REDD into Market-Based Climate Policies.” Discussion Paper 07-05 Washington DC:
Resources for the Future.
Na, Seong-lin and Hyun Song Shin. 1998. “International Environmental Agreements under
Uncertainty.” Oxford Economic Papers, 50(2), 173–185.
Nangle, Orval E. 1989. “Stratospheric Ozone: United States Regulation of Chlorofluorocarbons.”
Boston College Environmental Affairs Legal Review 16 (3): 531-80.
National Research Council. 1994. An Assessment of Atlantic Bluefin Tuna Committee to Review
Atlantic Bluefin Tuna, Ocean Studies Board, Commission on Geosciences, Environment,
and Resources, Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Nesbet, Matthew and Teresa Myers. 2007. “Twenty Years of Public Opinion About Global
Warming,” Public Opinion Quarterly 83(1): 1-17.
Newell, Richard G. and Kristian Rogers. 2003. “The Market-based Lead Phasedown .”
Discussion Paper 03-37. Washington D.C.: Resources for the Future.
http://www.rff.org/Documents/RFF-DP-03-37.pdf.
Newell, Richard G., William A. Pizer, and Daniel Raimi. 2013. “Carbon Markets 15 Years after
Kyoto: Lessons Learned, New Challenges.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(1): 1346.
Nordhaus, William D. 2007. “A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change,” Journal of Economic Literature 45 (3): 686-702.
Normile, Dennis. 2009. “Scientists Get No Respect From Fishery Managers.” Science 324: 1261.
Odell, John S. 2006. Negotiating Trade: Developing Countries in the WTO and NAFTA. Cambridge
University Press.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Public Goods and the Theory of Groups,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Olson, David, M. Eric Dinerstein, Eric D. Wikramanayake, Neil D. Burgess, George V. N.Powell,
Emma C. Underwood, Jennifer A. D'amico, Illanga Itoua, Holly E. Strand, John C. Morrison,
Colby J. Loucks, Thomas F. Allnutt, Taylor H. Ricketts, Yumiko Kura, John F. Lamoreux,
Wesley W. Wettengel, Prashant Hedao, and Kenneth R. Kassem. 2001. “Terrestrial
Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Life on Earth.” BioScience 51(11): 933–938.
O'Neill, Kate. 2009. The Environment and International Relations New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
Action, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ostrom, Elinor. 2000. “Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 14 (3): 137-58.
85

Ostrom, Elinor. 2009, "A General Framework for Analyzing Sustainability of Social-Ecological
Systems", Science 325 (5939): 419-22.
Ostrom, Elinor. 2011. “Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of Complex
Economic Systems,” The American Economic Review 100 (3): 641-72.
Ostrom, Elinor. 2012. “Nested Externalities and Polycentric Institutions: Must We Wait for
Global Solutions to Climate Change Before Taking Actions at Other Scales?” Economic
Theory 49 (2): 353-69.
Ostrom, Elinor, Roy Gardner and James Walker. 1994. Rules, Games and Common Pool
Resources. Michigan: University of Michigan Press.
Ostrom, Elinor, Joanna Burger, Christopher B Field, Richard B. Nogaard, and David Policansky.
1999. “Revisiting the Commons: Local Lessons, Global Challenges.” Science 284
(5412): 278-82.
Ostrom, Elinor, Thomas Dietz, Nives Dolšak, Paul C. Stern, Susan Stonich, and Elke U. Webe,
eds. 2002. The Drama of the Commons. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Parson, Edward A. 2003. Protecting the Ozone Layer: Science and Strategy. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Peltzman, Sam. 1976. “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” Journal of Law and
Economics 19 (2): 211-40.
Pfaff, Alexander, Gregory S. Amacher, and Erin O. Sills. 2013. “Realistic REDD: Improving
the Forest Impacts of Domestic Policies in Different Settings.” Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 7 (1) (January): 114–135.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2012. "Uncertain Outcomes and Climate Change Policy," Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 63, 289-303.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2013. “Climate Change Policy: What do the Models Tell US?” Journal of
Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Pinsky, Malin L., Olaf P. Jensen, Daniel Ricard, and Stephen R. Palumbi. 2011. “Unexpected
Patterns of Fisheries Collapse in the World's Oceans.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 108 (20): 8317-22.
Pintassilgo, Pedro and Clara Costa Duarte. 2000. “The New-Member Problem in the Cooperative
Management of High Seas Fisheries,” Marine Resource Economics 15 (4): 361-78.
Plantinga, Andrew J. and Kenneth R. Richards. 2010. “International Forest Carbon Sequestration
in a Post-Kyoto Agreement.” in Joseph E. Aldy and Robert N. Stavins, eds, Post-Kyoto
International Climate Policy: Implementing Architectures for Agreement, New York:
Cambridge University Press, 682-714.
Polacheck, Tom. 2012. “Politics and Independent Scientific Advice in RFMO Processes: A Case
Study of Crossing Boundaries,” Marine Policy 36: 132-41.
Polasky, Stephen, Jennifer Schmitt, Christopher Costello, and Lialila Tajibaeva. 2008. “LargerScale Influences on the Serengeti Ecosystem: National and International Policy,
Economics, and Human Geography.” In Anthony R. E. Sinclair, Craig Packer, Simon A.
R. Mduma, and John M. Fryxell, eds, Serengeti III: Human Impacts on Ecosystem
Dynamics Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 347-378.
Possingham, Hugh P., Sandy J. Andelman, Mark A. Burgman, Rodrigo A. Medellín, Larry L.
Master and David A. Keith. 2002. “Limits to the Use of Threatened Species Lists,”
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 17 (11): 503-7.
Poteete, Amy R. and Elinor Ostrom. 2004. “Heterogeneity, Group Size and Collective Action:
86

The Role of Institutions in Forest Management.” Development and Change 35(3): 43561.
Poteete, Amy R, Marco A. Janssen, and Elinor Ostrom. 2010. Working Together: Collective
Action, the Commons, and Multiple Methods in Practice, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Prins, Herbert H. T., and Jan Geu Grootenhuis. 2000. “Introduction: The Value of Priceless
Wildlife.” In Herbert H. T Prins ed., Wildlife Conservation by Sustainable Use, Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1-12.
Rausch, Sebastian and John Reilly. 2012. “Carbon Tax Revenue and the Budget Deficit:
A Win-Win Solution?” Report 228, MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of
Global Change, Cambridge, August.
Rayfuse, Rosemary. 2006. Regional Allocation Issues or Zen and the Art of Pie Cutting. Sharing
the Fish Conference, 26 February-2 March. Perth, Australia.
Reeve, Rosalind. 2002. Policing International Trade in Endangered Species: The CITES Treaty
and Compliance, London: Earthscan Publications.
Reiner, David M., Thomas E. Curry, Mark A. de Figueiredo, Howard J. Herzog, Stephen D.
Ansolabehere, Kazuki Itaoka, Filip Johnsson, and Mikael Odenberger. 2006. “American
Exceptionalism? Similarities and Differences in National Attitudes Toward Energy
Policy and Global Warming." Environmental Science and Technology 40 (7): 2093-8.
Rose, Adam, Brandt Stevens, Jae Edmonds, and Marshall Wise. 1998. “International Equity and
Differentiation in Global Warming Policy: An Application to Tradable Emission
Permits.” Environmental and Resource Economics 12:25-51.
Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent. 1990. “The Development of Irrigation in Provence, 1700-1860: The French
Revolution and Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic History 50(3): 615-38.
Rubio, Santiago Jose and Alistair Ulph. 2006. “Self‐Enforcing International Environmental
Agreements Revisited,” Oxford Economic Papers 58:233‐63.
Ruttan, Lore M. 2008. “Economic Heterogeneity and the Commons: Effects on Collective
Action and Collective Goods Provisioning.” World Development 36 (5): 969-85.
Scott, Anthony. 1955. “The Fishery: The Objectives of Sole Ownership,” Journal of Political
Economy 63: 116-24.
Scruggs, Lyle and Salil Benegal. 2012. “Declining Public Concern about Climate Change: Can
We Blame the Great Recession?” Global Environmental Change 22(2): 505-15.
Shepard Jr., Glenn H., Klaus Rummenhoeller, Julia Ohl-Schacherer, and Douglas W. Yu. 2010.
“Trouble in Paradise: Indigenous Populations, Anthropological Policies, and Biodiversity
Conservation in Manú National Park, Peru,” Journal of Sustainable Forestry. 29(2): 252301.
Shepsle, Kenneth A. and Barry R. Weingast. 1981. "Political Preferences for the Pork Barrel: A
Generalization," American Journal of Political Science 25 (1): 96-111.
Sigman, Hilary. 2012. “Monitoring and Enforcement of Climate Policy,” in Don Fullerton and
Catherine Wolfram, eds, The Design and Implementation of US Climate Policy, Chicago:
NBER and University of Chicago Press, 213-25.
Sinclair, Anthony R. E. 1995. “Serengeti Past and “Present,” in Anthony R. E. Sinclair and Peter
Arcese, eds, Serengeti II: Dynamics, Management, and Conservation of an Ecosystem,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 3–30.
Singhal, Monica, 2008, “Special Interest Groups and the Allocation of Public Funds.” Journal of
Public Economics 92 (3-4): 548-64.
87

Stavins, Robert N. 2008. “A Meaningful U.S. Cap-and-Trade System to Address Climate
Change.” Harvard Environmental Law Review 32: 293-371.
Stern, Nicolas. 2007. The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Stern, Nicolas. 2013. “The Structure of Economic Modelling of the Potential Impacts of Climate
Change: Grafting Gross Underestimation of Risk onto Already Narrow Science Models.”
Journal of Economic Literature forthcoming.
Stickler, Claudia M., Daniel C. Nepstad, Michael T. Coe, David G. McGrath, Hermann O.
Rodrigues, Wayne S. Walker, Britaldo S. Soares-Filho, and Eric A. Davidson. 2009.
"The Potential Ecological Costs and Cobenefits of REDD: A Critical Review and Case
Study from the Amazon Region." Global Change Biology 15 (12): 2803-24.
Stokke, Olav Schram ed. 2001. Governing High Seas Fisheries: The Interplay of Global and
Regional Regimes. New York: Oxford University Press.
Stolarski, Richard S. and Ralph J. Cicerone. 1974. “Stratospheric Chlorine: A Possible Sink for
Ozone” Canadian Journal of Chemistry 52: 1610-5.
Taconi, Luca. 2009. “Compensated Successful Efforts for Avoided Deforestation vs.
Compensated Reductions.” Ecological Economics 68(8-9): 2469-72.
Tarui, Nori, Charles Mason, Stephen Polasky and Greg Ellis. 2008. “Cooperation in the
Commons with Unobservable Actions.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 55: 37-51.
Tingley, Dustin and Michael Tomz. 2012. “Conditional Cooperation and Climate Change,”
working paper, Department of Government, Harvard University,
http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/tingleytomzclimatefinal_0.pdf
Ulph, Alistair. 1998. “Learning about Global Warming.” in Nick Hanley and Henk Folmer
eds. Game Theory and the Environment. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK et al., 255-86.
Ulph, Alistair, ed. 2001. Environmental Policy, International Agreements, and International
Trade, New York: Oxford University Press.
Ulph, Alistair. 2004. Stable International Environmental Agreements with a Stock Pollutant,
Uncertainty and Learning. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 29(1), 53–73.
Ulph, Alistair and David Ulph. 1997. “Global Warming, Irreversibility and Learning.”
Economic Journal 107(442): 636-50.
UNCLOS. 1982. United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. UN
Document A/Conf. 62/122.
UNFSA. 1995. Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. UN
Document A/Conf.164/37.
United Nations (UN). 1982. United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. U.N. Doc.
A/Conf. 62/122.
United Nations (UN). 1995. Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks. U.N. Doc. A/Conf.164/37.
United Nations, Ozone Secretariat. 1995. Seventh Meeting of the Parties to the Montreal
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer,
http://www.unep.ch/ozone/7mpviefn.htm.
88

United Nations, Ozone Secretariat. 1998. 1997 Update of the Handbook for the Montreal
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, New York: United Nations.
United Nations, Ozone Secretariat. 2010. The 2010 Assessment of the Scientific Assessment
Panel http://ozone.unep.org/Assessment_Panels/SAP/Scientific_Assessment_2010/index.s
html
United States, EPA. 2010. Technical Support Document: Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory
Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866. Washington DC. Interagency Working
Group on Social Cost of Carbon.
United States, Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon. 2010. “Technical Support
Document: Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis.” Washington DC.
United States, Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon. 2013. Technical Support Document:
Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive
Order 12866. May.
Upton, Simon, and Vandelis Vitalis. 2003. Stopping the High Seas Robbers: Coming to Grips
with Illegal, Unregulated, and Unreported Fishing on the High Seas. OECD Round
Table on Sustainable Development. Paris.
Van Dyke, Jon M. 2010. “Allocating Fish across Jurisdictions.” in Conservation and
Management of Transnational Tuna Fisheries, edited by Robin Allen, James Joseph and
Dale Squires, Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 163-79.
Varughese, George, and Elinor Ostrom. 2001. “The Contested Role of Heterogeneity in
Collective Action: Some Evidence from Community Forestry in Nepal.” World
Development 29 (5): 747-65.
Velders, Guus J.M., Stephen O. Andersen, John S. Daniel, David W. Fahey and Mack
McFarland. 2007. “The Importance of the Montreal Protocol on Protecting Climate.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of 104 (12): 4814-9.
Victor, David G. 2011. Global Warming Gridlock: Creating More Effective Strategies for
Protecting the Planet, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Richard Zeckhauser 2006. “The Perception and Valuation of the Risks of
Climate Change: A Rational and Behavioral Blend,” Climatic Change 77(2): 151-77.
Volden, Craig and Alan E. Wiseman. 2007. “Bargaining in Legislatures over Particularistic and
Collective Goods,” American Political Science Review, 101 (1): 79-92.
Vukas, Budislav and Davor Vidas. 2001. “Flags of Convenience and High Seas Fishing: The
Emergence of a Legal Framework,” in Olav Schram Stokke, ed. 2001. Governing High
Seas Fisheries: The Interplay of Global and Regional Regimes. New York: Oxford
University Press, 53-61.
Wade, Robert. 1988. Village Republics. Economic Conditions for Collective Action in South
India. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Webster, D.G. 2010. “Quasi-Property Rights and the Effectiveness of Atlantic Tuna
Management.” in Conservation and Management of Transnational Tuna Fisheries, edited
by Robin Allen, James Joseph and Dale Squires, Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 321-32.
Weingast, Barry R. 1994. "Reflections on Distributive Politics and Universalism." Political
Research Quarterly 47: 319-327.
Weingast, Barry R., Kenneth A. Shepsle, and Christopher Johnsen. 1981. “The Political
Economy of Benefits and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive Politics.”
Journal of Political Economy 89 (4):642-64.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2007. “A Review of The Stern Review of the Economics of Climate
89

Change.” Journal of Economic Literature 45 (3): 703-24.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2013. “Tail-Hedge Discounting and the Social Cost of Carbon.” Journal of
Economic Literature forthcoming.
Wiener, Jonathan Baert. 2007. "Think Globally, Act Globally; The Limits of Local Climate
Change Policies." University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 155: 101-119.
Wiggins, Steven N. and Gary D. Libecap. 1985. “Oil Field Unitization: Contractual Failure in
the Presence of Imperfect Information,” American Economic Review 75(3): 368-85.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1979. “Transaction Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
Relations.” Journal of Law and Economics 22 (2): 233–61.
Williamson, Oliver E. 2010. “Transaction Cost Economics: The Natural Progress.” The
American Economic Review 100(3): 673-90.
Worm, Boris, Ray Hilborn, Julia K. Baum, Trevor A. Branch, Jeremy S. Collie, Christopher
Costello, Michael J. Fogarty, Elizabeth A. Fulton, Jeffrey A. Hutchings, Simon Jennings,
Olaf P. Jensen, Heike K. Lotze, Pamela M. Mace, Tim R. McClanahan, Cóilín Minto,
Stephen R. Palumbi, Ana M. Parma, Daniel Ricard, Andrew R. Rosenberg, Reg Watson,
and Dirk Zeller. 2009. “Rebuilding Global Fisheries.” Science 325 (5940): 578-85.
Young, Oran R. 1994. "The Problem of Scale in Human/Environmental Relationships." Journal
of Theoretical Politics 6 (4): 429-47.
Young, Oran R. 2010. Institutional Dynamics: Emerging Patterns in International
Environmental Governance, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Young, Oran R. 2011. "Effectiveness of International Environmental Regimes: Existing
Knowledge, Cutting-edge Themes, and Research Strategies," Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1111690108

90

