NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HYSTERESIS AND THE EUROPEAN
UNEMPLOYMENT PROBLEM

Olivier J. Blanchard

Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 1950

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1986

We have benefited from the hospitality of the Center for Labour
Economics at the LSE. Richard Layard has been especially generous
in helping us in a variety of ways. We thank David Grubb, John
Martin and Andrew Newell for providing us with data, and Michael
Burda, Robert Waldman, Changyong Rhee and Fernando Ramos for
research assistance. We thank Stanley Fischer, David Metcalf,
Steven Nickell, James Poterba and Andre Shleifer and participants
in the NBER macro conference at which this paper was presented for
useful discussions and comments. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations and
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #1950
June 1986

Hysteresis and the European Unemployment Problem

ABSTRACT

European unemployment has been steadily increasing for the last 15 years and is
expected to remain very high for many years to come. In thi5 paper, we argue that
this fact implies that shocks have much more persistent effects on unemployment than
standard theories can possibly explain. We develop a theory which can explain such

persistence, and which is based on the distinction between insiders and outsiders in
wage bargaining. We argue that if wages are largely set by bargaining between
insiders and firms, shocks which affect actual unemployment tend also to affect
equilibrium unemployment. We then confront the theory to both the detailed facts of
the European situation as well as
such as

to

earlier periods of high persistent unemployment

the Great Depression in the US.

Olivier J. Blanchard
Department of Economics
M.I.T.

Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University

Cambridge, MA 02139

Cambridge, MA 02138

After 20 years of negligible unemployment, most of Western Europe has suffered

since the early 70's a protracted period of high and rising unemployment. In the

United Kingdom unemployment peaked it 3.3 percent over the 1945—1970 period, but
has risen almost continuously since 1970, and now stands at over 12 percent. For the
Common Market nations as a whole, the unemployment rate more than doubled between

1970 and 19B0 and has again doubled since then. Few forecasts call for a significant
decline in unemployment over the next several years, and none call for its return to
levels close to those that prevailed in the 1950's and 1960's.
These events are not easily accounted for by conventional classical or Keynesian

macroeconomic theories. Rigidities associated with fixed length contracts, or the
costs of adjusting prices or quantities are unlikely to be large enough to account

for rising unemployment over periods of a decade or more. And intertemporal
substitution in labor supply is surely not an important aspect of such a protracted

downturn. The sustained upturn in European unemployment challenges the premise of
most macroeconomic theories that there exists some "natural" or "non—accelerating
inflation" rate of unemployment towards which the economy tends to gravitate and at
which the level of inflation remains constant. The European experience compels
consideration of alternative theories of "hysteresis" which contemplate the
possibility that increases in unemployment have a direct impact on the "natural" rate
of unemployment.

This paper explores theoretically and empirically the idea of macroeconomic
hysteresis——the substantial persistence of unemployment and the protracted effects of

shocks on unemployment. Our particular motivation is the current European situation.
We seek explanations for the pattern of high and rising unemployment that has
prevailed in Europe for the past decade and for the very different performance of the

2

labor market in the United States and Europe, and reach some tentative conclusions
about the extent to which European unemployment problems can be solved by

expansionary demand policies. The central hypothesis we put forward is that
hysteresis resulting from membership considerations plays an important role in
explaining the current European depression In particular and persistent high

unemployment in general. The essential point is that there is a fundamental
assymetry in the wage setting process between insiders who are employed and outsiders

who are want jobs. Outsider; are disenfranchised and wages are set with a view to
insuring the jobs of insiders. Shocks which lead to reduced employment change the
number of insiders and thereby change the subsequent equilibrium wage rate, giving

rise to hysteresis. Membership considerations can therefore explain the general
tendency of the equilibrium unemployment rate to follow the actual unemployment rate.
A number of types of empirical evidence consistent with cur hypothesis are adduced.

The paper is organized as follows
Section 1 documents the dimensions of the current European depression. It
documents, by looking at the movements in unemployment in the United States and
United Kingdom over the past century, that high unemployment is In fact often quite
persistent. It reviews standard explanations of the current European situation and
finds them lacking. It then considers a number of mechanisms through which high
persistence of unemployment could be generated.
Section 2 explores what we find the most promising of the possible mechanisms
for generating hysteresis.

It presents a formal model Illustrating how temporary

shocks can have a permanent effect on the level of employment In contexts where wages

are set by employers who bargain with insiders. Persistence results in this setting
because shocks change employment and membership in the group of insiders, thus
influencing its subsequent bargaining strategy. We then discuss the role of unions
and whether such effects can arise In non union settings.

3

Section 3 examines the behavior of post war Europe in light of our theory of

hysteresis. It presents direct evidence on the role of unions, on the behavior o
wages and employment and on the composition of unemployment. We find the European
eKperience quite consistent with our model. Europe appears to have high hysteresis,
much more so than the US. High unemployment in Europe and low unemployment in the US

are well explained both by different sequences o shocks, especially in the 19G0s,
and by different propagation mechanisms, with Europe exhibiting more persistence than
the US.

Section 4 returns to an issue which is oi fundamental importance for policy.
Granting that Europe has more hysteresis than the US, is it really due to unions or

is hysteresis itse1 endogenous, being triggered by bad times ? In an attempt to
answer this question, the section compares Europe now to Europe earlier when
unemployment was low, and compares the current European depression to the US Great

depression. This last comparison is especially important, given the ability o the US
to drastically decrease unemployment in 1939 and 1940, mostly through aggregate
demand.

The conclusion summarizes our beliefs and doubts, and draws the implications o4
our analysis for policy.

4

1. The Record of Persistent Unemployment

We start this section by documenting the dimensions of the current European
depression. We then demonstrate that persistently high unemployment like that

experienced in Europe at present is not historically unusual. Data for the past
century suggest a surprisingly high degree of persistence in unemployment in both the

United States and United Kingdom. We argue that such persistence is not easily
explained by standard natural rate theories and conclude that theories which allow
for hysteresis, by which we mean a very high dependence of current unemployment on
past unemployment11 are required to explain such persistence.

1.1

The European Deession

Table 1 presents some information on the evolution of unemployment in three
major European countries as well as the US over the past 25 years. While European
unemployment rates in the 1960's were substantially lower than those in the United

States, unemployment rates in Europe today are substantially greater than current US

unemployment rates. The unemployment rate in the United States has fluctuated
considerably, rising from 4.8 to 8.3 percent in the 1973—1975 recession then
declining to 5.8 percent in 1979, then rising to 9.7 percent in 1982 before declining
to around 7.0 percent today.
inexorably since 1973.

In contrast, unemployment in Europe has risen seemingly

In France, the unemployment rate has

increased

in every

single year since 1973, while it has declined only twice in Germany and the United

Kingdom. The differences between the European countries and the United States are
most pronounced after 1980. While the US unemployment rate is at roughly its 1980

Table 1

European and U.S. Unemployment
1961—1986

United States

United Kingdom

France

West Germany

1961—1970

4.7

1.9

.9

.8

1971—1975

6.1

2.8

2.6

1.8

1976—1980

6.7

5.2

5.3

3.7

1980

7.1

6.0

6.4

3.4

1981

7.6

9.2

7.7

4.8

1982

9.7

10.6

8.7

6.9

1983

9.6

11.6

8.8

8.4

1984

7.5

11.8

9.9

8.4

1985

7.3

12.0

10.7

8.4

1986*

7.2

11.7

10.9

8.0

Source. Annual Economic Review, Commission of the European Communities, 1986.
*

Forecast.

5
level, the unemployment rate has approximately doubled in the three European
countries. The rapid decline in US unemployment after 19B2 contrasts sharply with the
continuing increase in unemployment in Europe. The last line of the table gives
forecast; of unemployment by the European Commission for 198ó i they show little
expected change. Longer run forecasts are very similar t

baseline

projections by the

European Commission put unemployment for the EEC as a whole at 10.4% in 1990,
compared to 10.B% in 1985.

Differences in unemployment rates actually understate the differences in the

performance of American and European labor markets over the past decade. Europe has
suffered the concomitants of high unemployment——reduced labor force participation and
involuntarily reductions in hours—— to a much greater extent than has the United

States. Between 1975 and 1983, the labor force participation rate of men in the
United States remained constant, while the corresponding rate in OECD Europe declined

by six percent. Average annual hour; worked declined by 2.7 percent in the United
States between 1975 and 1982 compared with declines of 7.5 percent in France and 8.1

percent in England. Perhaps the most striking contrast of the labor market
performance; of Europe and the United States is the observation that between 1975 and
1985 employment increased by 25 percent, or about 25 million jobs in the United
States while declining in absolute terms in Europe.

1.2. Unemployment Rates in the UK and the US over the_last__lOOyears

European unemployment has steadily Increased and, pending an unexpected change
in policy, is expected to remain at this new higher level for the foreseable future.

How unusual is such high and persistent unemployment? To answer this question, we
now examine the behavior of unemployment over the last 100 years in both the UK and
the US.

6

Figures 1 and 2 plot unemployment for each of the two countries, for the perod
1890—1985 for the UK, and 892—19B5 for the US.2
Estimation of an AR(1) process for the whole sample for each country gives i

UK 8 U • .93

u(—1) + e .

2.1

.90 u(—1) + e ; .

2.0

%

(.04)

US : u

(.04)

In both cases, the degree of first order serial correlation is high.
Unemployment is indeed surprisingly persistent. It exhibits at best a weak tendency
to return to its mean.

Examination of the two figures ——as well as statistical work——suggests that the
evolution of the unemployment rate over the past 100 years is however not well

captured by any simple linear autoregressive representation. The degree of
persistence as captured by the degree of first order serial correlation reported
above arises in large part from relatively in4requent changes in the level around

which unemployment fluctuates. In the UK, when unemployment goes up from 1920 to
1940, it shows little tendency during that period to return to its pre 1920 level

it then returns to a low level during WWII, to stay there until the 190s. The
current episode, both past and forecast, isa second instance in which unemployment,
after having sharply increased, stabilizes at a new, high level. The US experienced a

sustained increase in unemployment from 1929 to 1939, only to see unemployment drop
sharply during arid after th. war to a new, much lower, level. When the degree of
persistence In unemployment is estimated separately for periods of high and low
average unemployment, there is some weak evidence of greater persistence within
periods of high average unemployment.

UKUR

20

15

U. K.

10—

5±

1880

FIGURE
1.

1920

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE

1900

1940

1960

1980

USUR

25

20

15

10—

5—

0—

FICURE 2

1900

1920

t

U.S. UNEMPLOYMENT RATE

1880

I

1940

I

1960

1980

7

The time series studied in isolation give little indication as

to

the cause of

the changes in the mean level, which account for much of the persistence in
unemployment.

They could be exogenous or instead be triggered by unemployment

itself, with a few years of high unemployment triggering an increase in the mean
level of unemployment, a few years of low unemployment triggering in turn a decrease
in that level. In the absence of a tight specification of how this triggering occurs
we do not believe that the data can easily distinguish between these two

possibilities and we shall not attempt to do so at this stage.
Our finding that unemployment exhibits a very high degree of persistence over
the past century parallels the findings of Nelson and Plosser (1982), Campbell and
Mankiw [1986) and others that a variety of economic variables follow random walks or
other non—stationary processes.

In many cases such findings can be easily

rationalized by recognizing that the level of technology is likely to be non—
stationary and that other variables like the level of output depend on productivity.
But the failure of unemployment to display more of a mean reverting tendency is
troubling.

It is unlikely that non stationarity in productivity can account for the

persistence of unemployment since the secular increase in productivity has not been
associated with any trend or upwards drift In unemployment.

1.3. Diagnosinj UnernpLyentProbleffis

What sort of theories can account for persistent high unemployment in general

and th. current European experience in particular? We

highlight

the

difficulties one encounters in explaining persistent unemployment by focusing on the
problem of explaining the current European situation. The central puzzle it poses is

its persistence. While it Is easy to point to substantial, adverse supply and demand

B

shocks over the last 15 years, we argue that our standard theories do not easily

explain how they have had such enduring effects on the level of unemployment .

Aggregate demand

There is little question that Europe has been affected by large adverse demand
shocks, especially since 1980 (see for example Dornbusch et ii. 1983). In the 1980s,
Europe has to a large extent matched tight US monetary policy while at the same time
engaging in a major and prolonged fiscal contraction (see Blanchard and Summers 1984
for the UK, Germany and France ; see Buiter 19B5 far a more detailed study of the UK
fiscal policy).

But to the extent that aggregate demand shocks do not affect the equilibrium or
natural rate of unemployment, one would expect sustained high unemployment to be
associated with rapid declines in the rate of inflation. More generally, standard

models of the effects of aggregate demand shocks would not predict that previous

estimates of the relationship between inflation and unemployment would break down.
There is substantial evidence however that this relation has broken down and that
there has been a much smaller decline in inflation than would have been predicted by

past relationships. Below we examine the relation between wage inflation and
unemployment in detail. But the basic point that previous relations have broken down
is evidenced in Table 2 which gives the rates of inflation and unemployment in 19B4

and 1985 for the United Kingdom, France and Germany. Despite the high rates of
unemployment, there Is no sign of disinflation, with the United Kingdom and Germany
experiencing a small increase in inflation and France a small decrease. Econometric
estimates of the rate of unemployment consistent with stable Inflation show rapid
increases over the past decade. Layard et ii (1984), using crude time trends in a

Table 2

Inflation and Unemployment in the U.K., France and Germany

1984—1985

France

United Kingdom

Germany
U

U

•T1

U

71

1984

4.4

11.8

7.0

9.9

1.9

8.4

1985

5.5

12.0

5.7

10.7

2.1

8.4

IT

= Rate

u

= Unemployment

71

of change of GDP deflator.

Source. Annual Economic Review, Commission of the European Communities, 1986.

9

Phillips curve relation, find the unemployment rate consistent with steady inflation
to have risen from 2.4 in 1967—70 to 9.2 in 19B1-19B3 in Britain, from 1.3 to 6.2 in

Germany and from 2.2 to 6.9 in France. Coe and Gagliardi (1985), also within the
framework of the Phillips curve but using instead of a time trend a battery of
potential determinants of equilibrium unemployment as right hand side variables,

obtain roughly similar results. aggregate demand shocks have clearly played a role
in explaining the increase in European unemployment

but they cannot be the whole

story given the increase in the rate of unemployment consistent with steady
inflation.

Aggregate supply

Aggregate supply explanations appear more promising if the goal is to explain an
increase in equilibrium unemployment. This is indeed the approach followed by much of

the recent research. Sachs U979,1983] and Bruno and Sachs (1985] have argued that
unemployment in Europe is in large part the result of a combination of adverse supply

shocks and real wage rigidity. The argument is that real wages do not adjust to
clear the labor market so that adverse supply shocks which reduce the demand for

labor at a given real wage create unemployment. This argument has two parts, real
wage rigidity and the occurence of adverse supply shocks. We start by reviewing the
evidence on the second.

Table 3 presents some information on the behavior of various supply factors with
a potential bearing on unemployment in the UK since 1960k.

Table 3

Supply Factors and U.K. Unemployment

Year

Unemployment
Rate (%)

Replacement

Rate

(%)

Mismatch

Index

(%)

Productivity

Growth

(%)

Change in

Tax Wedge (%)

1960

2.3

42

1965

2.3

48

41

2.8

1.0

1970

3.1

51

38

3.2

1.0

1975

4.7

49

43

2.7

.8

1976

6.0

50

38

1.5

2.8

1977

6.4

51

35

1.7

1.9

1978

6.1

50

35

1.4

—.9

1979

5.6

46

35

2.1

1.3

1980

6.9

45

37

1.5

1.3

1981

10.6

50

41

1.4

2.6

1982

12.8

54

37

1.1

1.0

1983

13.1

54

.5

—1.8

1.9

Notes.

a) Standardized unemployment rate; source OECD.
b) Weighted average of replacement rates relevant to families of different sizes.
Source: Layard and Nickell (1985).
where u. and v. are the proportions of unemployment
c) Index constructed as Z I u.—v.
and vacancies in occupatioi i1respective±y. Soirce: Layard, Nickell and Jackman
(1984).

d) Rate of change of total factor productivity growth, derived by assuming labor
augmenting technical change. The first four numbers refer to the change in the
rate (at annual rate) over the previous five years. Source: Layard and Nickell
(1985).
e) The tax wedge is the sum of the employment tax rate levied on employers and of
direct and indirect tax rates levied on employees. The first four numbers refer
to the change in the rate (at annual rates) over the previous five years. Source:
Layard and Nickell (1985).

10

A first candidate is ymplo

t_bene!. Unemployment insurance may raise

unemployment if it causes workers to search longer or less intensively for jobs,
reducing the pressure that unemployment puts on wages. The second column of table 3
gives the average replacement ratio, that is the average ratio of after tax
unemployment benefits to earnings for different categories of workers ; it shows no

clear movement over time. This is not necessarily conclusive evidence against a role
for unemployment benefits : one can easily envision mechanisms through which
increases in unemployment benefits lead to higher real wages, higher unemployment but

little or no change in the replacement ratio. Indeed, another way of reading the
column is that it shows an increase in real unemployment benefits of roughly 30Y.
since 1970. Furthermore, it has been argued that the principle changes in

unemployment insurance have occurred through changes in eligibility rules rather than
benefit levels. Attempts to estimate the effect of unemployment benefits on
unemployment have not been very successful (see Minford (19B2) and Nickell (1984) for
further discussion) and one is led to conclude that the increase in unemployment
benefits probably does not account for a large portion of the increase in
unemployment.

A second candidate explanation is structural__chang. The argument is that the
need for large scale reallocation of labor associated with structural change tends to

Increase unemployment. Often it is suggested that the energy shocks of the 1970's

increased the rate of structural change and soled to higher unemployment. The
adjustment to structural changes may be complicated by real wage rigidity. The
fourth column of Table 3 presents the Index of mismatch" developed by Layard,
Nickell and Jackman (1984). The index triei to represent the degree of structural
change In the economy by examining the extent to which unemployment and vacancies

occur in the same sectors. The results In the table look at occupational mismatch,

Ii

but results are largely similar when industrial and regional measures are used.
There is little evidence of an increase in the rate of structural change since the
1960's when the unemployment rate was consistently low.
Perhaps the most common supply based explanations for persistent high
unemployment involve 'Factors which reduce labor productivity and or drive a wedge

between the cost of labor to 'Firms and the wage workers receive. The fourth and
fifth columns of the table give time series for total__4actor productivity growth and

the change in the tax wedg'. It is clear 'From the table that there has been a
substantial reduction in the rate of total 'Factor productivity growth in the wake of

the oil shocks. Over the years the total tax wedge has also risen substantially, by
30% since 1960, by 10% since 1970. While it is still true that the real after—tax
wage consistent with full employment has risen fairly steadily, it has increased more
slowly than it had in the first half of the post war period.

The problem with aggregate supply explanations
We have now documented the presence of adverse supply developments relative to
what might have been expected in the early 1970's. But for these shocks to have a
long lasting effect on unemployment, there must be long lasting real wage rigidity.
If and when labor supply becomes inelastic, supply shocks are then reflected in real

wages, not in unemployment. Individual labor supply is surely largely inelastic in

the long run. As with aggregate demand explanations, we face the problem of
explaining the mechanism that causes shocks to have long lived effects.

Recent models of union behavior (notably McDonald Solow 1981) have addressed
this problem by showing that if wages are the result of bargaining between unions and
firms, the result may be real wage rigidity, with shocks affecting employment only.

There is however a fundamental difficulty with this line of argument. To take the

12

model developed by McDonald and Solow, if real wages were truly rigid at a rate

determined by the interaction of union preferences and firms production technology,
employment would steadily increase and unemployment steadily decrease through time.
Annual productivity improvements due to technical change are equivalent to favorable

supply shocks. As long as productivity increments and capital accuulation led to the
demand curve for labor shifting outwards faster than the population grew,

unemployment would decline. This appears counterfactual'. Even over the last decade,
the cumulative impact of productivity growth has almost certainly more than
counterbalanced the adverse supply shocks that occurred.
To rescue this line of thought, it must be argued that real wages are rigid

along some norm", which may increase over time. But this has two implications. The
first is that the dynamic effects of supply shocks on employment then depend on the
way the norm adjusts to actual productivity arid this isleft unexplained. The second
and more important one here is that adverse supply shocks have an effect only as long
as the norm has not adjusted to actual productivity. Thus, unless the norm never
catches up with actual productivity, adverse supply shocks cannot affect unemployment
permanently. It seems implausible that the current persistence of high unemployment

can all be attributed to lags in learning about productivity. Both the United
I<ingdom and the United States have experienced enormous productivity gains without

evident reduction in unemployment over the last century. High unemployment therefore
cannot be blamed simply on poor productivity performance.

It can only be attributed

to surprises in productivity performance. But then it is hard to see how to explain
protracted unemployment from lower productivity growth.

13

Where does this leave us ?

We have argued •that there is plenty of evidence of

adverse shocks, be it lower than expected productivity growth, Increases in the price

of oil or in the tax wedge in the 1970s or contractionary aggregate demand policies
in the 1980's. But we have also argued that standard theories do not provide us with
convincing explanations of how these shocks can have such a sustained effect on

unemployment. Put differently, it is difficult to account for the apparent increase
in the equilibrium rate of unemployment ——or equivalently in the unemployment rate

consistent with stable inflation—— by pointing to these shocks. Borrowing from the
business cycle terminology, it is not difficult to find evidence of negative impulses

the difficulty Is in explaining the propagation mechanism. This leads us to look
for mechanisms that can explain the propagation of adverse supply or demand shocks

over long periods of time. These include the possibility that current unemployment
depends directly and strongly on past unemployment0. We now consider various channels
through which this may happen.

1.4.Theories of Hysteresis

Three types of explanation which loosely speaking might be referred to as the
"physical capital", "human capital",and "insider—outsider' stories can be adduced to

explain why shocks which cause unemployment In a single period might have long term
effects.

The physical capital story simply holds that reductions in the capital stock
associated with the reduced employment that accompanies adverse shocks reduce the

subsequent demand for labor and so cause protracted unemployment. This argument is
frequently made in the current European context where it Is emphasized that, despite
the very tubstantial increase in the unemployment rate that has occurred, capacity

14

utilization is at fairly normal levels. For the EEC as a whole, capacity utilization
has shown no trend over the last decade.

It currently stands at 81 percent compared

with 76 percent in 1975, 83 percent in 1979, and 76 percent in 1983.

It is then

argued that the existing capital stock is simply inadequate to employ the current
labor force.

We are somewhat skeptical of the argument that capital accumulation effects can

account for high unemployment for two reasons. First, as long as there are some
possibilities for substitution of labor for capital ex—post, reductions in the

capital stock affect the demand for labor just like adverse supply shocks. As noted
above, it is unlikely that an anticipated supply shock would have an important effect
on the unemployment rate. Second, as we discuss in Section 4 below, substantial
disinvestment during the 1930's did not preclude the rapid recovery of employment

associated with rearmarment in a number of other countries. Nor did the very
substantial reduction in the size of the civilian capital stock that occurred during

the War prevent the attainment of full employment after the War in many countries.
The argument that reduced capital accumulation has an important effect on the level
of unemployment is difficult to support with historical examples.

A second and perhaps more important mechanism works through "human capital"

broadly defined. Persuasive statements of the potentially important effects of
unemployment on human capital accumulation and subsequent labor supply may be found

in Phelps t1972] and Hargraves—Heap (1980]bo. Some suggestive empirical evidence may
be found in Clark and Summers (19821. Essentially, the human capital argument holds
that workers who are unemployed lose the opportunity to maintain and update their

skills by working. Particularly for the long term unemployed, the atrophy of skills
may combine with disaffection from the labor force associated with the inability to

find a job, to reduce the effective supply of labor. Early retirement may for

15

example be a semi—irreversible decision. More generally, if for incentive or human
capital reasons employers prefer workers with long horizons, it may be very difficult

for middle aged workers to find new jobs. A final point is that in a high
unemployment environment, it will be difficult for reliable and able workers to

signal their quality by holding jobs and being promoted. The resulting
inefficiencies in sorting workers may reduce the overall demand for labor.
Beyond the adverse effects on labor supply generated by high unemployment, the

benefits of a high pressure economy are foregone. Clark and Summers (1982]
demonstrate that in the United States at least World War II had a long lasting effect

in raising female labor force participation. Despite the baby boom,

in 1950 the

labor force participation of all female cohorts that were old enough to have worked
during the War was significantly greater than would have been predicted on the basis

of pre—War trends. The causal role of participation during the War is evidenced by
the fact that the participation of very young women who could not have worked during

the War was actually lower than would have been predicted on the basis of earlier

trends. Similarly, research by Ellwood (1981] suggests that teenage unemployment may
leave some "permanent scars" on subsequent labor market performance. One channel
through which this may occur is family composition. The superior labor market
performance of married men with children has been noted many times. The effect of the
Great Depression on fertility rates, both in the US and in Europe, has often been
noted.

Gauging the quantitative importance of human capital mechanisms generating
hysteresis is very difficult.

Some of the arguments, early retirement for example,

suggest that labor force participation should decline rather than that unemployment

should increase In the aftermath of adverse shocks. Perhaps a more fundamental
problem is that to the extent that there is some irreversibility associated with

16

unemployment shocks, it becomes more difficult to explain why temporary shocks have
such large short run effects.

If early retirement is forever, why should it be taken

in response to a temporary downturn ? Overall, while it seems likely that human
capital mechanisms can explain some of the protracted response to shocks, it is
doubtful that they are sufficient to account completely for the observed degree of
persi stence.

A third mechanism that can generate persistence and that we regard as the most
promising relies on the distinction between "insider' and "outsider" workers,

developed in a series of contributions by Lindbeck (see Lindbeck and Snower (19BJ
for example) and used in an important paper by Gregory (1B5] to explain the behavior

of the Australian economy. To take an extreme case, suppose that all wages are set
by bargaining between employed workers——the 'insiders"——and firms, with outsiders

playing no role in the bargaining process. Insiders are concerned with maintaining
their jobs, not insuring the employment of outsiders. This has two implications.
First, in the absence of shocks, any level of employment of insiders is self—

sustaining; insiders just set the wage so as to remain employed. Second and more
importantly: in the presence of shocks, employment follows a process akin to a random
walk; after an adverse shock for example, which reduces employment, some workers lose
their insider status and the new smaller group of insiders sets the wage so as to

maintain this new lower level of employment. Employment and unemployment show no
tendency to return to their pre shock value, but are instead determined by the

history of shocks. This example is extreme but nevertheless suggestive.

It suggests

that, if wage bargaining is a prevalent feature of the labor market, the dynamic
interactions between employment and the size of the group of insiders may generate

substantial employment and unemployment persistence. This is the argument we explore
in detail in the next section.

17

A Theory of Unemployment Persistence

2.

This section develops a theory of unemployment persistence based on the
distinction between insiders and outsiders. As the example sketched at the end of the
previous section makes clear, the key assumption of such a theory is that of the
relation between employment status and insider status. We can think of this key
assumption as an assumption about membership rules, the rules which govern the

relation between employment status and membership in the group of insiders. The
possibility of persistent fluctuations in employment arises because changes in
employment may change the group's membership and thereby alter its objective
functi on1

In

1

the

first part of this section, we develop a partial equilibrium model of

bargaining between a group of insiders and a representative firm and characterize
employment dynamics under alternative membership rules (We use the term "groupt1

rather than the more natural 'unicn to avoid preiudging the issue of whether the
membership considerations we stress are important only in settings wfrere formal

unions are present). The second part of the section extends the analysis to a general
equilibrium setting and shows how both nominal and real shocks can have permanent
effects on unemployment. In the remaining part of the section, we consider mainly two
issues ; the first is that of the endogeneity of membership rules. The second is that
of whether our analysis is Indeed relevant only or mostly in explicit union
s.tttlngs.

2.1. A Model of Membership Rules and Employment Dynamics.

is

To focus on the dynamic effects of membership rules on the decision of the group
of insiders the ugroupil for short, we formalize the firm am entirely passive, as

presenting

a

labor demand on which the group chooses its preferred outcome. We

start by characterizing employment and wages in a one period model. In a one period
model, initial membership Is given and membership rules are obviously irrelevant. But
it is a useful intermediate step, which will allow us to contrast our later results

with traditional ones which treat membership as exogenous. Throughout, we make no
attempt at generality and use convenient functional forms and some approximations to
retain analytical simplicity.

The One Period Model

The group has Initial membership no (in logarithms, as are all variables in what

follows, unless otherwise mentioned). It faces a labor demand function given by
(2.1) n

— cw + e

where n is employment, w is the real wage and e is a random technological shock,
with mean Ee, uniformly distributed between tEe—a, Ee+a). The coefficient a captures
the degree of uncertainty associated with labor demand. The group must decide on a
wage w before it knows the realisation of e. Given w and the realisation of e, the
firm then chooses labor according to the labor demand function. If n exceeds no, fl
no outsiders are hired. If n is less than no, flofl insiders are laid off. The

probability of being laid off is the same for all insiders.

Before specifying the objective function of the group, we can derive, for given
w and flo1 the probability of being employed. The probability of being employed for an

insider is equal to one if n>no. For n<no, we approximate the probability (which is

19

not in logarithm) of being employed for an insider by 1—n+n. This approximation will
be good as long as n is not too much smaller than flo. Under this. assumptions, the

probability p of being employed is given by (all derivations are in the appendix)

(2.2)

p • 1 —

(1/4a)(no

+cw — Ec +

a)2

1

for flo + cw

Ee — a

for no + cw

Ee — a

14 even under the worst outcome——which is e.Ee—a and thus n.—cw+Ee—a —_ n is
larger than flog then the probability of employment is clearly equal to one.

Otherwise, the probability is an

increasing

function of expected productivity Ee, a

decreasing function of initial membership floe and

of the wage w. It is also a

decreasing function of the degree of uncertainty a

the larger a, the lower the

probability of being employed in bad times, while the probability remains equal to
one in good times.

The second step is to derive the choice of w.

This requires specifying the

utility function of the group. The group maximises the utility function of the
representative group member, which we specify as t
U

p + bw

Utility is linear in the probability of employment and the wage. This
specification is not the mast natural but it is however attractive, for two reasons.
The first reason is that, as will be seen below, it

implies,

together with the

specification of probabilities given above, that the group exhibits the stochastic
equivalent of inelastic labor supply u an increase in Ee is entirely reflected in an
Increase in real wages and leaves the probability of employment unchanged. We have

argued in the previous section that this is a desirable feature of any model o4 wage
determination given the absence of major trends in unemployment rates over long

20

periods of time(. Note however that our assumption of stochastically inelastic
labor supply Ii the opposite of that used by McDonald and Solow. Where they postulate
a

rigid

real wage so that the labor supply curve is perfectly elastic, we postulate

perfectly inelastic labor supply. The second reason is that it Is analytically
convenient.

Replacing p by its value from (2.2) and solving for the optimal wage w gives:
• (1/c)(—no + Ee +

a(2(b/c)—1))

Replacing In labor demand gives
n

flo —

a(2(b/c)—1)

+

(e—Ee)

Replacing w in equation (2.2) and rearranging gives the optimal probability
1—a(b/c)2

Thus the wage depends negatively on initial membership. As by definition E(e—Ee)
• 0, whether expected employment exceeds membership depends on the sign of a(2(b/c)—
1) thus on whether b/c is less than 1/2 or not. The lower b, the more importance
workers attach to employment protection as opposed to the wage; the higher c, the
smaller the wage reduction required to increase expected employment. If b/c is less
than 1/2, workers set a wage low enough to imply expected net hirings of outsiders by
the firm. Note, as mentioned above that the optimal probability of being employed
depends neither on the initial membership nor on expected productivity11.
Until now, the analysis has been rather conventional: Given the Initial
membership, Insiders choose a wage. This wage and the realisation of a disturbance
determine employment. But when we go from this one period model to a dynamic one,

there may well be a relation between employment this period and next periods
membership. This relation will depend on the form of membership rules. We now examine
how this affects employment dynamics.

21

We first define membership rules. We can think of various membership rules as
being indexed by m. Those workers who have been working in the firm for the last m

periods belong to the group, are insiders. Workers who have been laid off for more
than a periods lose membership45, become outsiders. There are two extreme cases: the
first is the case where a is equal to infinity, so that the initial membership never

changes. The second is the case where m1 so that membership always coincides with
current employment. The extreme cases highlight the effects of alternative
membership rules so we consider them before turning to the more difficult
intermedi ate case.

The case of a constant membership (minfinity)

Let us denote by n beginning of period i membership, and by fli

realised

employment in period i. In the present case, membership is equal to n0 forever. So,

each period, if n1 exceeds no, all members work ; if n is less than no,

the

probability of being employed is given for each member by (approximately) 1—no+n1. We

assume that the one period utility function of a worker is given, as above, by (p +

bw)

and that the workers discount factor is equal to 0. Thus the utility o4 a

member as of time zero is given by:

+ bw] where e Is less than one
U0 • Eo E
1—0
Assume for the moment that the shocks affecting labor demand are uncorrelated

e Cp

over time, or more precisely that e

is

lid, uniform on t—a,+al. (We shall return

below to the case of serially correlated shocks). Then by the analysis of the
previous section, the probability of being employed in period I, conditional on wi is

given by (using the fact that Ee

0) i

22
Pt

•1
1 —

(1/4a)(n0

c

+

Wi

+ 1)2

for no+ CWi

—a

for

—1

no+ CWa

Given that employment outcomes do not affect future membership, and given the
assumption that shocks are white noise, the problem faced by members is the same
every period, and thus its solution is the same as that derived above:

(2.3) Wa

•

(1/c)
—

(—

no + a(2(b/c)—1) )

a(2(b/c)—1)

+

and

ci

In response to white noise shocks, employment will also be white noise. Whether
employment is on average larger or smaller than membership depends on whether (b/c)
Is smaller or larger than 1/2. If the insiders want strong employment protection,
they will choose a wage so that, on average, employment exceeds membership and the
firm has a cushion of outsiders who are laid off first in case of adverse shocks.

It is easy to see that the result that employment is white noise will continue

to hold regardless of the stochastic process followed by e. As shown above, our
assumptions Insure that labor supply Ii stochastically inelastic. Changes in the
expected value of e

affect

Dnly the deviation of e

real wages but do not affect the level of employment.

from its expected value affects the level of employment. By

the properties of rational expectations, the unexpected component of e must be
serially uncorrelated.

Th. case where membership equals employment (m1)

23

We now go to the opposite extreme, in which membership comes and goes with
employment. In this case membership at time i is simply given by employment at time
i—I

14 the group kept the same decision rule as in equation (2.3) but

,'i •

applied it to iii rather than to no, equation (2.3) would become :

(2.3') n •

n—

—

a(2(b/c)—1) + e

Thus, employment would follow a random walk, with drift. Optimal wage behavior
under the assumption that membership equals beginning of period employment is however
not given by (2.3'). Unlike the behavior implied by (2.3') current members should

recognize their inability to commit future memberships to wage policies. The
subsequent policies of the group will depend on its then current membership. This
changes fundamentally the character of the maximization problem. The group
membership, when taking wage decisions today, knows that wage decisions will be taken
next period by a membership which will in general be different from that of today.
This implies in particular that if an insider ii laid o44, he becomes an outsider and

thus considerably decreases his chances of keeping employment with the firm

this

presumably leads him to choose a lower wage than in the previous case, where being
laid off did not affect his future chances of being hired's.

The formal solution to this problem Ii treated in th. appendix. Even with the
simplifying assumptions we have made so far, the problem Is intractable unless we

further simplify by linearizing the group's intertemporal objective function. Let w'
be the wage around which the objective junction is linearized and let the shocks to
labor demand be white noise. The solution to the maximization problem is then

w •
(2.4) fli

(1/c)(— flt_t +a(2(b/c)(1/(1+bOw'))—l))

• ni—i —

a(2(b/c)(1/(1+b$w'))—i)

+ e

The probability of employment for a member Is a constant and Ii given by i

24
1 —

at(b/c) (l/(1+b8w)))2

Thus, under this membership rule, employment follows a random walk with drift.
For a given labor force, there is unemployment hysteresis. Uncorrelated shocks to
labor demand affect current employment, and through employment, membership and future

expected employment. The drift is positive if (b/c) is less than (1+b$w)/2, if
workers care sufficiently about the probability of employment as compared to the
wage. In such a case, although they do not care about the unemployed, they will set
the wage each period so as to have th. firm hire on average new employees. For a

given membership, the wage is always set lower than in the min4inity case and thus
the probability of employment is set higher; this is because being laid off implies a
loss of membership and imposes a much larger cost than before.
This analysis can again easily be extended to the case where labor demand shocks

are serially correlated. The results remain the same; employment continues to follow
a random walk. This is a consequence of our maintained assumption that expected
changes in labor demand have no effect on the level of employment.

The Intermediate Case (m between 1 and infinity)

The intermediate case where workers remain insiders for some time after losing

their jobs and where newly hired workers eventually but not immediately become

insiders raises an additional conceptual problem. There will no longer be unanimity
among insiders. Those who have already experienced some unemployment, or those who
have been working in the firm for a short period of time, for exampl. will favor more
cautious wage setting policies than those who have not.

A theory of behavior in the

face of conflict between members is beyond our grasp'. A plausible conjecture is

25

that allowing for values of m between 1 and

leads to wage setting policies that are

less cautious than in the oo case but more cautious than in the m1 case.
More importantly, rules corresponding to m between one and infinity are likely
to generate unemployment behavior such that shown in figures 1 and 2, namely
infrequent but sustained changes in the level of unemployment. Short sequences of
unexpected shocks of the same sign have little effect on membership and thus on mean
employment. In the case of adverse shocks, insiders are not laid off long enough to
lose insider status ; in the case of favorable shocks, outsiders do not stay long
enough to acquire membership. But long ——and infrequent—— sequences of shocks of the
same sign have large effect on membership and may lead to large effects on the mean
level of employment. The length of the shock necessary to cause a permanent change in

employment depends on the membership rules. In general there is no reason why these
rules have to be symmetric. The length of time after which an unemployed worker
becomes an outsider need not equal the length of time until a new worker becomes an

insider. Hence favorable and unfavorable shocks may persist to differing extents.

The results of this section have been derived under very specific assumptions,
from fixed membership rules to the assumption that the firm was passive and that
outsiders played no role, direct or indirect, in the negotiation process. We must
return to these assumptions. Before we do so however, we first show how the model of
this section can be used to generate permanent effects on aggregate employment of
both nominal and real shocks.

2.2 Persistent Effects of Nominal and Real Disturbances on Unemployment.

26

We now assume that there are many firms in the economy, each dealing with Its

own group of insider workers. We further assume that wages are set In nominal terms,
so that nominal disturbances can affect employment. We then characterize the effects
of nominal and real disturbances on employment and real wages.

The derived demand for labor facing each group

The economy is composed of marty firms indexed by i, each selling a product which

Is an imperfect substitute for all others, but being otherwise identical. The demand
facing firm J

is

given by

• —k(pj—p) + (rn—p),

k>1

All variables are in logarithms and all constants are ignored for notational

simplicity. The variables yj and pj denote the output and the nominal price charged
by firm j respectively, rn and p denote nominal money and the price level. Demand for

the firms output depends on the relative price as well as on aggregate real money
balances. The restriction on k Is needed to obtain an interior maximum for profit
maximi sation.

Each firm operates under constant returns to scale ; the relation between output
and employment is given by yj •

n.

If wj is the wage that firm i pays its workers,

constant returns and constant elasticity of the demand for goods imply

that prices

are given by p wj — e, where e is a random technological shock, which s assumed
common to all fireshi.

27

Each firm J faces a group of insiders with the same objective function as above,

which chooses a nominal wage and lets the firm determine employment. Biven the
relation between pi and Wj we can think of each group j as choosing Wj subject to
the demand functions

(2.5) nj • k(w—e—p) + (m—p)

The choice of the wage and employment

We now characterize the decisions of each group J at time zero (and for the
moment we do not introduce the time index explicitly). We assume each group to
operate under the membership rule mel, so that at time zero, membership in group J is
given by nj(—l). The group now chooses a nominal rather than a real wage, based on
its expectations of the price level, Ep, nominal money, Em, and the expected value of

the technological shock, Ee, which all enter the derived demand for labor. As we have
shown earlier, given such a demand function and its objective function, it chooses a
wage so that the expected level of employment is equal to its membership plus a
constant term. Ignoring again the constant, this implies i
(2.6)

k(w—Ee—Ep) + (Em — Ep)

•

nj(—l)

which defines implicitly w as a function of nj(—l), Em, Ep and Ee.

To solve for w, we must solve for the value of Ep. We do so under the
assumption of rational expectations. As all firms and groups are the same, and are
all affected by the same aggregate nominal shock, all groups hav• th. same membership
g

nj(—l)

•

n(—l). Furthermore all nominal prices are the same and equal to the price

level, so that the first term in (2.6) is equal to zero. Thus, from C2.6)

28
Ep

Em — n(—1) and
Ee +

Em —

n(—l)

The expected price level depends on expected nominal money and negatively on
membership. The nominal wage in turn depends positively on expected nominal money and
the expected technological shock, and negatively on membership. Replacing Wj and Ep
by their values in (2.5) and aggregating over j gives the equation characterizing the
dynamic behavior of aggregate employment i
n

n(—l) +

(rn—Em)

+

(e—Ee)

or, if we reintroduce the time index 1,

(2.7)

i,a

na—i + (m—Em) + (e±—Ee1)

Shocks, employment and wages.

From (2.7) only unexpected shocks affect employment. In the case of real shocks,
this comes as before from the assumption of inelastic labor supply, which imply that
each group sets wages so as to leave employment unaffected by anticipated real
shocks. In the case of nominal shocks, the result is the same as in other nominal
contract models (Fischer 1977) and the intuition

is

straightforward. Workers set a

nominal wage which, in view of expected aggregate demand, will maintain last periods
level of employment. Firms simply mark up over this nominal wage. Unexpectedly low
aggregate demand leads to unexpected decreases In output and employment, with no
changes In nominal wages (by assumption) and in prices (because of constant
returns) '.

These unexpected nominal and real shock;, unlike other contract models, have
however permanent effects on employment. This is the result of our assumptions about
membership rules. Once employment has decreased, it remains, In the absence of other

29

shocks, permanently at the lower level. A sequence of unexpected contractions in
aggregate demand increases equilibrium unemployment permanently. If we assumed that
m, the membership rule, was greater than one, we would again obtain the result that
while short sequences of adverse shocks had no effect on equilibrium unemployment, a
long sequence of such shocks would increase equilibrium unemployment permanently.

While the implications for employment are straight4orward, the model implies
that there is no simple relation between employment and real wages. Consider in
particular the effects of nominal shocks. By our assumption of constant returns to
scale and constant elasticity of demand, they leave the mark up of prices over wages
unaffected. Equivalently, they leave the real wage unaffected. Thus, a sequence of

adverse nominal disturbances will decrease employment, with no effect on the real
wage. This lack of a simple relation between real wages and employment comes from our
assumptions of monopolistic competition and constant returns, not from our
assumptions about insiders and outsiders. As our
membership rules, we do not

explore

focus

is on the dynamic effects of

the relation between real wages and employment

further. But it is an important caveat to the line of research which has focused on
the role of real wages in "explaining" high European unemployment.

In the model

constructed here, it is quite possible to have sustained high unemployment without
high real wages.

It is also possible for expansionary policies to raise employment

without altering real wages.

2.3. The endogeneity of membership rules

30
In the rest of this section, we return to the original model and examine various
extensions. Here, we focus on the determination of the membership rule;.
We have shown that the time series evolution of employment depends

critically

on

the nature of these rules. To the extent that insider status is closely linked with
employment, substantial persistence is likely to result.

If membership does not

change or changes relatively little when employment changes, employment is likely

to

be much less persistent.
It

is clear

that at any point

in time

optimal to commit the group to maximizing
ignoring

the welfare of those

hereafter. But this means

those who decide about membership, the only

employed are

which is always

find it

their interests indefinitely, while

currently laid off. That is,

the rule ml this period and

therefore

the currently employed would

they would

that If the

like to apply
currently

time consistent rule is m1,

the best current period rule for the currently employed. The issue is

whether the group can precommit itself, or more accurately whether the

currently employed can commit the group to take care of their interest in

whether or not

they are still employed by the firm.

Achieving the mr

solution

is

probably not feasible. But it seem; plausible

that the group will be able to commit itself to at least some extent. The

limiting

the future

the commitment will be the degree of

factor

divergence between the original

membership and th. group of employed workers In some subsequent period. Where the

divergence

controlling

is

too great, current employees will wrest control of the

group

from those

it in the interest; of some group of past workers. The extent to which

groups can commit themselves Is probably greatest where demand shocks are small

that

level and composition

period.

so

of employment change relatively littl, from period to

31

This suggests that m will depend on the distribution of the shocks. If shocks
have large variance, m may have to be close to one to avoid large differences between
membership and the employed. Or m may instead be a function of the realization of the
shocks.

A sequence of large positive or negative unexpected shocks may lead to the

takeover of the group by the then current employees. When a large fraction of
original labor force is on layoff, the incentive for the workers still employed to
ignore them and thus not take the pay cut required to get them back may be strong.

This is much less likely in the face of small shocks. Changes in the value of ii

associated with major shocks provide another possible explanation for coincidence of
persistent and high unemployment.

Our model thus suggests two alternative explanations for the empirical
observation that unemployment remains at high levels for long periods of time.

First, for a given fixed value of m greater than one but less than infinity, a
sequence of adverse shocks will lead to a change In membership and therefore alter

the level of employment permanently. Second, in bad times currently employed workers
are more likely to take over and disenfranchise the unemployed, thus reducing the
value of m and increasing persistence. The two differ in their implications for the
process for unemployment at high levels. In the first, after the level change, the
process for unemployment will have higher mean but the same degree of persistence
around the new mean as it had before. In the second case, unemployment will not only
be higher but exhibit more persistence.

2.4. LimItations and Extensions of the Model

32

In developing our analysis, we have made a number of simplifying assumptions
regarding functional forms and the structure of bargaining between workers and firms.
The question arises of how senstitive our results are to these assumptions.

have

We

also carefully avoided using the term "union" to refer to the group of insiders. But

it

is clear that bunion" would often have sounded more appropriate and the issue

arises of whether our analysis is actually relevant in non union contexts. We now

discuss

these issues informally.

Other bargaining structures

It is well known that even in a one period model, it Is in general inefficient

to let the firm choose employment unilaterally given the wage see

for example

Oswald

(1985)). In our multi—period model, the assumption that the 4irm chooses employment
according to its short run profit maximizing labor demand is even more questionable.
Even i4 bargaining takes the form of the union setting a wage and allowing the 4irm
to control the level of employment, firms will not choose to operate on their short

run labor demand curves. Through its employment decision, the firm can affect future

membership (unless m). By employing more workers this period, it can increase
membership next period and thus lower the expected cost of labor. This will lead the
firm to choose a level of employment higher than that Implied by short run profit
maximization. We suspect that taking account of this consideration would not
substantially

alter our

analysis

of employment dynamics. Rather, It would simply

shift each periods labor demand curve outwards.
Another important possibility would be for the firm to introduce two tier
systems, where newly hired workers get lower wages than those hired previously. Under
such systems, insiders should have no reluctance to let firms hire more workers, and

33

employment should increase until new hirees are paid their reservation wage. The
general reluctance of unions to accept such arrangements, especially in Europe,
suggests that a central issue is that of what happens over time to those hired at
lower wages. Unions do not encourage two tier arrangements at least in part because
of the fear that second tier workers will come to control the wage setting process.
Indeed the rarity of two tier arrangements is strong evidence for the relevance of

the membership considerations stressed here. Without some such consideration, it is
difficult to see why unions do not always favor such systems as a way of maximizing
the rents that they can capture.

Going back to the setting of the wage, if we allow the wage not to be set
unilaterally by the insiders but to be determined by bargaining between insiders and
the firm, wages will depend both on the utility of insiders and on the value of the
firm, the present discounted value of profits. Profit is a decreasing function of the
wage. Thus, the larger is the weight of the firm in bargaining, the lower is the
wage, and thus the higher the average level of employment. The implications for
employment persistence depend on the weight of the firm in bargaining when the wage
Is far from the reservation level of workers. If the firm ii relatively more powerful
when the wage is much above the reservation wage, then the wage will tend to decrease

when it is high, employment will tend to return to a higher level. Whether or not
this happens depends on the structure of bargaining between insiders and the firm.
The specific utility function we have used for insiders Ii also important for

our results. Its main implication, which we have argued is a

desirable

one, is that

the probability of employment chosen by the group is invariant to the size of the
group of Insiders, or to the level of productivity.

If instead an increase in

membership given productivity led the group to choose both a lower wage and a lower
probability of employment —which we can think as the stochastic equivalent of elastic

34

labor supply—, employment would depend on both the anticipated and unanticipated

components of productivity and may show less persistence. Even under the rule m1, an
unanticipated Increase in employment would, if the increase in productivity was
temporary, lead to the choice of a lower wage and a lower probability of employment
in the following period, implying an expected return to the initial level of

employment over time. The same effects would also arise if as unemployment became
larger and being unemployed became more costly, the group chose a higher probability
of employment, leading to an expected increase in employment over time

Groups or Unions ?

Is our analysis still relevant when workers are not formally organized in

unions, when for example wages are simply set unilaterally by the firm ?

The work of Lindbeck and Snower 1985] suggests that even in the absence of
formal unions current workers have some leverage vis a vis firms. And Slichter
(1950] provides confirming empirical evidence suggesting that even before unions were

economically important, wages tended to be high in industries with relatively
inelastic labor demand

In many non—union settings, current incumbent workers and prospective workers

cannot be regarded symmetrically. The requirement of cooperation among workers and
the collective knowledge possessed by incumbent workers make their position very
different from that of prospective new workers.

This leads us to suspect that the

membership considerations we have stressed are at least somewhat applicable even in

non—union contexts. The potential applicability of our analysis to non—union
settings may be argued Informally as follows. Imagine a firm facing a collection of

insider workers. The firm must choose a wage and an employment level. It cannot

35

credibly threaten to lay off all Iti workers and replace them, except at very high

cost, because of the specialized expertise of its labor force. On the other hand,
the firm cannot credibly threaten to replace workers individually with lower wage
workers because the remainder of the labor force will not tolerate the hiring of

"scabs". Under these conditions, wages and expected employment will be set in some
way to divide the surplus resulting from a continued relationship between workers and

firms. Workers will in general be able to extract some surplus even when they are
unorganized.

If firms make an "inadequate" wage offer, they can refuse to work. As

long as they have some specific capital, it will be preferable for management to make
another higher offer rather than lay the worker off.
If agreements are renegotiated only periodically and firms are permitted to vary
employment in the interim1 shocks will in general influence the level of employment.
Even without a formal model of the bargaining process between workers and firms, it
seems reasonable to expect that a reduction in the number of incumbent workers will

lead to the setting of a higher wage and a lower level of expected employment. Thus
persistence in employment, though not necessarily as much as with unions, may result

even in that case. Note that this also may help explain what goes on in th. nonunion sector of economies with large unions.

This argument is clearly tentative. But we conclude from it that, while the
effects we have described are more likely to be present when there are explicit

unions, they may also arise in settings in which insider—outsider considerations are
important.

The presence of a non union sector

36

We finally consider how our conclusions mutt be modified if part of the labor
market is neither unionized nor subject to insider—outsider considerations.
The simplest analysis of a setting with a competitive sector would hold that

there was no involuntary unemployment. Wages in the non—union sector would fall to
the point where all those workers ejected from the union sector could find

employment1. There are at least three reasons why even granting the existence of a
competitive sector, this analysis is suspect. First, competitive firms may be
reluctant to lower wages because of the fear of being unionized after they have

alienated their current labor force. Second, unemployment benefits may be
sufficiently high that the market clearing wage in the non—union sector is below some
workers' reservation wage.
are available.

In one sense their unemployment is voluntary since jobs

In another sense the unemployment is involuntary since the unemployed

may envy workers with the same skill in the union sector. The general consideration
is that when there are wage differentials across jobs, the concept of involuntary

unemployment becomes elusive (see Bulow and Bummers 985 for an elaboration of that
theme). Third, unemployment may occur even with a competitive sector if remaining
unemployed is in some sense useful ——or thought to be useful by workers—— in getting

a union job. This may occur if substantial search effort or queuing is required or
alternatively if accepting a low quality job sends a bad signal to employers. This

unemployment is related to that of Harris and Todaro 197O where workers must
migrate to urban areas to have a chance at high wage urban jobs.

There isa more fundamental point regarding the inability of a non-union sector
to prevent unemployment. As Weitzman t1982) persuasively argues, there are strong
reasons to believe that most economic activity Involves fixed costs and monopolistic

competition. Imagine a monopolistically competitive economy with fixed costs of
production and constant marginal costs where there is initially no involuntary

37

unemployment. Suppose that an adverse demand shock reduces the demand for goods in
this economy but that nominal wages remain constant in all existing firms. Then
employment and output will fall as will the profitability of existing firms. Will it
pay new firms to enter the market and hire the unemployed at low wages? It may not
because unlike incumbent firms, new firms must cover fixed as

well

as variable costs.

Particularly in settings where labor costs do not represent a large fraction o4

sales,

entry may not be able to insure the employment of the unemployedtt. These

considerations may enhance the power of unions because they reduce the incentive to
start up new non—union firms.

3g

3. Empirical Evidence on Hysteresis Theories

Having developed a formal theory of hysteresis, we now examine whether the model

is consistent with the observed patterns of persistently increasing unemployment in
Europe and whether it can illuminate the very different behavior of unemployment in

Europe and the United States in the recent past. We start by giving direct,
institutional evidence on the strength of unions in Europe. We then estimate wage and
employment equations implied by our model, for both the Europe and the US. We finally
examine patterns of labor market turnover, in the UK and the US.

3.1. The role of unions in Europe

The size of the union sector

Our model suggests that, even if hysteresis may arise in non union contexts, it
is probably more likely to arise the stronger and the larger the union sector. Thus,

we start by reviewing the role of unions in Europe

we limit, as before, our

investigation to the UK, France and Germany.22

Membership figures indicate a union density of approximately 45% for the UK, 20%
in France and 38% for Germany. But these figures give very limited information as to

the strength of unions. A better indicator is union coverage, that is of the
proportion of workers covered by some form of collective bargaining. For the UK,
coverage is of approximately 70% for manual workers, and of 557. for non manual

workers. For France and Germany, the proportion of all workers exceeds 80%. But even
coverage numbers are misleading. To understand why, one must be given some
institutional background.

39

On the surface, the three countries appear to be very different. In France there
are three main national unions. In Germany, there are only Industry unions. In the

UK, there is a maze of craft and industry unions. But the structure of bargaining is
in fact quite similar and can be described as follows : in all three countries, most
of the formal bargaining is done at the industry level. But, in all three countries1
wages are determined much more at the company or plant leveli
In the UK, industry bargaining sets rates, which are usually floors that have
little effect on actual wages •
extension, i.e.

for

Until

the Employment Act of 1980, there was scope for

provisions to extend the term; of the agreement to the whole

sector. These provisions have been eliminated in 1980. In the last 20 years, there
has been an increase in the amount of bargaining, both formal and informal, at the

plant level, between shop stewards and employers. Given that plant/company
bargaining is the really important level of bargaining, It is relevant to look at how
many workers are covered by both industry and plant/company level bargaining. In
1978, the number of workers covered by at least a company agreement was of 33X for
all industries and of 47.77. for manufacturing. Given the importance of informal
bargaining, these figures understate the importance of unions in setting wages.
In France, the "Conventions collectives" which are usually but not always at the
industry level form most of the formal bargaining. These agreements are signed
between a "representative" union and a "representative" employer and apply even if

not all unions sign it (which is frequently the case). Subject to some minor
conditions, they can be extended to all firms In the industry, by decision of the

Minister of Labor. As in the UK however, the importance of industry agreement; with
respect to wages should not be exaggerated. They usually set floors, which do not
appear, either directly or indirectly, to have a large effect on actual wages. As in
the UK, a growing portion of the bargaining takes place at the company level,

40

although often in haphazard fashion. Until 1982, wages were largely determined
unilaterally by firms, or in response to complaints of union representatives in the
plant, with little bargaining or even consultation

local strikes were however a

standard instrument used by unions to achieve a better deal. Since 1982, there has
been a change in the law (Lois Auroux) which requires annual bargaining at the
company level on pay and other matters. The result has been a drastic increase in the
number of company level agreements.
In Germany, most of the formal bargaining again takes place at the industry
level. Agreements can be extended —to either firms In the same industry or to non
union worders in firms which sign the agreements —by the state or federal Minister of
Labour if (1) half of the employees of the sector are employed by firms which have

signed the agreement and (2 extension is approved by both unions and employers who
have signed2a. But, as in the other two countries, bargaining is increasingly taking
place at the company level and there is general agreement that pay is very largely
determined at the company level.

To conclude, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of the 'union sector' in
these countries. To the extent that much bargaining aver wages In fact takes place at
the company level, union coverage numbers, which are based on both company and
industry level bargaining probably overstate the number of workers for whom the wage
is determined as a result of bargaining between unions and employers. Even with this
adjustment, the size of the union sector still remains high, much higher than in the
US. Also, if we believe that the mare disaggregated the level of bargaining the less
likely it is to take into account the interests of the unemployed as a whole, then

these countries are good candidates for hysteresis in the union sector.V'

41

An alternative approach is

to

ask the question

firm become non union ? In the UK, the answer is
non union. There ii

nothing

yes

can a firm be non union ? can a
i

a

firm can be or can become

in the law which prevents it. There are some well known

examples of non union firms, most often subsidiaries of US companies (Kodak). There

are very few examples of firms going non union In France and Germany, extension
agreements put some constraints on firms in a given sector. There are non union firms
in both countries. In France, these are nearly exclusively small firms. In France
furthermore, various requirements are imposed on firms with more than 50 employees.
In particular they must allow for the presence of "delegues du personnel" who are

union representatives within the firm. All national unions have a right to be

represented. Since 17B, firms must also allow for the presence of a "section
syndicale d'entreprise", for the presence of the union inside the firm. Together,
these facts suggest that it is difficult to be or go non union

Finally,

there is

the

in these countries.

question of how different the non union sector is from the

union sector. A study by Kaufman t1984 of the competitive sector in the UK finds
relatively little difference in wage behavior across the two sectors. Together with
the arguments given in the previous section, this suggests that the size of the
formal union sector may not be a major determinant of the extent of hysteresis. We
shall return to this question in the next section.

Membership rules

Membership rules determining who the union represents at each point

in time,

play an important role in our analysis. Th. empirical evidence on actual membership
rules is fairly clear

workers have the right to join unions if they want to.

42

Workers who are laid oft can remain in the union although they often lose the right
to vote p this may happen either because of formal restrictions, or because voting
takes place inside the plant. But this tells us little about the question of in whose
interest the union actually acts. A study of the unemployed and the unions in the UK

tBarker et a) 1984) gives some information. It finds that, while laid off workers are
officially encouraged to remain in the union and have their union fees waived, they
do not, for the most part, see reasons to stay in the union1'. This provides support
for the idea that the union cares mostly about the currently employed.

3.2. Wage and employment equations

Theory

We now derive, and then estimate later, the wage and employment equations
associated with an expanded version of the model of the previous section. There are

two extensions. First we allow for a dynamic specification of labor demand p the
reason for introducing it will be clear below. Second, we specify explicitly an
alternative hypothesis to that of hysteresis.
We thus specify labor demand as
(3.1) n • s n-t —(1—s)b(w—p) +

e

Following the analysis of the previous section, we assume that the union acts to
set expected employment according to the relationu

(3.2) En • (1—a)n

+ an—i

43

The case where a1 corresponds to the case where rn—i in the preceding section

and there is hysteresis jthe case where a—O corresponds to the case where the unions
policy is independent of history and so there is no hysteresis. Clearly,
intersediate outcomes are also possible9.
Finally, let the wage which satisfies (3.1) and (3.2) be denoted by w*. We
assume the actual wage to be given by s
w = w* +

where the disturbance term u is assumed to be white, uncorrelated with W and

reflects

factors outside the model. Combining this assumption with equations (3.1)

and (3.2) yields a wage and an employment equations
(3.3) w

Ep + (1/b(1_s))_(i_a)n* + (s—a)n_1 + Es] + u

(3.4) n

(1_a)n* + a n—i + Ce—Em +(1—s)b(p—Ep—u)]

The wage equation holds that the wage of the union is a decreasing function of

n. When the union is larger, it is more cautious in setting wages. The impact of n—
is ambiguous. A larger value o fli raises the size of the group in whose interest
the union is maximizing but it also increases labor demand.

The employment equation on the other hand implies that employment follows a
first order process. The degree of persistence depends only on a, not at all on s.
Unexpected movements in employment are due to price and productivity surprises, arid

deviations of wages from target. Equation (3.4) can be estimated by OLS. This Is
however not the case for equation (3.3) s expected productivity is likely to be
correlated with past productivity and thus with past employment. Therefore we now
derive the reduced form wage equation. To do so requires an assumption about the

process followed by e t we assume that e follows a random walk1. Lagging (3.1) and
substituting It in (3.4) yIelds i

44

(35) w—w—± g

k +

(Ep—p—1)

+

(1/b(1—s))N1+s—a)n_1

—

s fl—2] + u

where k E —(1/b(1—s))(1—a)n

This equation can be estimated by OLS. It gives the rate of wage inflation as a
function of expected price inflation, and employment lagged once and twice. It is
worth examining it further.

Consider first the cace where there are no costs of adjustment in labor demand.
In this case the relation gives a relation between expected real wage growth and

lagged employment only. If a1, then expected wage growth does not depend on
employment but if a<1, it does

after an unexpected decline in productivity, which

leads to lower employment, the remaining workers accept a cut in real wages only to
the extent that they care about the workers who have been laid off.
If there are costs of adjustment to employment, then expected real wage growth
depends on employment lagged both once and twice. If aDO, then the ratio of

employment lagged twice to employment lagged once cannot exceed 1/2 (in absolute
value). But as a increases, the ratio tends to one. If a • 1, the ratio equals unity
i

expected real wage growth depends on the change rather than on the level of

employment.

Note that we cannot identify a and s separately from estimation of the wage
equation. But a must be positive if we find the ratio described above to be larger
than 1/2. Furthermore, a can be directly obtained from the employment equation.

45

While we have derived the wage equation (3.5) from a

rather

specific theory of

union behavior, It can be motivated in other ways. Following the logic of the
monopolistic competitive model in the preceding section just as we have followed the
logic of the competitive model give; rise to an equation for wage Inflation

parallelling (3.5). Much more generally, equation (3.5) is very close to a standard
Phillips curve which allows for a rate of change effect, a la Lipsey. The only real
difference is the presence of employment rather than unemployment on the right hand

side. We now turn to estimation of the wage and employment equations.

Results

The results of estimation of the wage equations for the UK, France, Bermany and
the US, for the period 1953 to 1984 are reported in tables 4 and 5.
In table 4, four alternative specifications of the wage equation are estimated
for each country. Because the appropriate timing is unclear with annual data, we
estimate the equations using alternatively contemporaneous and once lagged

employment, and once and twice lagged employment3. We also estimate each equation
with and without a time trend ; many researchers have captured the shift of the
Phillips curve by a time trend, that is by an Increase over time unrelated to the
history of unemployment and it is interesting to see what happens to our
specification when a time trend is allowed. This gives us the tour alternative
specifications. Finally, we use for expected inflation the forecast of inflation
obtained from estimation of an AR(1) process for inflation over the sample period and

constrain the coefficient on expected inflation (which is therefore equal to a
constant plus a scalar times lagged inflation) to equal unity.

(9.6)
(.96)
(6.2)

.6*

(4)

(—.2)

(.4)
.34
(1.0)

•75*
•75*

(7)

(8)

—1.16

1.28

.8*

(12)

(3.1

(—2.1)

.97
(2.9)

.8*

(11)

(—2.1)

—.74

—.42
(—.7)

.61

(1.2)

.8*

—

(—.9)

(10)

—.39
.58
(1.5)

.8*

(—.5)

—

(—2.8)

(9)

France

—.08

.13

•75*

(6)

—.19

(—2.5)

(2.6)
.86
(3.2)

—.84

—.76

.67

•75*

(1.2)

.12

—

.00
(.0)

.20
(1.5)

—

.19
(1.9)

—.07
(—1.5)

—.74
(—5.1)

(5)

United Kingdom

—.89
(—8.9)

1.12

.6*

(3)

—.12
(1.5)

.6*

(2)

—.57

(—4.2)

(4.0)
.71
(2.4)

Time
xlOO

(—2.2)

—.80

logEt—2

.92

logEt—l

.6*

logEt

1953—1984

(1)

Germany

Country

t—l

4

Wage Equations

Table

—

(—.2)

—.05

(.7)

.16

(1.0)

.21

(1.5)
.09
(.5)

.25

(—.7)

—.13

(—.5)

—.10

(.3)
.04
(.2)

.07

e

2.09

2.04

1.92

2.03

1.84

1.83

1.97

2.01

2.01

2.00

2.03

1.99

DW

.33

.29

.13

.12

.15

.07

.31

.23

.76

.74

.59

.54

2

R

manufacturing employment.

rate of change of the consumer price index.

:

:

rate of change of average hourly earnings in manufacturing.

:

from a regression of
ri

on

ir(—1)

D.

Grubb.

See Grubb (1984).

for each country for the sample period.

OECD data bank, extended back to 1950 by

Coefficient

Source.

*

t—statistics in parentheses.
All equations for Europe are run with a first order autocorrelatlon correction.
All equations for the U.S. are run with a first order moving average correction.

E

w

Notes.

.34

(—3.9)

(—3.3)

(1.7)

(2.5)

—.13

•7*

(16)

.48

(2.2)
.54
(2.2)

.54

0

—.16

(4.6)
.28
(5.9)

—

.00
(.0)

Time
xlOO

(—4.8)

—.25

.24

•7*

(15)

—

(.0)

(—.8)

—.07

.00
(.0)
.00

logEt—2

(cont 'd.)

1953—1984

(—.8)

—.07

logEt—l

•7*

—

logEt

(14)

(13)

United States

Country

4

Wage Equations

Table

1.99

1.98

2.02

2.03

DW

.63

.49

.26

.26

.6*

(4)

•75*

(7)

.8*

.8*

.8*

.8*

(9)

(10)

(ii)

(12)

France

(8)

•75*

.

(6)

(5)

•75*

.6*

(3)

United Kingdom

.6*

(2)

,

.6*

(1)

Germany

Country

.

(.7)

(—1.0)
—1.43
(—2.0)

(—2.9)

(2.2)

4.12

(1.8)

(—1.97)
—4.97

3.78

—3.57

—1.42
(—.7)
—3.01
(—1.3)

(.8)

.62

.78

—2.31
(—3.6)
—2.57
(—4.0)

(1.2)

.95

(2.6)

1.68

—2.86
(—4.3)
—2.41
(—3.0)

Ut_i

—.96

—2.39
(—4.0)
—1.60
(—2.1)

L.

Equations

5

(.6)

—

(.9)

2.10

1.35

—

(3.4)
2.46
(3.3)

2.58

—

(3.0)

.33

—

(2.1)

.25

(2.4)

.28

—

(1.4)

.14

—.10
(—1.5)

(.5)

—.10

(.7)

.13

—.10
(—.5)

(.4)

.07

(.6)

.13

(1.0)

.22

—.2

(—.03)

(.2)

.04

(.4)

.08

(.3)

.06

.27

(1.4)

—.08

(—1.1)

(1.6)

.30

p

(2.6)

xlOO

Time

2.12

(3.8)

2.62

Ut__2

1953—1984

Wage Change

Table

1.91

1.99

1.86

1.93

1.85

1.83

2.02

2.02

2.00

1.99

1.94

1.97

DW

.33

.14

.15

.03

.25

.12

.37

.33

.54

.50

.59

.57

46
In table 5, we perform the same set of estimations, but using unemployment
rather than employment as a

right

hand side variable. We do thu because

unemployment is the variable used In standard Phillips curve specifications. Some
theories of hysteresis such as the idea that the long term unemployed exert less
pressure on wages than those recently laid off also suggest that unemployment is more
appropriate than employment in the Phillips curve.
Tables 6 and 7 g1ve the results of estimation of the employment and unemployment
processes for each country for the period 1953 to 1984. Here again, while our theory
has implications only for employment, we think it Is useful to also report results
for unemployment as well.

The results are fairly clear cut and indicate that there are substantial
differences between the European countries and the United States. Starting with the
wage equations, one can draw the following conclusions i

(1) Virtually all specifications for Germany, France and the United Kingdom in
tables 4 and S suggest a substantial degree of hysteresis.
Let us denote by R the absolute value of the ratio of the coefficient on lagged
employment —unemployment— to the coefficient on contemporaneous employment —

unemployment— (or of the coefficient on employment —unemployment— lagged twice to the
coefficient on employment lagged once as the case may be). As we have seen, under
strict hysteresis

this ratio should be equal to unity. R is indeed close to

unity for nearly all specifications

it is not affected by the inclusion of a time

trend, or by the use of employment versus unemployment. There ii little difference
across countries : R is higher in the UK, sometimes exceeding unity, It is closer on
average to .BS for Germany and

Table 4b

Wage Equation Residuals
1953—1984

Year

Germany

1980

—1.91

1.7

1.6

—1.2

1981

— .32

—4.1

1.4

— .8

1982

—

.75

3.9

1983

.57

1984

United Kingdom

France

United States

.0

—

.1

—2.7

.1

—

.9

— .44

1.1

—1.5

a=l.87

a=3.2

a=3.9

—

Residuals from equations 3, 5, 11 and 15 in table 4.

.3

:

See Table 4.

(—5.8)

OECD and Grubb (1984).

.43
(2.4)

(2.9)

(—6.0)

—1.05

.47

(.3)

.11

(—.2)

—.07

t—l

—1.02

Ut

standardized unemployment rate.

Source.

U

Notes.

(16)

7*

7*

(14)

(15)

•7*

t—l

(13)

United States

Country

—

(.2)

.07

—.06
(—.1)

U_2

1953—1984
(cont 'd.)

Wage Change Equations

Table 5

Time

.02
(.6)

—

—

.42

(2.2)

(2.2)

.41

.47

(1.6)

—.07

.40

(1.3)

P

(—1.7)

xlOO

1.99

1.99

2.01

DW

.63

.62

.24

Table 6

Employment Processes
1953—1984

Country

p

0

.76
(22.3)

1.00

2

xlOO

R

Germany

United

.96

—
—

.86

.78

(26.7)

(3.9)

1.07

.54

(23.3)

(2.6)

—1.9xlO

2

.97

(.0)

Kingdom

.95
(16.3)

.41

—
—
—.20

(2.0)

(—3.8)

.81
(3.0)
.48
(2.5)

—
—
—.13

.96
.94

France
.94

(19.5)
1.08

(19.5)

United

.94
.94

(—4.0)

States
.82

(7.5)
.34

(1.5)

.07

(.3)

.46

.40
(2.5)

logE = plogE(—l) + cL(TINE) + c + 0(—l)

manufacturing employment.

.72

—

(1.6)

Note. Results of estimation of

E

—

.77

Table 7

Unemployment Processes
1953—1984

0

p

Country

a
xlOO

2

R

Germany
.65
(3.4)
.39
(1.9)

92

(148
(17.5)

—
—

.91

.06
(5.0)

.93

—
—

.95

.09
(3.5)

.96

—
—

.97

.02
(1.4)

.97

—

.58

United Kingdom
1.02

.77

(3.9)

(20.9)

.81

.82

(3.9)

(9.9)

France
—.06

1.12

(—.3)
—.22
(—1.1)

(32.7)

1.04
(18.2)

United States
.06

.72
(4.5)

(.2)
.31
(.9)

.36
(1.4)

Note. Results of estimation of

+ c + Oc(—1)

U =

pU(—l) + a(TIME)

U

standardized unemployment

—
.07
(1.9)

.63

47

The time trend itself contributes little. If

the increase in unemployment was

due to an autonomous increase in the natural rate over time, the coefficient on the
time trend should be positive. Only in the UK when employment is used, and in the UK

and France when unemployment is used Is the time trend positive and either
significant or marginally significant. Even then, Its quantitative contribution
small. In the case In which

it

is

Ii largest and most significant (equation 12 for

France in table 5), it only explains a i.5X increase in the unemployment rate
consistent with a given level of expected real wage growth over the sample period.

Further evidence that the apparent increase in the natural rate through time is a
consequence of rising unemployment and not autonomous comes from the absence of

substantial serial correlation in our estimated Phillips curves. An upwards drift in
the constant term would manifest itself in the form of serial correlation.

A final piece of evidence is given in table 4b which reports the residuals
associated with the best fitting equations from table 4, not including a time trend,

for each country, for 1980 to 19B4. There is little evidence of significant

prediction errors in recent years. This is in sharp contrast to the performance of
wage equations which do not allow lagged employment to enter.
(2) In contrast to the results for Europe, the results for the United States

provide evidence of much less hysteresis. There is evidence of a significant effect
of either lagged employment or lagged unemployment. But, with the exception of one
specification using employment, the value of R for the US is smaller than for Europe,
being in most cases around .5. There is also no evidence in favor of a time trend in
the wage equation

(3) A comparison of the results of estimation in tables 4 and 5 does not give a
clear answer as to whether employment or unemployment belongs in the wage equation.

Using R2's gives a draw, with employment doing better for France, unemployment doing

48

better for the UK. We have also run regressions Including current and lagged values
of both unemployment and employment —or

equivalently1

employment arid the labor force—

• They give the same ambiguous answer3 with the labor force being significant in the

UK, but not in France or Germany. We see the UK results however as presenting a
problem for our model.

The employment and unemployment equations reported in table 6 and 7 confirm to a
large extent the conclusions from the wage equations. Both unemployment and
employment are more persistent in Europe than in the US. In particular, the process
generating unemployment appears non stationary in all three European countries,

whether or not a time trend is Included in the regressions. The US process is
instead stationary. The data however strongly suggest that an ARMA(l,l) ,

rather

than

the AR(1) process implied by our theory, is needed to fit the employment and
unemployment processes of all four countries. This may reflect a difference between
the length of a period in the model and annual frequency of observation used in the
estimation.

3.3

Patterns

of

Labor Market Turnover

A central element in our theory of hysteresis is the lack of concern of employed
workers for the unemployed.

It Is the fear of job loss for current workers and not

the outstanding labor market pool that restrains wage demands.

Indeed the formal

model explains why firms hire at all only by assuming that wages which are set low
enough to insure the jobs of current workers will sometimes make It profitable for

firms to hire new workers. While this Ii clearly an oversimplification, the point
remains that insider—outsider or union models of the type we have considered are

49

really theories of why the unemployed are not hired, not theories of why layoffs take

place. This suggests the utility of looking at data on labor market turnover.

A

finding of high turnover with many workers having short spells of unemployment and
then being rehired would tend to cast doubt on the relevance of insider—outsider
formulations, while a finding that the rate of flow into and out of employment was
relatively low but that the unemployed remained out of work for a very long time
would tend to support these theories.
Table 8 presents some evidence on the rate of flow into unemployment in the
United States and United Kingdom over the past decade. The flow ii measured as the

number o4 persons becoming unemployed over a three month period. For the United
States, this is estimated as the number of unemployed reporting durations of less

than 14 weeks. For Britain it is the number of unemployment registants over a three
month period.

Two conclusions emerge clearly from the table. First, despite the much higher
rate of unemployment in the United Kingdom than in the United States, the rate of
flow into unemployment is actually lower there. The implication is that the
unemployment problem is not one of an excessive rate of job loss but of an

insufficient rate of hiring of the unemployed. The second striking feature o4 the
data is that the rate of flow into unemployment in Britain has increased surprisingly

little as unemployment has soared. Between 1970 and 19B4 when the rate of
unemployment in Britain rose more than 00 percent, the rate of flow into
unemployment has risen by only about 75 percent. This pattern of rising unenployment
with only a modest Increase in the rate of Inflow appears more pronounced in British
than American labor markets. In the United States, the inflow rat, has accounted for

a significant part of the increase in unemployment during recession periods. For
example, between 1979 and 1982, unemployment increased by 67 percent and the inflow
rate rose by 44 percent.

4.5
4.2
4.8
6.3
5.7
5.5
5.0
5.0
5.8
6.0
7.2
6.5
5.5

1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

Average of quarterly values.

4.8

1971

*

4.4

1970

Year

Number Unemployed less
than 14 weeks as a %
of Employment

8

6.2

7.4

9.6

8.4

9.0

8.0

7.6

7.5

7.4

9.2

8.5

7.2

6.9

7.8

8.4

tion (weeks)

Employment x Average Dura-

14 x Unemployed

United States
100

Patterns of Inflow to Unemployment

Table

5.6

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.2

4.5

4.7

4.9

4.2

3.2

2.9

3.6

3.6

3.3

Quarterly Inflow as

a

% of Employment*

Great Britain

50

The OECD (1995) summarizes the fragmentary information available on labor market

turnover for other European nations. The data in general parallel our findings for
Britain——suggesting relatively modest increases in the rate of flow into unemployment

starting from a very low base. They do suggest however that the composition of the
newly unemployed has changed over time as the unemployment rate has increased.
Layoff rates have increased while quit rates have declined.

Given the magnitude of the increases in European unemployment rates and the
relatively small Increases In flow rates, it is inevitable that unemployment

durations have increased substantially. Table 9 presents some information on the
increasing importance of long term unemployment in Europe. Along with information on
the average duration of unemployment, it presents estimates of the fraction of all
unemployment due to persons whose complete spells will exceed various threshold

lengths3t. The table demonstrates that at the same level of unemployment, long term
unemployment is much more important in Europe.

In 1980, when the American

unemployment rate was 7.2 percent, only an estimated 15 percent of all unemployment

was due to persons out of work for more than a year. The corresponding percentages
were 74 percent, 59 percent and 75 percent in the United Kingdom, Germany and France

even though the unemployment rates were lower. The table also demonstrates that long
term unemployment has increased in importance as overall unemployment rates have
risen in Europe.

Indeed, the increase in duration of unemployment is almost

proportional to the increase in unemployment.

Summary

3.6

average duration of
unemployment for
adult men currently
unemployed

50
15

4
1

6 months

12 months

18 months

24 months

percent contribution
to adult male
unemployment of
those unemployed
at least —

7.2

8

18

39

72

5.8

7.5

United States
1980
1984

unemployment rate

9

23

38

59

85

8.6

3.4

43

58

75

92

12.6

8.1

FR of Cermany
1980
1984

The Importance of Long Term Unemployment

Table

43

58

75

92

12.6

6.6

56

64

80

93

14.4

10.0

France
1980
1984

3.6

average duration
of unemployment for
adult men currently
unemployed

4
1

18 months

24 months
8

18

39

72

5.8

7.5

Based on authors calculation.

15

12 months

Source.

50

6 months

percent contribution
to adult male
unemployment of
those unemployed
at least —

7.2

United States
1980
1984

unemployment rate

9

59
38

87
76
65

74
57
41

23

85

8.6

3.4

96

19.4

12.7

43

58

75

92

12.6

8.1

FR of Germany
1980
1984

91

12.2

6.5

United Kingdom
1980
1984

The Importance of Long Term Unemployment

Table

80
64
56

58
43

93

14.4

10.0

75

92

12.6

6.6

France
1980
1984

51

In this section, we have shown that unions play an important role in Europe and
that the behavior of European unemployment is consistent with our hypothesis about

hysteresis. It is obviously tempting to conclude that unions are at the root of the

European problem. But the temptation must be strongly resisted. First, even if
unions create hysteresis, they just create a channel for persistence, which implies
that both favorable and adverse shocks will both have long lasting effects.

The

sequence of unfavorable shocks at least some of which are the consequence of policy

may equally well be said to be the cause of persistent high unemployment. Second, it
is as yet unclear whether the cause of hysteresis in Europe is unions or the sequence

of of adverse shocks which has caused high unemployment. We consider this issue in
the next section.

c..

4. Ii Euroscierosis Really the Problem?

The previous section has shown that our model of persistent unemployment may
explain important aspects of the current European depression and the very different

behavior of European and American labor markets. The evidence presented so far
leaves open a crucial question however.

Is the presence of hysteresis in European

unemployment a consequence of the heavily regulated and unionized character of

European labor markets? Alternatively, is hysteresis the result of a sequence of
adverse shocks to employment? The case that major structural reforms are needed if
full employment in Europe is to be restored depends on an affirmative answer to the

first question, while the case for expansionary macroeconomic policies is more
compelling if the second question can be given a positive answer.

Resolving whether the source of hysteresis lies ultimately in European
institutions or in the sequence of adverse shocks that have buffetted European
economies requires comparisons of the current situation with situations where only

one of these elements is present. Comparison with the United States at present
cannot resolve the issue because the American economy lacks institutions like those
in Europe and has not suffered a sequence of contractionary aggregate demand shocks

like those experienced by Europe in the 198Os. But we are able to make two
comparisons which can shed some light on the sources of hysteresis. The first is a
comparison of the behavior of European labor markets in the recent period with their

behavior over the 1953—1968 period. Broadly speaking, labor market institutions were
similar in the two periods but the pattern of shocks was very different33. The
second comparison is between the current European depression and the US depression of

the 1930s. At the time of the US depression, unions were weak, social programs and
labor market regulations were a small factor, and there were few 14 any important

53

adverse supply shocks. Thu US Depression may also shed light on th. role of
expansionary policies in alleviating persistent high unemployment. We consider these
comparisons in turn.

4.1 European labor markets before the current depression

The previous section has examined the persistence of unemployment and the

behavior of wages in Europe over the past 35 years. This long interval contains the
current depression period and the period of unparallelled prosperity of the 1950s
and 1960's. We examine the extent to which hysteresis is a product of bad times by
considering labor market behavior separately over each of the two periods. Table 10
presents estimates of the stochastic process followed by unemployment separately for

the 1952—1968 and 1969—19B4 periods54. The degree of persistence in unemployment in
Europe is much higher in the latter period when unemployment was high. Similar but
somewhat less dramatic results are obtained using employment rather than
unemployment. For the earlier sample period, unemployment appears to be more

persistent in the United States than in the United Kingdom or France. These results
tend to suggest that hysteresis is a feature of bad times rather than a consequence
of the structure of European labor markets.
Table 11 presents estimates of wage change equations paralleling those reported

in Table 5, but now for the 1953—1967 period. Taken together the results suggest
somewhat less hysteresis in the 1953—1967 period than ii present over the whole
sample period, with the difference being pronounced in the United Kingdom where the
ratio R, which was close to one for the full sample Is now close to .5. However, the
results for the 1953—1967 period like those for the entire period suggest a greater

degree of hysteresis in Europe thin In the United States. The fact that persistence

Table 10
The Persistence of Unemployment in Good and Bad Times

Country

p

SE Regression

France
1952—1968
1968—1984

.41
(1.1)

1.11
(5.0)''

.81

.3

(1.8)

—.48

.4

(1.4)

Germany

.86

.22

(12.3)
1.07
(5.1)

(.9)
(1.4)

1952—1968

.01

(2.5)

1968—1984

(.0)
1.0

.97

(27.6)

(3.8)

1952—1968
1968—1984

.5

.51

.8

United Kingdom

.5
.9

.99

United States
1952—1968
1968—1984

.75

—.37

(1.6)

1.0

(—.7)
.50
(1.1)

1.1

.59
(1.7)

Note. The results represent estimates of ARNA
unemployment rate.

(1,1)

process for the

.6*

(2)

•7*
7*

(7)

(8)

United States

(6)

(5)

9*

75*

(4)

France

•75*

(3)

United Kingdom

.6*

(1)

Germany

Country

t—1

.37
(1.7)
.57

(3.2)

(—5.2)

—1.25
(—7.0)

(—4.2)

—.17

(—1.9)

(—.5)
(2.3)

(—3.8)

(—.1)

—.04

.73

—.50

—1.23

(—1.8)

—.06

(2.8)

4.12

(—3.8)

—.47

(—.5)

—.17

(.0)

—.00

(—.4)

—.14

(—.4)

—.14

P

4.53

.16
(1.4)

(—1.1)

—.60

Time
xlOO

—6.25)

—6.11

(1.9)

(—3.8)

(2.0)

1.74

(—3.2)

—3.49

1.89

(2.2)

(—3.6)

—2.91

(3.7)

4.53

(—3.7)

—6.25

5.86

—6.48

t—l

1953—1967

Table 11

1.90

2.05

2.19

2.18

1.71

1.71

2.07

1.91

DW

.86

.66

.62

.61

.57

.50

.60

.55

2

R

54

is present in the early period in Europe to a greater degree than in the United
States but that It becomes Increasingly important as the unemployment rate increases

makes U difficult to draw any firm conclusion about its causes.
On balance, evidence on the changing behavior of European labor markets suggests

that bad times as well as unions account for findings of hysteresis. But this
evidence is not sufficiently powerful to permit a judgement about their relative
importance.

4.2 A Tale of Two Depressions

Salient features of many discussions of the current European depression include
pessimistic forecasts that unemployment will never return to earlier levels, concern
that reduced investment and lower capital stocks have made it impossible to employ

the entire labor force, and fears that expansionary policies will lead directly into

inflation with little or no favorable impact on output or employment. These
pessimistic views are premised on the conviction that structural problems are central
to high unemployment in Europe, and that the causes of persistent high unemployment

go beyond a sequence of adverse shocks. Yet the American depression of the 1930s
was ended by the expansion in aggregate demand associated with rearmarment.

Unemployment recovered to pre—Depression levels. Recovery was not inhibited by an
insufficient capital stock or by the overly rapid adjustment of wages and prices.

Are this experience and the current European experience sufficiently comparable to
permit the inference that hysteresis arises from a sequence of adverse shocks rather
than from structural problems in the labor market?

Dr do major differences in the

character of the American and European depressions render the American experience
irrelevant for thinking about current European problems?

55

We begin by briefly reviewing the record of the American economy over the 1925—

1945 period. A number of basic economic statistics are presented in Table 12. The
outstanding feature of the period is of course the dramatic upsurge in unemployment

that began in 1929. Unemployment rose from levels comparable to those experienced in
Europe in the late 1960's and early 1970's to 25 percent in 1933 and remained above

14 percent until 1940. As in Europe today employment actually declined over a 10
year period despite a rapidly increasing population. Beginning in late 1939 with the
declaration of War in Europe, unemployment began to decline rapidly as rearmarment

stimulated the economy. The benefits of Increased defense spending spilled over
widely into the rest of the economy. While there were only 822 thousand men in the
Army in November of 1940 and 2.1 million a year later, non—agricultural employment
increased by 16 percent or 6 million persons between 1939 and 1941. Production of a
variety of non—defense goods increased rapidly. Plitchell (1947) reports that between
1939 and 1941 automobile sales rose by 35 percent, refrigerators by 69 percent and

washing machines by 63 percent. Overall industrial production rose by 20 percent.
These rapid improvements in economic performance were unexpected. Indeed in the
wake of the 1937 recession many observers had despaired of any eventual return to

full employment. Paul Samuelson noted in 1944 that "in the years just prior to 1939
there were noticeable signs of dwindling interest in the problem of unemployment
which took the form of ostrich—like attempts to think away the very fact of

unemployment by recourse to bad arithmetic and doubtful statistical techniques. And
even among economists there was increased emphasis on the recovery of production and

income to 1929 levels." Such pessimism was pervasive even among those charged with
alleviating the situation. Harry Hopkins a liberal confidante of Roosevelt wrote in
1937 that "it is reasonable to expect a probable minimum of 4 to S million unemployed

even in future prosperity periods." (Leuchtenberg (1963) p.263). Similar sentiments

Table 12
The American Economy
192 5—194 5

(CPI)

Index of
Productivity

Non—Residential
Capital (1958$)

.9

4.0

92.6

211.0

1.8

1.5

0.0

95.0

218.7

1927

3.3

3.2

—6.0

95.4

223.9

1928

4.2

.3

—1.0

96.1

229.3

1929

3.2

3.5

—1.0

100.0

236.6

1930

8.9

—0.6

—3.0

97.0

238.8

1931

16.3

—5.0

—8.3

98.5

233.5

1932

24.1

—8.9

—9.0

95.4

222.8

1933

25.2

—5.8

—5.0

93.2

212.2

1934

22.0

12.0

2.6

103.3

203.9

1935

20.3

2.3

2.6

106.7

198.3

1936

17.0

1.9

1.2

111.3

197.0

1937

14.3

5.9

3.7

110.4

198.4

1938

19.1

1.8

—2.4

113.5

194.5

1939

17.2

1.2

—1.2

117.6

192.2

1940

14.6

2.4

1.2

122.2

193.6

1941

9.9

9.7

4.9

124.2

198.3

1942

4.7

26.9

10.5

123.3

193.5

1943

1.9

10.6

6.3

124.6

186.5

1944

1.2

7.8

2.0

134.4

183.0

1945

1.9

9.0

1.9

142.0

185.5

Year

U

1925

3.2

1926

(all workers)

Source. Baily (1983) and Historical Statistics.

56

were echoed by others including LaGuardia who concluded that the situation had pissed
from being an emergency to being the new norm.

Similar pessimism is often expressed in Europe today. The pessimism reflects
the view that unlike the US depression's persistent unemployment, persistent
unemployment in Europe is caused by structural problems not merely the residue of
adverse shocks. H. Giersch has coined and popularized the word "euroscierosis" to
denote these structural problems. Is there some important difference between the two
situations which suggests that rapid expansionary policies would fail in Europe today

even where they succeeded so spectacularly in the United States in 1940? There are
surprisingly many similarities between the two experiences. The failure of inflation
and real wages to recede more rapidly is an often noticed aspect of the current
European experience. Indeed, it Is this observation that drives conclusions that
problems are structural and that the equilibrium rate of unemployment has increased.
In the latter half of the Depression, a similar pattern appears In the United States.
Between 1936 and 1940 unemployment fluctuated around a

very high mean but there was

essentially no deceleration in inflation and real wages rose by about 10 percent,

close to the normal rate of productivity growth. Previous to the 1930's periods of
steady inflation had had much lower average unemployment rates.
Just as unemployment in Europe is highly persistent today, it appeared highly

persistent during the American Depression. The autocorrelation of unemployment was
.874 in the United States over the 1919—1941 period. To further examine the issue of
hysteresis during the Depression, Table 13 presents some estimated wage equations for
the 1920—1941 period. The War years are omitted because of the influence of controls.
The results dramatically suggest hysteresis parallelling that found in Europe today.
When only contemporaneous employment or unemployment ii entered Into the equation, it
is insignificant, but the change in employment or unemployment is strongly associated

Table 13

Wage Equations and the American Depression

____

(1)

____

logE

logE1

—.06
(.2)

(2)

—1.13
(2.9)

1.26
(3.2)

.67
(.50)

(4)

2.71

—2.72

(.74)

(3.2)

____
.22
(.8)

0.0

1.71

.50
(2.1)

.29

2.13

.24

.03

1.75

.38
(1.7)

.36

1.99

Note. The dependent variable is the rate of wage inflation. Data drawn from
Historical Statistics of the United States.

57

with changes in the rate of wage in41ation3. These results are robust to a variety
of ways of treating expected inflation. While parallelling our results for present
day Europe, these results differ from our results using American data for the Post-

War period. This may be taken as evidence that hysteresis is a phenomenon associated
with bad times rather than with particular labor market institutions.
In considering contemporary European labor markets, we laid considerable stress
on the importance of long term unemployment emphasizing that turnover rates were if

anything lower in Europe than in the United States. Table,drawn from Woytinsky
(1942) presents some of the limited evidence available on patterns of labor market

turnover during the American depression. Again, the results parallel Europe today.
There is little evidence of an increase in the flow rate into unemployment, though

quits decline and layoffs increase. As in Europe today the duration of unemployment
appears to have increased substantially. Woytineky reports evidence from a 1937
Philadelphia survey which found that 61.7 percent of unemployed adult men had been

out of work for more than a year. More generally, he concludes that the Depression
era saw the emergence of a new group of hard core unemployed. Patterns in labor
market turnover do not appear to provide a basis for distinguishing European labor
markets and American labor markets during the Depression.

Hysteresis appears to be an important feature of American Depression. Earlier
in the paper, we have suggested three possible sources of hysteresis. Of these
physical capital accumulation appears an unlikely culprit. As Table 12 demonstrates,
the real value of the non—residential capital stock actually declined between 1929

and 1939. This reduction did not represent an important bar to full employment

during or after the War when demand for goods was strong. Thu sakes us somewhat
skeptical of claims that insufficient capital is holding up a European recovery.
However, it should be noted that Mitchell (1947) claims that capacity utilization

Table 14

Labor Market Turnover and the American Depression

ro 1929

EXTENT OF LAPoR TuawovEs riot 1919
(Median monthly rates per 100 workers)
Year

Ace 8OT .1

1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
$osre:

10.1
10.1
2.7

8.0

90

Quits

7.5
10.3

5.8
8.4

1.1

.0.6

1.1

0.8

4 4
5.3

2.2

0.4
0.7

3.8
4.0
3.9
3.3

4

3.8

My1è

DichargeJ, Lsyoffe

4.2
6.2

7.3

3.3
5.2
4 6
3.3
3.7
4

Sepsrationa

Total

1.0

2.7

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0 4
0 5

3 1
2.9

2.1
2 2
2.7

3 1

1.8

0.4
0.3
0.6
0.4
0.5
0.7

0.5
0.6

July I9. pp. 64,65; Prbni.ry 1931, p. lOS.

EXTENT OF LAIIOR TURNOVER FROM 1930 ro 1940, y YE.Rs

(Average mcrnthk raft's per 100 workrrs)
Separat inns

Year

Accesion

1929
1930

4.4

3.8

1.6

2 4

1930

3.1
3.1

5.0

4.7
4.2

43
3.8

1.6
10
0.7
09

4.1

0 9

——

I

Lyc.ffs

Median rates

2.7
.

Weighted

1931
1932
1933
1934

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940

3.4
54
4.3
3.5
38
41

44

4.1

36
34
4.4
4.1
3.1

335

1.1

05

06

0.2

1.2

04
0.2
0.2
0.2
02
0.2
02
02
01
0.1

3.0

average rates

0.9
11
12

06
0.8
1.0

015

29

3.4
2.7
3.0
2.5
21
3.0
34
2.2

22

Including usisce!laneou reparations because of death, retirement on pension, etc..
reported separately since January 1940.
Sosirct: Mo,itèly Labor Rrrse, 1930 to 1941. For a summary of labor turnover from
1931 to 19.39, see ibtd., September 1940, pp. 69-701.

Source. Woytinsky (1942).

58

rates were very low prior to the 1939 expansion. This is not true in Europe today.

There is some evidence of human capital hysteresis in labor force participation. The
labor force participation rate of men over 65 dropped from 54 to 42 percent between

the 1930 and 1940 censuses.6 This is considerably more rapid than its trend rate of
decline. Between 1920 and 1930, it fell by only 1 percent, and it remained
essentially constant between 1940 and 1950.

It seems unlikely however that this

could have much effect on unemployment. Indeed to the extent that marginal workers
were induced to drop out of the labor force, bad times might have reduced subsequent
unemployment.

This leaves our insider—outsider story of wage setting. Beyond documenting the
importance of hysteresis, and confirming its implications for wage equations, it is
difficult to test the story directly. But the judgemerit of Leuchteriberg (1963) is

perhaps revealing, "By Roosevelt's second term, as it seemed the country might never
wholly recover, the burden of the unemployed had become too exhausting a moral and

economic weight to carry. Those who drew income from other sources could hardly help
but feel that the Depression had been a judgement which divided the saved from the

unsaved. Increasingly, the jobless seemed not merely worthless mendicants but a
menacing Lumpenproletariat." While Leuchtenberg is referring primarily to public
attitudes towards the unemployed, similar private attitudes are the driving force
behind the hysteresis mechanism we have stressed.
The finding of so many parallels between the current European depression and the
American depression suggests to us that hysteresis in Europe may be more the result
of a long sequence of adverse shocks .than the result of structural problems.

Perhaps most telling is the observation that the apparent natural rate of

unemployment drifted upwards following the actual unemployment rat. during the

American depression just as it has in Europe. Biven the absence of structural

explanations 4or this drift, the inference that it resulted from high past
unemployment seems compelling.

So too, the high apparent European natural

rate

of

unemployment may be the result of hysteresis arising in the aftermath of a sequence
of

adverse shocks. As we discuss below, this implies that expansionary macroeconomic

policies

may well work in reducing unemployment in Europe.

60
5.

Conclusions

Periods of persistently high unemployment are not uncommon events in broad

historical context. Yet standard macroeconomic theories have a difficult time
accounting 4cr them. We have argued that they can only be understood in terms of
theories of hysteresis that make long run equilibrium depend on history. And we have
argued that membership effects may well be important sources of hysteresis. Such
effects appear to be an important source of persistence in unemployment in Europe
today.

Nigh unemployment is not however always persistent. A crucial issue is
identifying the circumstances under which persistence is likely to arise. The main
issue is that of whether hysteresis is the result of specific labor market
structures, of the presence of unions in particular, or whether It is itself the
result of adverse shocks, which by increasing unemployment, trigger the insider—

outsider dynamics we have discussed in the paper. Our tentative conclusion, from the
historical record, is that membership effects become important in bad times and are

not crucially dependent on the presence of unions. We have not provided however a
fully satisfactory theory of membership effects in non—union settings.
Our theory permits a broad brush account of the increase In unemployment In
Europe over the past 15 years.

In the 1970s European economies were hit with

surprises in the form of rising oil prices, the productivity slowdown, and rapid

increases in tax rates. With wages rigid in the short run each of these types of
shocks created unemployment. Because of the membership considerations stressed here,

the decrease in employment was validated by higher wage demands. As a result by the
end of the 1970s the equilibrium level of unemployment had increased substantially.

In the 19BOs, the European economies unlike the US economy experienced a series of
adverse aggregate demand shocks as European monetary policies followed US policies,

—61 —

adverse aggregate demand shocks as European monetary policies follows US policies,

but fiscal policies turned contractionary. This led to further unemployment which
was then validated by wage demands by those who remained employed. At this point,
unemployment will remain high even if there are no more adverse shocks, because of

the power of insider workers to set wages.
Our argument is that Europe has experienced a sequence of adverse shocks during
the past 15 years each of which had a fairly permanent effect on the level of

employment. Current high unemployment can equally be blamed on a propagation
mechanism which leads the adverse shocks of the past to have a lasting impact, or on
the

shocks themselves. Unlike simple Keynesian explanations for

depression

the European

which stress only aggregate demand, our theory explains increases in the

apparent natural rate of unemployment. Unlike some classical explanations for
European unemployment which deny any role for demand management policies, our theory

explains how aggregate demand can have protracted effects even in the absence of any

long lasting nominal rigidities.
This view of the European unemployment problem has a number of fairly direct

policy implications. First, "enfranchising" additional workers may tend to increase
employment.

If worksharing

programs cause more workers to be employed and therefore

represented in wage setting decisions, they may lead to reduced wage demands and

increased employment. Profit sharing plans such as those proposed by Weitzman
(1985) may also raise employment by making it possible for employers to reduce the

cost of labor by increasing hiring. On the other hand they would increase unions'
resi stance to hi ring new workers and mi ght thereby increase membershi p probl ems.

An obvious alternative policy is measures to reduce the power of unions and

thereby allow outsider workers to have a larger impact on wage bargains. Our
findings regarding the US depression where unions were probably not of great

—62—

importance lead us to be somewhat skeptical of the efficacy of such measures.
Certainly it does not yet appear that efforts to reduce the power of unions in the
United Kingdom have borne macroeconomic fruit.
Our model suggests that shocks, positive or negative, are in a sense self

validating, if employment changes, wage setting practices adapt to a new level of

This means that positive shocks contrived through demand management

employment.

policies can reduce unemployment regardless of the source of the shocks which caused

it. Even if unemployment initially originated from adverse productivity shocks,
expansionary policies, if they succeed in raising the level of employment will yield
permanent benefits. Symmetrically, even if most of the increase in unemployment in

the

1980's is due to demand, the large decrease in the price of oil may well

decrease it permanently. At the same time the model suggests that only policies or
shocks which are in some sense surprises will be efficacious. This means that it
may be difficult to increase employment a great deal with expansionary policies.
The crucial question becomes the length of time over which expansionary policies can
"surprise"

wage setters.

To whatever extent they can, very long lasting benefits

will be derived.

the many parallels between the 1½ierican and European depressions imply that

Do

a major expansion in aggregate demand would create the same miracles in Europe as it

did in the United States? Unfortunately comparison of the two depressions cannot

lead to a very definite answer. While it does dispose of the
increase

idea that the apparent

in the natural rate of unemployment means that demand expansion cannot

possibly succeed, and the idea that real wage growth must be restrained if expansion

is

to take place, an important problem remains. The likelihood of achieving a

surprise for a protracted period through inflationary policies may well have been
much greater in the United States after a decade including

a major deflation than it

63

is in Europe today after a decade of stagflation. On the other hand, the very
political infeasibility of expansion in Europe suggest; its possible efficacy.
Certainly the protracted high unemployment caused by the deflationary policies of the
recent past stands as a testament to the potent effect; of macroeconomic policies,

64

Footnotes

1

Formally, a dynamic system is said to exhibit hysteresis 14 it has at least

one eigenvalue equal to zero (unity, if specified in discrete time). In such a case,

the steady state of the system will depend on the history of the shocks affecting the
system. Thus, we should say that unemployment exhibits hysteresis when current
unemployment depends on past values with coefficients summing to one. We shall
instead use "hysteresis" more loosely to refer to the case where the degree of
dependence on the past is very high, where the sum of coefficients is close but not
necessarily equal to one.
2

For the United States we made use of the revised unemployment rates

calculated by Romer (1986) for the 1890—1929 period.
This part relies heavily on the empirical work presented for individual
European countries at the Chelwood Bate Conference on Unemployment, to be published
in Economica, 1986. The reader is refered to individual country papers for further
cvi dence.
4

We focus on the UK because detailed data are more easily available.

Available data for France and Germany tell a very similar story.
5

The mismatch index by industry goes up however in 19B1 and 1982 ——which are

the last two years for which it has been computed——.
6

Let a be the rate of growth of productivity and 6 be the change in the tax

wedge. Then the rate of growth of the after tax real wage consistent with a given
capital labor ratio Is approximately given by a—6.
7

When a time trend is added to the AR(1) specification of unemployment

estimated above, its coefficient is both small and insignificant, for both countries.

65

B

This is also the direction of research recently followed by Sachs (1985) to

explain European unemployment.
9

Unemployment remained high ——around lOX——in Italy until 1960 approximately

but other factors are thought to be at work in that case.
10

Drazen (1979) constructs a related model, based on learning by doing,

which also generates hysteresis. HaIl (1976) explores

the

possibility that

unemployment has long lasting effects on productivity, and its implications for
economic policy.
11

The issue of membership and membership rules is clearly closely related to

the issue of union size and union membership in the union literature. See Farber
(19B4, section 6) for a survey. This literature has not however focused on the
dynamic implications of membership rules.
12

Formalizing the firm as passive allows to concentrate on the effects of

alternative membership rules on the decisions of the group of insiders. Allowing for
wage bargaining between the firm and insiders as well as for some control of
employment cx post by insiders introduces additional issues which we shall discuss
later.
13

The assumption of stochastically inelastic labor supply maintained here is

not realistic for a single firm. it is best to think of the firm under consideration
as a representative firm, facing the same shocks as other firms.
14

Because we use a log linear approximation to define p, p as defined can

be negative. But the approximation is only acceptable for p close to one, that is for

values of a(b/c) not too large.
15

We may also think of assymetric rules where it takes m periods to acquire

membership, and m2 periods to lose it. We shall briefly return to their likely
implications later.

66
16

There is another effect which works in the opposite direction. Choosing a

high real wage leads to lower expected employment, thus lower membership and

higher

expected real wages in the future. This effect however turns out to be dominated by
that emphasized in the text.
17

Farber (1984) reviews the research on union behavior when members have

different seniority status, and thus conflicting interests.
18

Thus, we assume implicitly that the technological shock affects costs, but

not the relation between output and employment. This is the case for example if
output is produced with two inputs, labor and a non labor input, according to a
Leontieff technology, and the the technological shock reflects changes in the
relative price in the non labor input. A change in productivity growth would instead
affect both the relation between output and employment, and between prices and wages.
Allowing the technological shack to affect the relation betwen output and employment
in the model is straightforward but introduces ambiguities in the effects of supply
shocks on employment which are not central to our argument.
19

Like in other contracting models, staggering of wage decisions across

unions would lead to effects of even anticipated nominal shocks. See Taylor [1979].
20

There

is

some evidence that this has actually occurred in Britain.

Despite the legal changes which have decreased the legal power of unions in the last
decade, the size of the union wage

differential appears to

have risen sharply in

recent years.
21

Consider a simple example. Suppose restaurant wages were rigid, and a big

decline in the demand for restaurant meals took place so there were unemployed chefs.
Would it pay to open a new restaurant with a low paid chef? Probably not if fixed

costs were high. These considerations may
employment growth may be concentrated

in

have something to do

small establishments.

with why in bad times

67
22

Given that our paper is written for an American audience, we do not review

the role of unions in the US in any detail. As will be clear from our description of
Europe, unions in the US play a much more limited role than in Europe.
23

Actual extensions are rare but the threat of extension is considered to be

very effective in making all firms respect the content of these agreements.
24

In future research, it would be valuable to study japanese labor market

institutions with a view to evaluating the theories of persistent unemployment put

forward here. There are a number of similarities between 3apaneese and European
institutions including the importance of company level bargaining. There may however
be important differences as well, particularly in the attitude of 3apanese unions
towards outsiders.
25

Two recent cases have been in the news, that of British Petroleum which

has gone non unon union for some of its shipping operations, and that of Robert
Murdoch who has in effect gone to a more accomodating union.
26

The reason why unions encourage the unemployed to remain in the union

appears to be due in part to their desire to increase membership figures, and through
these, their role in the national union movement.
27

Allowing labor demand to depend on current and expected real wages, as it

should under costs of adjustment, would complicate our task here. 3ohn Kennan takes
up this issue in his comments on our paper.
28

Note that a between 0 and 1 does not correspond exactly to a between 1 and

infinity. As we have argued before, m between 1 and

leads to a more complex, non

linear, specification.
29

This is a plausible and convenient assumption. Suppose we assumed instead

that productivity was the sum of a linear function of observable variables and a
stationary or borderline stationary process, say an AR(1) process with coefficient p.

68

The wage equation would then differ from that in the text in two ways. The first

would be the presence of lagged real wages1 with coefficient —l. The second would be
the presence of the

first differences of the observable variables affecting

productivity. We have explored these more general specifications empirically for the
UK and found our simple wage equation not to be misleading.
30

Because our wage data refers to manufacturing wages, we use manufacturing

employment as the employment variable in the results reported here. Very similar
results were obtained using total employment.
31

All these findings are quite robust. The value of R is substantively the

same if, following the argument of the previous footnote, the lagged real wage,
current and lagged values of the capital—labor ratio, the price of oil, and a proxy
for productivity growth (when available) are added to the regressions. The results
are also robust to changes in the coefficient on lagged inflation, say within .2 of
the values used in the table.
32

The motivation for calculations of this type is laid out in Clark and

Summers (1979).

In performing the calculations, we have assumed that the exit rate

from unemployment is not duration dependent.

If more realistically, we allowed for

it to decline, the estimated concentration of unemployment in long spells would show
up even more clearly.
33

Some of the institutional rigidities of European labor markets date however

from social policies introduced in the 1960s and 1970s.
34

It is clear that with such short samples, and such a drastic increase in

unemployment in the second subsample, estimation cannot be very precise.
35

A similar finding is emphasized by Gordon and Wilcox (1979) who also

provide evidence that it holds for Europe during the Depression period. Gordon
(1983) emphasizes the importance of the rate of change effect In the Phillips curve

69

during the Depression period in both the United States and UK but finds the level
e4fect to be dominant outside of this interval.
36

This dropoff may reflect the effects of the introduction of Social

Security to some extent. The program was sufficiently small in 1940, that this is
unlikely to be the whole story. Moreover, the timing of its introduction surely had
something to do with the fact of the Depression.

70

Appendix to Section II

1)Derivation of the probability of being employed.

For a given realisation of e, thus for a given n'— cw + e, the probability of
employment is given by
If fl

flo ,

or equivalently for e

If n n or equivalently for e

flo+ cw ,

then

no+ cw

then p = N/N0

p

1—no+n

This implies that, for an arbitrary distribution of e, with density function
and support Eee], the probability is given by

f(e) ,

flo+CW

e

p = ! (l—no—cw+e)f(e)de + 1 1 4(e)de
no+cw

If, as assumed in the text, e is uniform on (Ee—a,Ee+al, p becomes

flo+CW
p

(1/2a)( ((i—no—cw+e/2)e]
Ee—a

1 —

+ (Ee +jfloCW)}

for n0+cw

Ee—a

(1/4a) (no+cw—Ee+a)2 for flo+CW

Ee—a

2)Derivation of the solution in the case when m=1

We first derive the objective function maximised by the union at any point in
time.

71
'Je

assume that, i4 laid off, the probability of being rehired by the firm is

equal to zero. As in the text, we assume that the utility of being unemployed is

equal to zero. Let f be, as in the text, the probability of being employed at time

i

for a member of the union at time i. Then, given the membership rule that membership
depends on employment in the previous period, the probability for a union member at

time zero to still be a union member in period i is given by Eo(p0p1...p_1). Thus,
the utility of the union member as of period 0 is given by
U0 = Eo( (po4bw0) + 9p0(p1+bw1) + $2p0p1 (pu+bw2) +

..J

or, in recursive form by
U0

po + bwo +

poE0(8U)

Even under the assumption that the shocks are independently distributed through
time, the random variables within the expectation operator above are not in general
independent, making the maximisation problem intractable. Thus, we solve instead the

problem associated with the objective function linearized around some p, w. This
linearized objective function is given by the following recursion i
V0 = (A + dp0

where A i
d £

+

—$p
1

+

(1 +

bwo

)

+

$pE0V1

(p +bw) / Ci—ep ) and

8(p+bw)(1

+

$p

+

02p'2

bew')/(l—ep)

The weight put on the probability of being employed, o1 is now higher than in
the previous case. This is because pa affects not only today's outcome but the
probability of union membership and employment in the future.

72

We now derive the solution to the maximisation using the linearized objective
function. Under the assumption that shocks to labor demand are

independent

and

uniformly distributed on (—a,+aD, the solution to the linearized maximisation problem
is derived as follows:

We first guess that the maximised value V0 is of the form

c —n_

(al)

with coefficients

and p to be determined. We then iolve for optimal Po and w0

and p, and finally solve for

given

14 V0 = —pn_1, then E0V1

cc—pEono

and p.

+pcw0. Replacing in the recursive form

which characterizes Uo gives

Vo • (+9p)

+

(a2)

(b+Gppc)wo + dpo

The probability po is given by
1—(1/4a) (flo+Cwo+a)2

Replacing Po in (a2) and solving for optimal wo gives
Wo

(1/c)rn0 —a + 2a(b+8p'pc)/dc)

(a3)

This in turn gives

• 1— a((b+$ppc)/dc)2.

(a4)

This gives us Wo and po as functions of structural parameters and of
now solve for the values of
and (al) gives the values of
value of 5 is given by :
p • (b/c)/(I—ep').

and 5.

and 5. We

Replacing Wo and po in (a2) and comparing (.2)

and 5. The value of

Is of no interest here. The

References

Barker, A., P. Lewis and P1. McCann, 1984, "Trades Unions and the Organisation of

the Unemployed," British Journal of Industrial Relations, 3, 391—404

Blanchard, 0. and L. Summers, 1984, "Perspectives on High World Real Interest
Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 273—334.

Bruno, P1. and J. Sachs, 1985, 'The Economics of Worldwide Stagflation,' Oxford,
Basil Blackwell

Buiter, W. ,

1985, "A Guide to Public Sector Debt and Deficits," Economic Policy,

1, November, 13—60

Bulow, 3. and L. Summers, 1986, "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with Application

to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynesian Unemployment," forthcomina
Journal of Labor Economics

Campbell, 3. and 8. Mankiw, 1985, "Are Output Fluctuations Transitory'", mimeo
Harvard,

Clark, K. and L. Summers, 1979, " Labor Market Dynamics and Unemployment, A

Reconsideration," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 13—60.

Clark, K. and L. Summers, 1982, "Labour Force Participationi Timing arid

Persistence," Review of Economic Studies 49 (159), 825—844.

74

Ccc, D. and F. Gagliardi, 1985, "Nominal Wage Determination in ten OECD
Countries", OECD Economics and Statistics Department Working Paper 19, March

Dornbusch, R. et al, 1983, "Macroeconomic Prospects and Policies of the European
Community", Center for European Policy Studies Discussion Paper 1, Bruxelles,

reprinted in 'Restoring Europe's Prosperity", 0. Blanchard, R.Dornbusch and R, Layard
eds, Cambridge MIT Press, 1986, 1—32

Drazen, A., 1979, "On Permanent Effects of Transitory Phenomena in a Simple
Growth Model", Economics Letters 3 , 25—30

Ellwood, D., 1982, "Teenage Unemploymenti Permanent Scars or Temporary
Blemishes'" in "The Youth Labor Market Problem i

its

Nature, Causes and

Consequences", R. Freeman and D. Wise eds, Chicago Press—NBER

Farber, H.,1984, The Analysis of Union Behavior", MIT working paper 355,
November

Fischer, S., 1977, 'Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 85—1, February, 191-205.

Gordon, R. ,

1983, "A century of Evidence on Wage and Price Stickiness in the

United States, the United Kingdom and Japan", in "Macroeconomics, Prices and
Quantities", J. Tobin ed, Brookings Institution, 85—120

75

Gordon, R. and . Wilcox, 1981, "Monetarist Interpretations o4 the Great
Depression, An Evaluation and a Critique", in "The Great Depression Revisited", K.

Brunner ed, Martinus Nijhf, 49—207

Gregory, R., 1985, "Wages Policy and Unemployment in Australia," presented at the
Cheiwood Gate Conference on Unemployment, Cheiwood Gate

Grubb, D., 1984, "The OECD Data Set," LSE Center 4or Labour Economics working
paper 615,

Hall, R., 1976, "The Phillips Curve arid Macroeconomic Policy", Carnegie Rochester

Con4erence an Economic Policy, Vol 1,

127—148

Hargraves Heap, S.P., 1980, "Choosing the Wrong Natural Rate, Accelerating
Inflation or Decelerating Unemployment and Growth," Economic Journal, 90, September,
611—620

Harris, 3. and M. Todaro, 1970, "Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two
Sector Analysis," American Economic Review, March, 60—1, 126—143.

Kau4man, R. ,

1984, "On Britains Competitive Sector" British Journal of

Industrial Relations," March

76

Layard, R., S. Nickell and R. 3ackman, 1984, "On Vacancies," LSE Center for
Labour Economics Discussion paper 165, August

Layard, R. and S. Nickell, 19B, "Unemployment in Britain," presented at the
Chelwood Gate Conference on Unemployment,

Layard, R. et al, 1984, "Europe

the Case for Unsustainable Growth", Center for

European Policy Studies,8/9, May, reprinted in "Restoring Europe's Prosperity", 0.
Blanchard, R. Dornbusch and R. Layard eds, MIT Press, 1986, 33—94

Leuchtenburg, W., 1963, "Franklin D. Roosevelt and the new deal," Harper & Row,
New York

Lindbeck A. and 0. Snower, 1985, "Wage setting, Unemployment and Insider—Outsider
Relations" Institute for International Economic Studies, Stockholm, WP 344, December

McDonald, I. and R. Solow, 1981, "Wage Bargaining and Unemployment," American
Economic Review, December, 71—5, 896—908.

Minford, P., 1982, "Unemployment : Cause and Cure", Oxford, Martin Robertson

Mitchell, 8., 1947, "Depression Decade: From New Era Through New Deal ," New York,
Halt, Rinehart

77

Nelion, R. and C. Plosser, 1981, TMTrends and Random Walki in Economic Time

Series Some Evidence and Implications", Journal of Monetary Economics,1O, September,
139—162

Nickell ,

5.,

1984, "A Review of "Unemployment : Cause and Cure" by Patrick

Minford with David Davies, Michael Peel and Alison Prague", Discussion Paper 185,

Centre for Labour Economics, London School of Economics

OECD, Employment Outlook, 1984

Oswald, A., 1985, "The Economic Theory of Trade Unions i An Introductory Survey,'
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, forthcoming

Phelps, E. ,

1972, "inflation Policy and Unemployment Theory," New York, Norton

Romer, C., 1986, "Spurious Volatility in Historical Unemployment Data", Journal
of Political Economy, 94—1, February , 1—37

Sachs, 3., 1979, "Wages, Profits and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A Comparative
Study," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 269—319

Sachs, 3,, 1983, "Real Wages and Unemployment in the DECD Countries," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 255—289

Sachs, 3., 1985, High unemployment In Europe", mimeo Harvard

78

Samuelson, P., 1966, "The Collected Scientific Papers of Paul A. Samuelson," Vol.
II. ,

Carbridge,

MIT Press

Slichter, S., 19503 "Notes on the Structure of Wages," Review of Economics and
Statistics, 31, 283—288

Taylor, 3., 1979, "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model," American Economic
Review, May, 69—2, 108—113

Weitzman, Martin, 1982, "Increasing Returns and the Foundations of Unemployment
Theory", Economic Journal, 92, December, 787-804

Weitzman, M., 1985, "The Share Economy", Cambridge Massachusetts, Harvard
University Press

Woytinsky, W.S., 1942, "Three aspects of Labor Dynamics," Washington, D.C.:
Social Science Research Council

