NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTELLECTUAL RETURNEES AS DRIVERS OF INDIGENOUS INNOVATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE CHINESE PHOTOVOLTAIC INDUSTRY
Siping Luo
Mary E. Lovely
David Popp
Working Paper 19518
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19518
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Siping Luo, Mary E. Lovely, and David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Intellectual Returnees as Drivers of Indigenous Innovation: Evidence from the Chinese Photovoltaic
Industry
Siping Luo, Mary E. Lovely, and David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 19518
October 2013
JEL No. O30,O31,O32,Q42,Q55
ABSTRACT
We offer new evidence on indigenous innovation and intellectual returnees by estimating the relationship
between patenting by Chinese photovoltaic firms and the presence of corporate leaders with international
experience. Our research approach combines data from three sources: the industrial census, international
and domestic patent records, and leadership biographical information. Using nonlinear methods, we
find robust evidence that returnees positively influence patenting activity and also promote neighboring
firm innovation. We find no tendency for export intensive firms to patent more. Controlling for R&D
expenditures, we find that firms with returnees in leadership roles have more patents.
Siping Luo
School of Public Policy and Management
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
luosiping@gmail.com
Mary E. Lovely
Syracuse University
Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs
Department of Economics
110 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244
melovely@maxwell.syr.edu

David Popp
Department of Public Administration
and International Affairs
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

1.

Introduction
Innovation is seen as the driving force of productivity growth (Freeman and Soete, 1997;

Freeman and Louca, 2001; Fagerberg and Verspagen, 2002). However, as shown by Breznitz
and Murphree (2011) for the case of China, breakthrough innovation is not the only route to
sustained growth. China has maintained steady income advances by receiving new technology
from richer countries and mastering subsequent stages of innovation, a process known as
“incremental innovation.”1 Such innovation has helped to propel profound shifts in international
flows of manufactured goods: the share of manufactures in the exports of developing countries
has risen from 25 percent in 1980 to more than 80 percent today.
Empirical studies have identified various channels through which cross-border flows
facilitate international technology transfer: international trade (e.g Keller, 2010), foreign direct
investment (e.g. Veugelers and Cassiman, 2004; Kemeny, 2010), and joint R&D ventures (e.g
Zhou, et al., 2012)). 2 Other scholars note the importance of supply chains to technology transfer,
and especially to indigenous innovation. Xu and Sheng (2012) use firm-level evidence from
China to argue that positive spillovers from FDI arise from forward linkages, that is, from access
to superior intermediate inputs or capital equipment. Puga and Trefler (2010) expand the idea of
forward linkages when they argue that the movement of new products from a developed to
developing countries induces incremental indigenous innovation as the production process is
refined and standardized in the low wage setting. This process of indigenous innovation allows
low wage countries to export increasingly sophisticated new goods, thereby reducing the length

1

Puga and Trefler (2010) attribute coinage of the term “incremental innovation” to Rosenberg (1982) and
describe this form of invention as the “unsung hero of modern economic growth.”
2
Keller (2004, 2008) provides comprehensive surveys of the channels of international technology diffusion.

1

of the product cycle and rapidly shifting world trade patterns.3
Recently, attention has shifted to “intellectual returnees,” skilled persons who study or
work in an advanced economy and subsequently return to their origin country, as the spark for
indigenous innovation (Mountford, 1997; Kapur and McHale, 2005; Saxenian, 2006; Zucker and
Darby, 2007). Returnees may offer their home countries human and venture capital, familiarity
with systems developed by multinational firms, and valuable connections and cultural links to
their host countries (Wang, Zweig, and Lin, 2011). Surprisingly given the frequency of stories
about successful intellectual returnees in India and China, there is limited systematic evidence on
the role played by cross-border skilled migrants to innovation within their country of origin.
This paper offers new evidence on the link between indigenous innovation and
intellectual returnees by estimating the relationship between firm-level patenting in the
photovoltaic (PV) industry and the presence of corporate leaders who have studied or trained in
an advanced country. Our research approach requires the combination of data from three distinct
sources. First, we use industrial census data to create a panel of more than 800 firms in the
Chinese PV industry over the period 1998 to 2008. Secondly, we search Chinese and
international patent office records to link each PV firm to its patenting activity. Lastly, we use
firm, industry, and media reports to find the tertiary education and job experience of each firm’s
top management team in each year, identifying those who have studied or trained overseas.
Using nonlinear methods appropriate to count data, we test whether the presence of
intellectual returnees in leadership positions within the firm leads to a higher likelihood of
patenting. We find robust evidence that returnees do influence firm patenting activity and also
3

Puga and Trefler (2010) provide a formal model of this process and supporting evidence of incremental
innovation in low wage countries by combining data on the location of first production for innovative goods with
data on patents by low wage country inventors for U.S. corporations.

2

provide some benefits for innovating activity of neighboring firms via inter-firm spillovers. We
find no tendency for firms with greater export intensity to patent more, nor do we find
differences across firms based on age or size. Controlling for expenditures on R&D activity, we
still find that firms with intellectual returnees in leadership roles have more patents.
While we use a single country, China, and a single industry, photovoltaics, our study is
clearly located within the domain of technology transfer for development. Fu, Pietrobelli, and
Soete (2011) provide evidence from emerging economies that international technological
diffusion can only occur with parallel indigenous efforts. Fu and Gong (2011) investigate this
process in China and find that indigenous R&D at the industry level is necessary for technology
upgrading by domestic firms. At least some indigenous R&D appears to be propelled by crossborder migration of skilled persons from technologically advanced countries. Song et al (2003)
observe patenting by non-U.S. firms that hire engineers from U.S. firms and find that first
patents granted to mobile engineers in the hiring firms are about seven times more likely to cite
the source firm’s patents than randomly selected controls.4
There is already a small body of evidence on intellectual returnees and innovation from
China, which is not surprising given the scale of its economic activity and the importance the
Chinese government has attached to the return of its high-skill, experienced citizens from
overseas. Deng et al. (2012) draw on a firm-level World Bank survey of 998 Chinese
manufacturing firms to estimate a positive relationship between the share of managers with an
overseas education and a proxy for innovative performance, the share of new product exports in

4

Along similar lines, Oettl and Agrwal (2008) find that cross-border movement of inventors raises
patenting by the recruiting firm, but also leads to increased patent counts for the firm that lost the inventor and the
source country.

3

the firm’s total export volume.5 Filatotchev et al. (2009) collect survey data from Beijing hightech firms and find that firms owned by Chinese natives with at least 2 years of commercial or
educational experience in an OECD country are more likely to export and more likely to report
export sales growth.
While this evidence suggests that intellectual returnees are a conduit for cross-border
technology transfer, distinguishing causation from correlation is particularly difficult in this area
of study due to limited availability of relevant data panel. Accounting for firm characteristics is
vital, however, as there may be reverse causation running from innovation to returnees, with
highly skilled overseas talent attracted only to those companies with strong innovative capacity.
Filatotchev et al. (2011) recognize this issue and use Generalized Method of Moments (GMM)
techniques to estimate a positive and significant relationship between non-returnee firms’ patents
per employee and the density of returnee-led firms in the same sector. Liu et al. (2010) also rely
on GMM techniques in their study of the innovative performance of Chinese firms. They a
positive and significant relationship between returnee-ownership status and the number of
patents per employee. Neither of these studies is able to use fixed-effect techniques to estimate
the relationship of interest because a founder’s returnee status does not change over time.
Our analysis builds on these efforts by directly linking Chinese PV firms to their patent
filings and testing the relationship between these innovative activities and the presence of
returnees in the firm’s leadership. Both our data collection and econometric methods are guided

5

Other studies provide indirect support for a link between overseas experience and firm innovation.
Notably, Lu et al. (2013) use a unique dataset of Chinese listed firms to investigate how domestic industrial
diversification affects the number of foreign markets in which a firm operates, a proxy for technical sophistication.
They find that international experience by the firm’s top leaders strengthens the impact of domestic diversification
on the extensive margin of firm’s export markets.

4

by a serious concern for identification. We focus on the firm’s top management team rather than
its founder so that firms’ exposure to intellectual returnees varies over time. This broader focus
then allows us to create a panel dataset and to use both negative binomial and Poisson fixedeffect estimation methods in our investigation.
We turn now to a discussion of China’s photovoltaic industry and its innovative
performance. In section 3, we present our research design and empirical implementation.
Methods used in collecting and combining data on firms, patents, and returnees is described in
section 4 and our empirical results are presented in section 5. We discuss the challenges for
continued technology transfer through cross-border migration in section 6.
2.

China’s photovoltaic industry and the patent explosion
The Chinese PV industry, which has developed from virtual nonexistence to the world’s

third largest in less than a decade, is well suited to a study of returnees and incremental
innovation. First, products along the silicon-based solar supply chain are highly standardized,
eliminating complexity introduced by differences in product quality. Secondly, the industry
relies on production technologies initially developed in industrialized countries, implying an
initial transfer of advanced knowledge and equipment to China. Thirdly, and perhaps most
importantly, significant complementary adaptation is needed all along the chain, and especially
in upstream stages requiring advanced technologies and specific skills. Using detailed
knowledge of the PV industry and extensive field interviews in China, de la Tour et al. (2011)
conclude that, “a major part of the technology concerns the operation of manufacturing processes,
which mainly consists of know-how. In the context, the manufacturing experience of skilled

5

employees is a key asset.”6 Lastly, there is evidence of a significant number of intellectual
returnees in leadership roles in the industry (de la Tour et al., 2011; Luo and Yu, 2012). For
these reasons, the PV industry is fertile ground for testing whether incremental innovation can be
fueled by leaders familiar with overseas technologies and operations.
Emergence of China’s PV industry and intellectual returnees
China’s emergence as a major producer and exporter of photovoltaic equipment occurred
rapidly. As seen in Figure 1, worldwide installation of new solar power generating capacity
grew from a very small base in 2001 to almost 30 gigawatts installed in 2012. Within a decade,
hundreds of Chinese PV firms participated in all segments of the PV supply chain, from silicon
purification and wafer production to cell production and module assembly, leading to rapid
declines in the installation price of solar equipment worldwide. Today, many of the largest and
most visible firms in the industry, including Suntech, Trina, JingAo, and Yingli, are Chinese
enterprises.7
While exporting more than 95% of its production, China’s share of global PV production
rose from 1% in 2009 to 59% by 2010. 8 It remains the world leader in cell production and
module assembly, segments with relatively low technological barriers to entry and low industrial
concentration. With strong support from the government, Chinese firms have rapidly increased
their presence in upstream activities. Their capacity to purify silicon and produce ingots and

6

de la Tour et al. (2011) use industry directories and field interviews to support their claim that Chinese
producers acquired the skills and technology necessary to compete in this newly emergent sector through two main
channels: imported capital equipment and the return of skilled individuals. They find a very limited role for
technology transfer through multinational activity and none for licensing.
7
A supply glut and heavy debt pushed Suntech Power Co. into bankruptcy court in March 2013. Suntech
had been the world’s largest manufacturer of solar panels but now faces an uncertain future (Ma and Glazer, 2013).
8
Recently, China has moved strongly to increase domestic installed capacity. China was the top nonEuropean PV market in 2011, with 2.2 GW installed, followed by USA with 1.9 GW (EPIA, 2012).

6

wafers, both of which require technologically advanced production processes, has allowed them
to increase market share in these segments (de la Tour et al., 2011).
China’s rapid entry into the global PV market has led to considerable trade friction. After
failing to obtain significant countervailing duties on solar panel equipment imports from China,
in 2012 the United State imposed anti-dumping duties of approximately 35% on billions of
dollars of solar products to protect domestic manufacturers from lower-priced imports. In June
2013, the European Union imposed modest tariffs of 11.8 percent on solar panels imports worth
five times as much as the American volume, but threatened to raise these rates if Beijing did not
stop what the Europeans say is dumping.9 In July 2013 and in what many see as retaliation,
China levied duties exceeding 50% on solar-grade polysilicon imports from the United States,
threatening to greatly reduce sales to the American polysilicon industry’s largest customer.10
The reasons for China’s export success and apparent cost advantage in solar equipment
are beyond the scope of this paper.11 However, extensive data collection and field research by de
la Tour et al. (2011) identify the importance of international technology transfer as the driver of
China’s success. They argue that successful entry into each segment of PV production requires
state-of-the-art production technology. Turnkey operations can be purchased in the downstream
cell and module assembly segments, while equipment suppliers are scarce in the upstream
segments of silicon purification and wafer production. Particularly in these more advanced
segments and for continuing adaptive innovation in downstream segments, de la Tour et al.

9

See Diane Cardwell, “China’s Feud with West on Solar Leads to Tax,” The New York Times, July 18,
2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/19/business/energy-environment/chinas-feud-with-west-on-solar-leads-totax.html.
10
Ibid.
11
Besides concerns about government subsidies and export pricing behavior, observers often point to scale
economies due to the large size of almost all aspects of PV manufacturing in China.

7

(2011) highlight the importance of skills and indigenous adaptation as key the sector’s
development.
During this development process, intellectual returnees played a crucial role in mastering
the technology and techniques needed to produce for export. Pioneers in the industry are the
well known “three returnees of China’s photovoltaic,” Huaijin Yang, Zhengrong Shi, and
Jianhua Zhao. These three men, originally from Jiangsu province, studied photovoltaic
technology in Australia in the 1990s, and then returned to China with advanced technology and
foreign capital to start firms using China’s relatively low-wage skilled labor force.
Besides the famous “three returnees,” there are hundreds of other returnees in China’s PV
sector. The importance of returnees to the industry is a central finding from field interviews
carried out by Luo and Yu (2012) and by de la Tour et al. (2011). These sources suggest that
China benefited not only from the return of foreign trained pioneers but also a continuing flow of
talent back to the Chinese PV industry. Exact counts are not available, but industry sources
report most large firms engage in aggressive recruiting of ex-pat executives with overseas
training.
A patent explosion in Chinese photovoltaics
Due partly by increased official attention to patenting, over the past decade there has
been a Chinese patent “explosion” (Hu and Jefferson, 2009). Analysis by Eberhardt, Helmers,
and Yu (2012) find that the number of domestic filings with the Chinese patent office increased
at an average annual rate of 35% during the period 1999-2006. However, their examination of
domestic and international patent applications by manufacturing firms registered in China
indicates that an overwhelming share were from a handful of companies in the ICT equipment

8

sector, especially for those also filed with the U. S. Patent Office.12 Moreover, they find that
most innovation is done by large, relatively young firms that are more R&D-intensive and export
oriented than their peers.
Similarly, de la Tour et al. (2011) document an increase in both China’s solar
photovoltaic patenting activity and an increase in China’s share of global PV patents. Our work
builds on theirs by examining the characteristics of the Chinese firms acquiring these patents.13
To document these firms’ innovative activity, we search and extract all patents records for
Chinese PV firms filed in China, using records of the State Intellectual Property Office (SIPO),
and with international patent offices, using records from the Delphion patent database.14 As
further checks to ensure completeness, we also search for information on Chinese patents using
the China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI).15
These methods yield a total of 3508 patent applications from 290 of the 806 Chinese
firms active in the industry through 2011. The number of patents assigned to these firms
increased from 14 in 2000 to 973 in 2010, implying an annual growth rate of 68%. Figure 2
shows the distribution of patent counts among those firms with patents. Compared to other
industries in China (Eberhardt et al., 2012), patenting is more widespread in the PV industry.
The average patent count among all firms is 4.35, with an average of 12.1 among those with one

12

Because of the costs of filing abroad, along with a one-year waiting period that gives inventors additional
time to gauge their invention’s value, only the most valuable inventions are filed in multiple countries. Because of
this, researchers such as Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004) have used data on patent families as proxies for the
quality of individual patents. Lanjouw and Mody (1996) use such data to show that environmental technologies
patented by developed country firms are more general than similar inventions from developing countries, as the
developed country inventions are protected in more countries.
13
As explained in more detail in section 4, we use China’s Annual Survey of Industrial Firms to identify all
firms operating in any segment of the PV supply chain.
14
Delphion provides worldwide detailed worldwide patent information at http://www.delphion.com/.
15
A sub-dataset of CNKI provides all updated patents information of SIPO at
http://dbpub.cnki.net/Grid2008/Dbpub/Brief.aspx?ID=SCPD&subBase=all.

9

or more patents. Thus, while many firms have patents, most firms have only a few.
Detailed scrutiny of the 3508 patent records suggests that much of this innovative activity
represents the “incremental innovation” highlighted by Puga and Trefler (2010) as necessary to
move production of new technologies to developing countries. First, we reviewed each patent to
identify whether it represented a process or product innovation. Most patents represent process
innovations: improved devices, tools, or methods that enhance production efficiency or product
quality; only a few patents represent product innovation, in which a new higher quality final
product is patented. The share of product innovation patents rose in recent years.
Secondly, we gain additional information on the quality of Chinese PV innovation can be
gained by examining the type of patent protection sought. Not all patenting activity signals the
same level of innovation and Chinese patent documents contain details that make it possible to
sort them into categories reflecting innovation quality. Specifically, Chinese patent law permits
three types of patents - invention, utility, and design - and the type is listed in the patent record.
Invention patents refer to new technical solutions relating to a product or process. They provide
20 years of protection and are analogous to patents in industrialized economies. Utility patents
refer to minor improvements to existing technology. They provide only 10 years of protection
and apply to any new technical solution relating to the shape or structure of a product. Design
patents cover the aesthetic design of a product and also provide just 10 years of protection.16
As illustrated in Figure 3, about two-thirds of patent applications from Chinese PV firms
represent utility and design innovations. While only about one-third of patents are invention
patents, the number of these more valuable innovations increases steadily over the decade.
16

Descriptions of the various patent types come from the State Intellectual Property Office of P.R.C,
http://www.sipo.gov.cn/zsjz/zhzs/200804/t20080418_383771.html, and the Embassy of United States,
http://beijing.usembassy-china.org.cn/iprpatent.html.

10

These trends are consistent with an industry that used existing technology from foreign countries
and initially directed research efforts mainly to adaptation and “minor” innovation rather than
basic research. As the industry expanded, however, it seems that more effort was directed to
fundamental research resulting in more invention patents.
Table 1 provides more detail on the top patenting PV firms in China: Suntech, Trina,
Shanghai Solar, CEEG, and Yingli. These firms are domestic, either private or state-owned
enterprises.17 In addition to their patent counts, the table shows that with the notable exception
of Suntech, most firms have more utility and design patents than invention patents and hold few
international patents. Finally, based on our reading of individual patents, columns 5 and 6 of
Table 1 show the share of each firm’s patents that are product versus process innovations. Unlike
the broader sample of firms, for these top innovators, a majority of their patents represent new
products rather than improved processes.
3.

Research design: intellectual returnees and innovation capacity
We use the patent data described in section 2 to investigate the role of intellectual

returnees on innovation. Our basic approach is to regress a firm’s patent count on an indicator
for the presence of an intellectual returnee among a firm’s leadership. We control for a variety
of other factors that determine the firm’s innovative activity. We identify the effects of
international experience using both differences between and within firms, as we discuss in
greater detail below.

17

Of the top nine PV companies in China in 2008 and 2009, de la Tour et al. (2011) find that only three
have investment links with foreign companies and these are late arrivals, following the Chinese pioneers.

11

Patents counts as an indicator of technology innovation
We use patents as a measure of each firm’s innovation efforts. Patents provide a
temporary legal monopoly to use an innovation in a specific market. In contrast to data on R&D
spending, which has only limited availability and is subject to numerous measurement problems,
patents are publicly available documents, with a long history even in some developing countries
(Nagaoka, Motohashi, and Goto, 2010). While patents are an output of the innovation process,
economists have found that patents provide a good indicator of innovation activity (see, e.g.,
Griliches 1990). Moreover, due to the detail available on patent documents, patents are widely
used in studies of environmental innovation (see Popp et al. 2010 for a review).
Nonetheless, when working with patent data, it is important to be aware of their
limitations. The existing literature on the benefits and drawbacks of using patent data is quite
large.18 While the tendency to patent varies across industry and by country, focusing on a single
industry in a single country mitigates many of these concerns in our study. Also, as noted earlier,
Chinese patent data enable us to address differences in the quality of patented inventions, using
the categories of invention, utility, and design described in section 2.
Determinants of a firm’s technology innovation
Many internal and external factors determine a firm’s technology innovation activities.
Our study focuses on the role of international technology transfers resulting from international
personnel movement. Returnees may be an important technology transfer channel, but their
impact is not well studied because international personnel movement is typically conceived as a
“brain drain” through which talent is transferred from developing nations to the developed world

18

Griliches (1990) provides a useful survey.

12

(Fagerberg et al., 2010). Part of the explanation for this gap in the literature may also be the
difficulty of obtaining data on returning intellectuals and their innovative activities. With the
recent emergence of indigenous innovation and large existing stock of overseas talent, however,
China presents a unique opportunity to study the possible impact of intellectual returnees.
Returned talent can improve a firm’s innovative performance through a variety of
channels. First, intellectual returnees represent a transfer of technology through human capital
(Kapur and McHale, 2005). They generally have better professional training than domestic peers
and, thus, provide a new source of knowledge to the enterprise. Some returnees are facile with
advanced technologies from employment in developed country firms and may even hold patents
pertaining to these technologies. Secondly, returnees often are recruited back to China at salaries
higher than those paid to domestic workers and are placed in leadership roles within the firm. A
leadership position may give an intellectual returnee the platform by which to influence the
firm’s innovative and patenting activity. For these reasons, we expect that the presence of
intellectual returnees in a leadership position to raise a firm’s patenting activity.19
To ensure that we isolate the effect of returnees within the firm, we must control for other
factors that also influence its patenting behavior. One channel may be through talent located in
neighboring firms that raises a firm’s innovative potential through formal or informal
interactions or even personnel movement among firms (Zucker and Darby, 2007; Filatotchev et
al. (2011)). Therefore, in testing for a positive relationship between a firm’s returnees and its
patenting activity, we control for the presence of returnees as leaders of neighboring firms.
Additional spillovers may come from external scale economies or co-location near major
19

While we focus on returnees and innovative performance, some researchers argue that returnees have
disadvantages in that they lack local connections and local knowledge and that these disadvantages lead to poorer
performance by firms started by returnee entrepreneurs (see Li, et al. 2012 for discussion).

13

universities. External economies would be evidenced by industry agglomeration, which may
affect firms’ innovation by facilitating knowledge spillovers, through input-output linkage and
by labor market sharing (Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr, 2010). Major universities or research
institutes can also be the source of innovative capacity, especially where enterprise-university
linkages are strong (Edquist, 2004). We create measures of both industry agglomeration and
proximity to research centers to control for these factors.
The literature on firm-level innovation suggests other channels of international
technology transfer, such as international trade and FDI, that also contribute to firms’ technology
innovation (Lin and Zhang, 2005; Keller, 2010). While there is very little foreign investment in
the PV sector, there are significant export flows and keeping up with competition in export
markets may induce more innovative activity. Therefore, we also control for firm export
intensity in our empirical implementation.
The literature also suggests several firm characteristics that are important determinants of
innovative performance (Cohen (2010) provides a review). Examples include firm size, age, and
market share. We include these as controls in the model that follows. Lastly, we include year
fixed effects to control for patenting shocks common across firms in a given year, such as those
due to changes in government policy, bank lending behavior, or the business cycle.
Empirical implementation
Our data set, described in detail in section 4, is an unbalanced panel of 806 firms over the
time period 1998-2008. Our dependent variable is the number of patent applications filed by
firm i in year t, where t is the application year of the patent. The basic empirical model is:
Patenti,t = f(IntlExper_Leaderit, IntlExper_Execit, ln(IntlExper_Clusterit),
ln(IndustryClusteri,t), ln(UnivDisti,t), Xi,t, yeart)

(1)
14

All continuous variables are included in logarithmic form when we estimate model (1) so that we
can interpret coefficients as elasticities.
We include two indicators of the international experience of a firm’s leaders. The first
indicator, IntlExper_Leaderit is an indicator for whether or not the firm’s chief executive officer
(CEO) or chairman of the board (posts usually held by the same person but not always) has
international experience. IntlExper_Execit is a dummy variable equal to one if one or more
members of the firm’s top management team have international experience. Depending on each
individual company’s organizational structure, top management may include the chief operating
officer, chief technical officer, and chief science officer. International experience is defined as a
certificated overseas education or foreign working experience. The most common international
experience is completion of a degree from a foreign university, accounting for 80% of
international experiences.
To investigate whether spillovers from the presence of returnees in neighboring firms
matter in the PV industry, we create a firm-level measure of proximity to firms led by
intellectual returnees. This variable, IntlExper_Clusterit, sums over the international experience
of all other firms in year t, placing more weight on the international experience of nearby firms
using the formula:

Here, Ij,t is a dummy variable equal to one if firm j’s leader in year t has international
experience, and di,j represents the distance between firms i and j. We measure the distance

15

between firms using county centroids.20
The inclusion of IndustryClusteri,t tests for the effects of industry agglomeration. We
measure industry clustering as the sum of other PV firms’ output discounted by distance.
Defining vj,t as output for firm i in year t and di,j as the distance between firms i and j, we
calculate industry cluster as:

We use UnivDisti,t, to examine the potential benefits of locating near a research university.
This variable measures the distance from firm i to the nearest top university (or public research
institute), defined as:
UnivDisti,t = Min{Di,u, u = 1,…,25}.
Here Di,u is the distance between firm i and each of the top 25 universities in China, u.21
Xi,t is a matrix of firm characteristics used as control variables. Our controls for firm
characteristics include a measure of market power, defined as the share for firm i in year t of
total PV industry sales, the export share of total sales for firm i in year t, the age of each firm at
time t, and the size of the firm measured as the number of employees.
We also include dummy variables indicating the nature of firm i’s production: upstream
(silicon purification), midstream (silicon ingot/wafer/cell), downstream (panels), or

20

Since we know the county is which each firm is located, we calculate, the distance between firms in the

same county using the common formula  2 area  , where area refers to the county’s area.

 
3
21

The top 25 universities and public research institutes in China are as follows: Tsinghua University,
Nanjing University, Peking University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, University of Science and Technology of
China, Zhejiang University, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Shandong University, Sichuan
University, Sun Yat-sen University, Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Dalian University of
Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Jilin University, Southeast University, Wuhan University, Xian Jiao
Tong University; and three institutes of China Academy School. University rankings are taken from
http://www.shanghairanking.com/Country2011Main.jsp?param=China.

16

comprehensive firms that are fully or partially integrated, producing some upstream and
downstream products. While patents come from all types of firms, upstream production
processes are generally more technological sophisticated, but smaller adaptive innovations are
more easily produced in the downstream segment. We control for ownership with a series of
dummy variables for ownership type: state, foreign, HMT (Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan),
collective, or private enterprise. Lastly, we include year dummies to control for changes over
time affecting the entire industry, such as changes in environmental or patent policy.
4.

Data on Firm Characteristics, Patent Applications, and Leadership Experience
Our research design requires the combination of firm-level data, which allow us to

identify PV firms and their characteristics, with patents record for these firms over the period
1998 to 2008. It also requires us to collect information on the identity of each firm’s top
management teams and whether or not they have relevant international experience. Table 2
provides summary statistics of the variables used in our regression analysis.
Photovoltaic firm characteristics
We identify photovoltaic firms from 1998 to 2008 using the Annual Survey of Industrial
Production (ASIP) provided by China’s National Bureau of Statistics. From this source, we
obtain information on a total of 806 unique firms listing a PV product among their top three
activities. The ASIP is a universal database covering all major industrial firms, including all
state owned enterprises and non-state firms with annual turnover above 5 million RMB (about
US $800,000 in sales). This census provides basic information such as corporate identity,
location, establishing year, and operating information such as output value, sales, intermediate
input, value added and tax, employment, assets and liabilities, and other financial data.
17

Photovoltaics is an emerging technology and there are no unique industry code specifying
PV firms. Fortunately, the ASIP records each firm’s main products, which we use both to
identify firms operating in the industry and also to further categorize them into their location
along the PV supply chain: upstream purification of silicon, midstream production of ingot and
wafer and the creation of solar cells, and downstream industry assembly of solar panels. Some
firms are vertically integrated and we code these firms separately. To ensure a complete list of
firms, we scrutinize each firm’s recorded products in each year it appears in the ASIP. There is
entry of some firms into the industry from other sectors of the economy. Additionally, we crossreference our list with the solar company directory provided by ENF Solar, which is considered a
comprehensive list of suppliers used by international purchasers of PV products.22
Patent application records and matching
Linking firm data and to patent records is challenging because firm names and locations
obtained from the ASIP are recorded in Chinese while international patent information available
from Delphion is in English. To assist, we make use of another dataset, QIN, a Chinese
enterprises financial database.23 We use QIN’s listing of firms by both their Chinese and English
names to obtain English names for those firms we have identified through the ASIP. Through
this procedure, we are able to find patent information on about one third of the initial 806 firms.
About two-thirds of the initially identified PV firms are not present in QIN. For these
firms, we use the following approaches to get patents records from Delphion. First, we use the
firms’ Chinese names to search patent record in CNKI, which contains patent records in SIPO.
Secondly, we use the SIPO patent information (e.g. Publication Number) to locate the same
22

ENF website: http://www.enf.cn/.
QIN is a data product of Bureau van Dijk, which provide information on companies around the world.
The website is as follows: https://qin.bvdep.com.
23

18

patent record in Delphion, and the latter record typically also contains the firm’s English name,
from which we can obtain the firm’s complete patents records in Delphion. Third, in those few
cases where Delphion patent records don’t contain the firm’s English name, we use company
websites to identify English names. Based on these procedures, we identified patents records for
all 806 firms.
Firm leaders’ international experience record
Obtaining biographical information on each firm’s leadership also requires painstaking
search procedures. First, we identify each firm’s top management team, including the chairman
of the board, chief executive officer, chief operating officer, company president, chief
technology officer, and chief science officer, in each year.24 For each executive, we search for a
detailed biography providing information on tertiary education and industry experience. Key
sources of information are each company’s own official website and public online references to
the company and its leaders, such as online newspapers, magazines, and industry publications.25
Through these procedures, we confirmed biographical information for the leaders of 472 of the
806 PV firms we initially identified. Firms with available information include the largest firms
and together account for more than 80% of the output value of all PV firms combined. We were
unable to confirm biographical information for the leadership of the 334 remaining and mainly
small producers initially identified. We handle this situation in two ways econometrically. In

24

Lu et al. focus on the firm’s top management team, as we do here, in their study of returnees and the
firm’s ability to export to multiple markets.
25
To obtain information of the firm’s leader (founder or CEO) and the management team (executives other
than CEO), we search information from the firms’ website and online source. First, we check the firm’s official
website, where some firms provide official biographies for the leader and management team. Second, if we cannot
find the information from the official website, we use internet search engines to find information on the international
experience of the firm’s leader and management team. Specifically, we use “Google,” the largest search engine in
the world; and “Baidu,” the largest search engine in Chinese.

19

our main regressions, we group those firms with missing leadership information with those
confirmed as “no executives have international experience.” In separate runs (unreported, but
available upon request), we omit all firms with missing information from our sample and we find
no qualitative differences in our regression results.
Among the 472 firms for which we have confirmed information, 115 have leaders with
international experience, accounting for nearly 25% of firms with available information. We
found 51 firms with a chairman or CEO who has international experience and 96 firms with
similarly experienced other top management. Among those with international experience, 80%
have overseas educational experience and many of them have Ph.D. degrees. The remainder,
351 of the 472 firms, did not have a leader or executives with international experience.

5.

Empirical results and discussion
Our data set contains an unbalanced panel of 806 firms over the time period 1998-2008.26

Because the dependent variable is a count of patent applications by firm and year, we use count
data panel regression techniques. We present results from both Poisson and Negative Binomial
fixed effects regression models (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005; Hilbe, 2011). Below we discuss
the advantages and disadvantages of each technique.
We can identify the effects of international experience using both differences between
and within firms. In our data, much of the variation in leader’s international experience occurs
across firms. However, while between-firm variation provides more abundant information on

26

While we have 1810 potential firm/year observations, fixed effect regressions will drop all firms that
never patent in any year, as the fixed effect perfectly explains their patenting behavior. This leaves us with 445
observations from 106 unique firms for the fixed effect regressions.

20

the effects of international leadership, relying on this source of variation alone risks endogeneity
bias. A central concern is reverse causation: a firm that has private information about the value
of its own R&D may seek out a leader with international experience for reasons unrelated to
patenting. If this channel of influence exists, estimation of (1) with a cross-section may lead to
the spurious conclusion that international experience spurs patenting rather than the other way
around. Within a short time frame, a firm’s R&D productivity is unlikely to change significantly,
so a method of reducing the possibility of endogeneity bias is the use of firm fixed effects in our
estimation procedure. Another approach is to control for firms’ R&D expenditures, although this
approach cannot capture the quality of a firm’s R&D activities. We use both approaches in our
empirics.
The first model we estimate is the negative binomial model, a method often used with
overdispersed count data. Our dependent variable, firm-level patent counts, is overdispersed in
the sense that the variance in the data is greater than the mean. Our concern about endogeneity
leads us to estimate a negative binomial fixed effects (NBFE) regression, which is unusual in that
it provides coefficient estimates for time-invariant variables. In our data, only eight of those
firms with leaders having international experience undergo a change in this variable (e.g.
bringing on a new leader who has international experience). Thus, the NBFE model allows us
to better estimate the effect of international experience, as it draws on both within and across
firm variation in a fixed effect setting. It also allows us to estimate the effects of time-invariant
variables, such as firm ownership type, because NBFE estimation using conditional maximum
likelihood allows estimation of firm-specific intercepts. However, the NBFE model has the
weakness that it does not perfectly control for omitted firm time-invariant characteristics (Allison
and Waterman, 2002; Paulo, 2008).
21

In contrast, a Poisson fixed effects (PFE) model allows us to better control for any
unobserved time-invariant firm characteristics that may affect firm-level innovation. While the
Poisson model assumes that the mean and variance of the data are the same, it provides
consistent estimates even if the data are overdispersed. Robust standard errors can then be used
to adjust for overdispersion (Cameron and Trivedi 2005). Thus, the PFE model provides
consistent results even if there are unobserved firm characteristics that bias the NBFE results,
making it better suited for a causal argument. However, this model enables us to identify the
effects of international experience only by the outcomes for those few firms switching status.
Given these tradeoffs, we present both the NBFE and PFE results.
Intellectual returnees and technology innovation
Our results suggest that intellectual returnees both improve a firm’s technology
innovation capacity and provide spillover effects to neighboring firms and, thus, are an effective
channel for technology transfer. Looking first at Table 3, we see that firms whose leader has
international experience have between 138% (NBFE – column 1) and 379% (PFE – column 2)
more patents than other firms. Similarly, having an executive board member with international
experience increases patenting by 89% (NBFE) to 165% (PFE). These coefficients are all
precisely estimated.
Recall that the NBFE estimation does not condition on unobserved fixed effects, so it
identifies the effect of experience from both differences between and within firms. However, the
results may be biased if, for example, a firm that has private information about the value of its
own R&D seeks out a leader with international experience. In this case, we would expect any
such bias to be positive – e.g. more innovative firms, who are likely to patent more frequently
anyway, will be more likely to seek out those with international experience. In contrast, the PFE
22

controls for such unobserved firm characteristics. Nonetheless, the PFE effect of leadership is
higher than that estimated using the NBFE model, suggesting that this sort of bias may not be a
concern. We emphasize, however, that since our sample only allows us to identify the leadership
effect by changes at a few firms, a priority for future research should be replication of our results
in a broader sample. However, given the consistency across the two methods, we believe that
the results provide strong evidence that returnees play an important role in innovation.
Clustering of PV firms is common and interactions among PV firms have been identified
as a notable channel for technology transfer (de la Tour et al., 2011). Examples of these
interactions include input-output linkages, technology cooperation, labor market sharing, and
personal communication between firm leaders. Our fixed effects results provide evidence that
these clusters are not only important, but that they are an important channel of spillover benefits
from international experience. As shown in column 2 of Table 3, the estimated coefficient for
our measure of returnee clustering is positive and statistically significant, with an elasticity of
0.876, suggesting that the benefits of returnees’ international experience are shared among
neighboring firms.
The significant effect of international experience remains robust when separating the
results by patent type in Table 4. Table 4 presents separate results for invention patents, utility
and design patents, and process patents. Process patents are a subset of both invention and
design patents that protect innovations designed to improve the production process, rather than
advancements in the solar cells themselves. The international experience of a firm’s leader
remains large and significant across all three patent types and across both the NBFE and PFE
models. Interestingly, the international experience of executive board members is important for
utility and design patents and process patents, but not for the more significant invention patents.
23

These more minor innovations typically represent adaptive innovation based on current
technology and are easier to achieve while still improving product quality or reducing cost. In
contrast, firms whose leaders have international experience are also more likely to do major
innovations, as shown by their increased likelihood of receiving invention patents.
R&D and patenting activity
Table 5 provides descriptive statistics on the level of R&D spending by firms with and
without international experience. These data are only available for three years in our sample:
2005-2007. However, they provide some evidence that firms with internationally experienced
leaders are more active researchers. Such firms do more total R&D and spend more on R&D per
worker than do other firms.
Table 6 considers whether international returnees place more value on patent protection
than other firm leaders. We address this by including firm R&D spending as an explanatory
variable. These results depend on a smaller sample, given the limited availability of the firmlevel R&D data.
Column (1) of Table 6 presents results from a Poisson fixed effects regression. The
interpretation of the regression including R&D is different from those previously shown. When
R&D is included, the regression estimates a patent production function – that is, how additional
research inputs translate into research outputs. Thus, the large positive coefficients in column (1)
do not tell us that firms with international experience are more innovative. Rather, they tell us
that, conditional on levels of R&D spending (e.g. research inputs), firms with international
experience obtain more patents. These returnees in general are more familiar with technology
frontiers, and they may as well be more aware of the importance of intellectual rights protection
given by patenting.
24

One troubling aspect of the results in column (1) is the insignificant coefficient on R&D.
This result is inconsistent with other recent studies examining R&D and patenting in China, such
as Eberhardt et al. (2012) and Hu and Jefferson (2009). A complication is that the fixed effects
model can only be estimated on firms that patent at least once during the 2005-07 sample period,
resulting in just 155 observations. Column (2) addresses this by using a random effects model.
This expands the sample size to 705, but has the drawback that the estimates are not consistent if
the unobserved individual random effects are correlated with the explanatory variables.
Nonetheless, given small sample size issues that arise when working with data from hightechnology firms, it is not uncommon to include random effects results when estimating patent
production functions (see, for example, Eberhardt et al. 2011, Hu and Jefferson 2009, and Huang
and Wu 2012).
The random effects model results allows us to verify the importance of R&D, but
coefficients on leader experience should be interpreted with caution, given potential unobserved
effects that could determine both international experience and patenting. Column (2) shows that,
as expected, firms doing more R&D are more likely to patent, with an elasticity of 0.057.
Finally, to ascertain the role of the changing sample size, column (3) reruns the random effects
regression on just those 155 observations including firms that patent at least once from 2005-07.
Once again the effect of R&D is insignificant and nearly 0. Thus, the significant coefficient
found in column (2) comes not from differences between the random effects and fixed effects
model, but because of differences between those firms that do or do not patent. However, the
coefficients on international experience are lower in both random effects models than in the fixed
effects model, suggesting that unobserved characteristics of firms are important, verifying the
importance of using fixed effects to estimate the effects of international experience on patenting.
25

Other determinants of firm innovation
As noted in section 5.1, industry agglomeration provides an important channel for
spillover benefits from international experience. Therefore, we also include a direct measure of
industry clusters to see if agglomeration benefits, such as input-output linkage, labor market
sharing and knowledge spillover, enhance technology innovation. The evidence for these
benefits is limited; the coefficient is only significant in the PFE model and only at the ten percent
level. In Table 4, we see that, even at the 10 percent level, industry agglomeration is important
only for utility & design and process patents. Thus, general agglomeration effects appear
unimportant for more significant innovations. Similarly, our NBFE models include controls for
geographic proximity to a top university. This location characteristic also has no additional
impact on patent levels.
International trade is usually regarded as an important channel of international
technology transfer, both through the importation of advanced capital equipment and through
learning by exporting. To investigate the learning by exporting channel, the regressions in both
Tables 3 and 4 include controls for firm export intensity. Domestic firms may gain access to
foreign technology through exporting, or may be pressured by competition to improve products
for export markets. While both can help raise innovation performance (Clerides and Saul et al.,
1998; Bernard and Jensen, 1999), we find no evidence of a link between patenting and export
intensity for Chinese PV firms.
6.

Concluding remarks
The rapid growth of China’s PV industry has had a profound effect on the global solar

equipment market. Recent case studies illustrate how indigenous Chinese innovation facilitated
26

growth in the industry and adapted advanced production methods to leverage China’s lower
labor costs. While previous studies suggest an important role for intellectual returnees in
fostering this innovation, few studies have marshalled sufficient data to directly relate innovative
activity to the presence of overseas-trained personnel in a firm’s top management team.
Our analysis investigates the patenting history of 806 Chinese solar photovoltaic firms
from 1998-2008. We show that firms whose leaders have international experience are more
likely to patent. Moreover, the benefits of intellectual returnees spill over to neighboring firms,
who also see their patenting activity increase. These spillover effects are found despite the fact
that we find no evidence for more general industry agglomeration effects in our sample.
As awareness of the role of returnees in indigenous innovation grows, China’s
immigration and overseas training policies will continue to encourage intellectual returnees.
Recruiting high-skill returnees is a strategic imperative emphasized in three national middle- and
long-term plans: for scientific and technological development (2006-2020), for human resources
development (2010-2020), and for education reform and development (2010-2020). China’s
policies now include not only incentives for the return of émigrés, but also imperatives in some
sectors for overseas experiences. According to China’s official statistics, more than 500 thousand
Chinese students returned after training abroad during 1978-2009. In the next five years, an
estimated 500,000 Chinese students will be educated abroad and an estimated 300,000 will
return to China (Wang and Lai et al., 2010; Li and Xu, 2011). The resulting “brain circulation”
is sure to influence China’s ability to compete in production of high-tech and newly emerging
sectors and influence trade patterns for years to come.
The brief history of silicon solar in China suggests caution as developing countries seek
technology transfer through intellectual returnees. First, the potential for trade conflict is high as
27

emerging economy firms move into high-tech sectors once considered the province only of
developed countries. Adaptation of advanced production processes matched with low labor and
energy costs, and sometimes subsidies by eager governments, can quickly propel new producers
to large global market shares. Unless global demand growth is sufficiently rapid, import surges
in Western markets may trigger a cycle of trade retaliation, ignited by the levy of antidumping
and countervailing duties on developing country exports.
A second caution from the history of the PV industry warns that domestic citizens may
never reap the benefits of public expenditures used to lure highly skilled individuals back home.
A main subsidiary of Suntech Power, one of the world’s biggest solar-panel makers, declared
bankruptcy in March, 2013. Its founder, Shi Zhengrong, was an overseas scientist with
Australian citizenship and had several patents to his name before deciding to return to China to
start a business. The city of Wuxi lured him with a $6 million initial investment in his company
that it is unlikely to recoup.27
A final caution relates to the fine line between technology transfer and intellectual
property espionage. Our analysis suggests that domestic Chinese innovative activity in silicon
solar is genuine, as evidenced by the granting of patents for indigenous inventions by both
Chinese and international patent offices. Nevertheless, as more scientists return home with
human capital acquired in technologically advanced economies, challenges grow for resolution
of intellectual property conflicts within a weak global IP protection architecture.

27

For further discussion of policies toward returnees and issues of technology transfer vs. espionage, see
Edward Wong and Didi Kirsten Tatlow, “China Seen in Push to Gain Technology Insights,” The New York Times,
June 5, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/world/asia/wide-china-push-is-seen-to-obtain-industrysecrets.html.

28

7.

References

Allison, P. D., & Waterman, R. P. (2002). Fixed effects negative binomial regression models.
Sociological Methodology, 32, 247-265.
Amsden, A. H. (1989). Asia's next giant: South Korea and late industrialization. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Bernard, A. B., & Jensen, J. B. (1999). Exceptional exporter performance: Cause, effect, or both?
Journal of International Economics, 47(1), 1-25.
Cameron, A. C., & Trivedi, P. K. (2005). Microeconometrics: Methods and applications. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Clerides, S. K., Lach, S., & Tybout, J. R. (1998). Is learning by exporting important? Microdynamic evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 113(3), 903-947.
Cohen, W. (2010). Fifty years of empirical studies of innovative activity and performance. In B.
H. Hall, & N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation (Vol. 1, pp.
129-213). Oxford: Elsevier.
de la Tour, A., Glachant, M., & Ménière, Y. (2011). Innovation and international technology
transfer: The case of the Chinese photovoltaic industry. Energy Policy, 39(2), 761-770.
Deng, Z., Jean, R.-J., & Sinkovics, R. R. (2012). Determinants of international innovation
performance in Chinese manufacturing firms: An integrated perspective. Asian Business
& Management, 11(1), 31-55.
Eberhardt, M., Helmers, C., & Yu, Z. (2012). Is the dragon learning to fly? An analysis of the
Chinese patent explosion (Working Paper No. 2011-15). CSAE, University of Oxford.
Edquist, C. (2005). Systems of innovation: Perspectives and challenges. In J. Fagerberg, D. C.
Mowery, & R. R. Nelson (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Innovation (pp. 181-208).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellison, G., Glaeser, E. L., & Kerr, W. R. (2010). What causes industry agglomeration? Evidence
from coagglomeration patterns. The American Economic Review, 100(3), 1195-1213.
European Photovoltaic Industry Association. (2011). Global market outlook for photovoltaics
until 2015. Brussels: European Photovoltaic Industry Association. Retrieved from
http://www.epia.org/news/publications/
29

Fagerberg, J., & Verspagen, B. (2002). Technology-gaps, innovation-diffusion and
transformation: An evolutionary interpretation. Research Policy, 31(8-9), 1291-1304.
Fagerberg, J., Srholec, M., & Verspagen, B. (2010). Innovation and economic development. In
B. H. Hall, & N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation (Vol. 2,
pp. 822-872). Oxford: Elsevier.
Fan, C. S., Hu, Y., & Zheng, H. (2008). A theoretical and empirical study on the impacts of FDI
on indigenous innovation in China. Economic Research Journal (Chinese), 43(1), 89102.
Filatochev, I., Liu, X., Lu, J., & Wright, M. (2011). Knowledge spillovers through human
mobility across national borders: Evidence from Zhongguancun Science Park in China.
Research Policy, 40(3), 453-462.
Filatotchev, I., Liu, X., Buck, T., & Wright, M. (2009). The export orientation and export
performance of high-technology SMEs in emerging markets: The effects of knowledge
transfer by returnee entrepreneurs. Journal of International Business Studies, 40(6),
1005-1021.
Filatotchev, I., Liu, X., Lu, J., & Wright, M. (2011). Knowledge spillovers through human
mobility across national borders: Evidence from Zhongguancun Science Park in China.
Research Policy, 40(3), 453-462.
Freeman, C., & Louca, F. (2001). As time goes by: From the industrial revolutions to the
information revolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Freeman, C., & Soete, L. (1997). The economics of industrial innovation. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Fu, X., & Gong, Y. (2011). Indigenous and foreign innovation efforts and drivers of
technological upgrading: Evidence from China. World Development, 39(7), 1213-1225.
Fu, X., & Pietrobelli, C. (2011). The role of foreign technology and indigenous innovation in the
emerging economies: Technological change and catching-up. World Development, 39(7),
1204-1212.
Griliches, Z. (1990). Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey. Journal of Economic
Literature, 28(4), 1661-1707.
Guimarães , P. (2008). The fixed effects negative binomial model revisited. Economics Letters,
99(1), 63-66.

30

Hobday, M. (2000). East versus Southeast Asian innovation systems: Comparing OME- and
TNC-led growth in electronics. In L. Kim, & R. R. Nelson (Eds.), Technology, learning,
and innovation: Experiences of newly industrializing economies (pp. 129-169). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Hongling, W., Li, D. D., & Junxin, F. (2006). Does FDI facilitate or dampen indigenous R&D?
Economic Research Journal, 2, 44-56.
Hu, A. G., & Jefferson, G. H. (2009). A great wall of patents: What is behind China's recent
patent explosion? Journal of Development Economics, 90(1), 57-68.
Huang, C., & Wu, Y. (2012). State-led technological development: A case of China's
nanotechnology development. World Development, 40(5), 970-982.
Kapur, D., & McHale, J. (2005). The global migration of talent: What does it mean for
developing countries? Washington: The Center for Global Development.
Keller, W. (2010). International trade, foreign direct investment, and technology spillovers. In B.
H. Hall, & N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation (Vol. 2, pp.
793-829). Oxford: Elsevier.
Lanjouw, J. O., & Mody, A. (1996). Innovation and the international diffusion of
environmentally responsive technology. Research Policy, 25, 549-571.
Lanjouw, J. O., & Shankerman, M. (2004). The quality of ideas: Measuring innovation with
multiple indicators. Economic Journal, 114(495), 441-465.
Levin, R. C., Klevorick, A. K., Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. (1987). Appropriating the returns
from industrial research and development. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1987(3), 783-820.
Li, H., Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Li-an, Z., & Zhang, W. (2012). Returnees versus locals: Who perform
better in China's technology entrepreneurship? Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 6(3),
257–272.
Li, P., & Xu, J. (2011). On the diffusion effect of intellectual returnees: An analysis based on
regional differences and threshold characters in China. China Economics Quarterly
(Chinese), 3, 935-964.
Lin, J. Y., & Zhang, P. (2005). The advantage of latter comers, technology imports, and
economic growth of developing countries. China Economic Quarterly (in Chinese), 4,
53-74.

31

Liu, X., Lu, J., Filatotchev, I., Buck, T., & Wright, M. (2010). Returnee entrepreneurs,
knowledge spillovers and innovation in high-tech firms in emerging economies. Journal
of International Business Studies, 41(7), 1183-1197.
Liu, X., Wang, C., & Wei, Y. (2009). Do local manufacturing firms benefit from transactional
linkages with multinational enterprises in China. Journal of International Business
Studies, 40(7), 1113-1130.
Lu, J., Liu, X., Filatotchev, I., & Wright, M. (2013). The impact of domestic diversification and
top management teams on the international diversifcation of Chinese firms. International
Business Review. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2013.07.002
Luo, S., & Yu, Y. (2012). International technology transfer and indigenous innovation:
Evidences from Chinese photovoltaic. World Renewable Energy Forum. Denver:
American Solar Energy Society.
Ma, W., & Glazer, E. (2013, March 20). Suntech is pushed into Chinese bankruptcy court. Wall
Street Journal. Retrieved from
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324557804578372082733827860.html
Mountford, A. (1997). Can a brain drain be good for growth in the source economy? Journal of
Development Economics, 53(2), 287-303.
Nagaoka, S., Motohashi, K., & Goto, A. (2010). Patent statistics as an innovation indicator. In B.
H. Hall, & N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation (Vol. 2, pp.
1083-1127). Oxford: Elsevier.
Oettl, A., & Agrawal, A. (2008). International labor mobility and knowledge flow externalities.
Journal of International Business Studies, 39(8), 1242-1260.
Popp, D., Newell, R. G., & Jaffe, A. B. (2010). Energy, the environment, and technological
change. In B. H. Hall, & N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation
(Vol. 2, pp. 873-937). Oxford: Elsevier.
Puga, D., & Trefler, D. (2010). Wake up and smell the ginseng: International trade and the rise
of incremental innovation in low-wage countries. Journal of Development Economics,
91(1), 64-76.
Smith, K. (2005). Measuring innovation. In J. Fagerberg, D. Mowery, & R. Nelson (Eds.), The
Oxford Handbook of Innovation (pp. 148-177). New York: Oxford University Press.
Song, J., Almeida, P., & Wu, G. (2003). Learning-by-hiring: When is mobility more likely to
facilitate interfirm knowledge transfer? Management Science, 49(4), 351-365.
32

Veugelers, R., & Cassiman, B. (2004). Foreign subsidiaries as a chanel of international
technology diffusion: Some direct firm level evidence from Belgium. European
Economic Review, 48(2), 455-476.
Wang, H., & Lai, M. (2010). International technology transfer, heterogeneity and technology
innovation in China. Management World, 12, 131-142.
Wang, H., Zweig, D., & Lin, X. (2011). Returnee entrepreneurs: Impact on China's globalization
process. Journal of Contemporary China, 20, 413-431.
Xu, X., & Sheng, Y. (2012). Productivity spillovers from foreign direct investment: Firm-level
evidence from China. World Development, 40(1), 62-74.
Zucker, L., & Darby, M. (2007). Star scientists, innovation and regional and national
immigration (Working Paper No. 13547). Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic
Research.

33

35

70%

30

60%
Global annual installation
Market share of Chinese firms

20

50%
40%

15

30%

10

20%

5

10%

0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

0%

Market share

Installation (GW)

25

Figure 1: Global Solar Photovoltaic Installation and Chinese Firms’ Market Share, 20012012 Source: EPIA, 2013

250

Patent count

200
150
100
50
0

Number of firms

Figure 2: Chinese PV Patent Count across Firms with Patent Records, 1998-2011
Source: Delphion & SIPO, 2012

34

1200
Total patent count

1000

Invention patent
Utility & Design patent

800
600
400
200
0

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Figure 3: Chinese PV Firms' Patent Count, by type, 1998-2010
Source: Delphion & SIPO, 2012

Table 1: Top Chinese Patenting Photovoltaic Firms

59

Product
technology
share
59.9%

Process
technology
share
40.1%

47

76

66.7%

104

45

59

CEEG

79

30

Yingli

65

30

Firm

Total
patents

Invention
patents

Utility &
Design patents

Suntech

157

98

Trina

123

Shanghai
Solar

International
patents

Ownership
type

70

Private

33.3%

7

Private

60.6%

39.4%

0

State

49

73.4%

26.6%

0

State

35

69.2%

30.8%

3

Private

Source: Authors calculation using data from Delphion

35

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Main Variables Used in Regression Analysis
Variable

Definition

Mean

St. Dev.

Patenti,t

Firm’s annual patent application count

0.63

2.98

IntlExper_Leaderit

CEO or Chairman of Board has international
experience or not

0.08

0.27

IntlExper_Execit

Other members of top management team have
international experience or not

0.13

0.34

IntlExper_Clusterit

Proximity to firm leaders with international
experience, measured as the sum of the inverse
distance of all other firms whose leaders have
international experience

0.31

0.46

IndustryClusteri,t

Industry agglomeration, measured as sum of all
other firms’ output value discounted by distance

2.62x1011

1.18 x1012

UnivDisti,t

University closeness, measured as firm’s distance
to the nearest top university (or public research
institute)

201.26

277.27

MarketPoweri,t

Market power, measured as firm revenue as share
of all PV firm revenue

0.006

0.016

Exporti,t

Export share, measured as export sales divided
by firm’s total sales

0.27

0.37

RDi,t

R&D expenditure, in 1000 RMB

1001.52

3554.50

Agei,t

Firm’s age

7.24

10.17

Sizei,t

Firm’s size, measured as number of employees
Multiple dummy variables, denoting firm
registration type as State, Foreign, HMT (Hong
Kong, Macau and Taiwan), Collective, or Private

312.17

1166.58

-

-

-

-

-

-

Ownershipi+

FirmCategoryi++
Yeart

Multiple dummy variables, denoting firm type as
silicon purification, silicon ingot/wafer/cell,
silicon panels, comprehensive silicon solar firms,
non-silicon solar or other PV application
Year dummy variables

Notes: Summary statistics are based on the PV firm’s unbalanced panel between 1998 and 2008, except for R&D expenditures,
which are only available from 2005 to 2007.
+
Ownership contribution of the total firm-year sample is as follows, Foreign (0.133), HMT (0.104), Private (0.505), State
(0.148), Collective (0.030) and Others (0.080).
++
Firm Category contribution of the total firm-year sample is as follows, Silicon Purification (0.065), Silicon Ingot/Wafer/Cells
(0.344), Silicon Panels (0.147), Comprehensive Silicon (0.053), Non-silicon (0.023), and PV application (0.368)

36

Table 3: Negative Binomial & Poisson Fixed-Effect Estimation, Total Patent Count
Dependent Variable

Total Patent Count
[1]
Negative Binomial FE
1.384***

[2]
Poisson FE
3.792***

0.436

0.374

0.894**

1.649***

0.407

0.402

0.198

0.876**

0.236

0.375

-0.044

0.289*

0.11

0.164

-0.016

-

0.166

-

0.426***

-0.357**

0.157

0.166

-0.162**

0.079

0.064

0.087

0.049

0.056

0.131

0.239

0.058

0.382

0.153

0.246

Log-Likelihood

-337.48

-503.61

Number of Observations

445

445

Estimator
IntlExper_Leaderit
IntlExper_Execit
Ln(IntlExper_Clusterit)
Ln(IndustryClusteri,t)
Ln(UnivDisti,t)
Ln(MarketPoweri,t)
Ln(Exporti,t)
Ln(Agei,t)
Ln(Sizei,t)

Notes: Estimation also includes year, firm ownership type, and firm category dummies.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

37

Table 4: Negative Binomial & Poisson Fixed-Effect Estimation, Patent Count by Type
Dependent Variable

Invention Patent

Estimator

[1]
NBFE

IntlExper_Leaderit

[5]
NBFE

1.179*

1.446***

[6]
Poisson
FE
3.375***

1.072

0.667

0.983

0.479

0.378

0.141

14.09

1.054**

1.523***

0.986**

1.640***

0.788

671.2

0.498

0.425

0.42

0.394

0.405

1.279***

-0.133

0.678

0.156

0.748**

0.434

0.403

0.285

0.477

0.241

0.369

0.063

0.007

0.040

0.414*

-0.001

0.331*

0.142

0.106

0.130

0.218

0.110

0.173

-0.269

-

-0.094

-

0.004

-

0.295

-

0.22

-

0.171

-

0.258

-0.083

0.320*

-0.445*

0.383**

-0.383**

0.209

0.150

0.190

0.233

0.156

0.177

-0.034

0.092

-0.054

0.092

-0.142**

0.075

0.087

0.056

0.085

0.110

0.067

0.093

-0.213

-0.238

0.071

0.138

0.087

0.102

0.198

0.181

0.146

0.230

0.135

0.214

0.053

0.328*

-0.204

0.296

0.007

0.346

0.208

0.176

0.205

0.282

0.156

0.248

Log-Likelihood

-187.94

-224.54

-232.72

-336.69

-316.73

-445.37

Number of observations

326

326

370

370

445

445

Ln(IntlExper_Clusterit)
Ln(IndustryClusteri,t)
Ln(UnivDisti,t)
Ln(MarketPoweri,t)
Ln(Exporti,t)
Ln(Agei,t)
Ln(Sizei,t)

0.662

[3]
NBFE

Process Patent

[4]
Poisson
FE
14.00***

IntlExper_Execit

2.162***

[2]
Poisson
FE
3.232***

Utility & Design Patent

Notes: Estimation also includes year, firm ownership type, and firm category dummies.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

38

Table 5: R&D expenditures by Chinese PV firms (in thousand RMB)
R&D per
firm
1001.52

R&D per
worker
4.21

2005

546.94

2.64

2006

937.11

4.50

2007

1264.47

4.77

Leader has international experience

1385.15

8.17

2070.02

6.14

785.88

3.75

Among firms in PV industry
Annual trends for all
firms

Firms with or without

Executives have international

international experience

experience
No international experience

39

Table 6: Poisson Estimation Including R&D as a Control Variable
Dependent Variables

Total Patent Count, 2005-2007

Estimator

[1]
Poisson FE

14.92***

[2]
Poisson RE
Using full sample
(2005-2007)
0.528

[3]
Poisson RE
Using the same
sample as [1]
-0.356

Samples

-

IntlExper_Leaderit

1.320

0.656

0.415

16.46***

2.239***

1.374***

1.746

0.501

0.375

-0.720

0.005

-0.030

0.916

0.209

0.188

0.473**

0.380***

0.397***

0.191

0.090

0.084

-

-0.151

-0.087

-

0.140

0.116

-0.902***

-0.772***

-0.630***

0.276

0.125

0.123

-0.058

-0.008

-0.082

0.147

0.058

0.056

0.397*

0.119

0.082

0.222

0.112

0.125

0.385

0.444***

0.295**

0.319

0.149

0.135

0.012

0.057***

0.011

0.070

0.022

0.020

Log-Likelihood

-155.20

-468.33

-326.05

Number of observations

155

705

155

IntlExper_Execit
Ln(IntlExper_Clusterit)
Ln(IndustryClusteri,t)
Ln(UnivDisti,t)
Ln(MarketPoweri,t)
Ln(Exporti,t)
Ln(Agei,t)
Ln(Sizei,t)

Ln(RDi,t)

Notes: Estimation also includes year and firm ownership dummies.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

40

