                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 PREDATORY SHORT SELLING

                                      Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                         Martin Oehmke

                                        Working Paper 19514
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19514


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




For helpful comments, we thank Thierry Foucault, Charles Jones, Marco Pagano, Alejandro van der
Ghote, and seminar participants at Columbia University. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19514.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Martin Oehmke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Predatory Short Selling
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Martin Oehmke
NBER Working Paper No. 19514
October 2013
JEL No. G01,G20,G21,G23,G28

                                               ABSTRACT

Financial institutions may be vulnerable to predatory short selling. When the stock of a financial institution
is shorted aggressively, leverage constraints imposed by short-term creditors can force the institution
to liquidate long-term investments at fire sale prices. For financial institutions that are sufficiently
close to their leverage constraints, predatory short selling equilibria co-exist with no-liquidation equilibria
(the vulnerability region) or may even be the unique equilibrium outcome (the doomed region). Increased
coordination among short sellers expands the doomed region, where liquidation is the unique equilibrium.
Our model provides a potential justification for temporary restrictions on short selling of vulnerable
institutions and can be used to assess recent empirical evidence on short-sale bans.


Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
markus@princeton.edu

Martin Oehmke
Finance and Economics Division
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 420
New York, NY 10027
moehmke@columbia.edu
1         Introduction

The financial crisis of 2007-09 and the recent European sovereign debt crisis have led to
a heated discussion on short selling financial stocks. For example, as financial stocks fell
sharply in the spring, summer, and fall of 2008, a number of banks, most notably Bear
Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and Morgan Stanley, blamed short sellers for their woes.1 In
response, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and a number of international
financial regulators took measures against short selling; most significantly, some imposed
temporary restrictions on the short selling of financial stocks, some even on short selling in
general. In August 2011, when European banks were struggling because of losses due to
the European sovereign debt crisis, market regulators in France, Spain, Italy, and Belgium
imposed temporary bans on short selling for some financial stocks.
        On both occasions, the worry was that short selling was “predatory,” in the sense that
short sellers were attempting to bring down fundamentally solvent financial institutions by
triggering self-fulfilling downward spirals. However, this line of argument is at odds with the
consensus view in economics, which—broadly speaking—says that there is nothing wrong
with short selling. In fact, most economists would argue that short selling is a valuable
activity—short sellers help enforce the law of one price, facilitate price discovery, and en-
hance liquidity. Moreover, short sale restrictions may lead to overvaluation and bubbles,
and reduce the ability of investors to hedge exposures.2 In the light of these findings, is
there any economic justification to impose restrictions on short selling the stock of financial
institutions?
    1
    See, for example, “Anatomy of the Morgan Stanley Panic,” Wall Street Journal, November 24, 2008.
    2
    For theoretical models on how short-sale constraints can lead to overvaluation, speculative trading, and
bubbles, see, for example, Miller (1977), Harrison and Kreps (1978), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), and
Hong and Stein (2003). Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) show theoretically that a market with short-sale
constraints incorporates information more slowly than a market in which short sales are not restricted.
Empirical evidence that short sellers contribute to market efficiency and market quality can be found in,
among others, Dechow, Hutton, Meulbroek, and Sloan (2001), Desai, Krishnamurthy, and Kumar (2006),
Bris, Goetzmann, and Zhu (2007), Chang, Cheng, and Yu (2007), Boehmer, Jones, and Zhang (2008), Saffi
and Sigurdsson (2011), and Boehmer and Wu (2013). Short positions are important hedging tools in a
number of common trading strategies (e.g., hedging options, convertible bonds, or market risk in long-short
strategies).


                                                     1
   In this paper, we present a model of predatory short selling. We show that, even though
short-selling activity is beneficial during “normal times,” in times of stress short sellers can, in
fact, destabilize financial institutions through predatory short sales. Predatory short selling
can occur in our model because financial institutions are subject to leverage constraints
imposed by their short-term creditors and uninsured depositors. These leverage constraints
capture a first-order difference between financial institutions and regular corporates: Relative
to corporations that can match maturities of assets and liabilities, the business model of a
financial institution almost necessarily involves maturity and liquidity mismatch (see, e.g.,
Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Brunnermeier, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2013)), which
exposes financial institutions to sudden withdrawal of funding in response to declines in
equity value. We show that, in the presence of such leverage constraints, predatory short
sellers that temporarily depress the stock price of a financial institution can force the financial
institution to sell long-term assets in order to repay debt to satisfy their leverage constraint.
When long-term assets have to be unwound at a sufficient discount, the resulting losses for
the financial institution allow predatory short sellers to break even on their short positions.
   Our model implies that financial institutions can be vulnerable to attacks from preda-
tory short sellers when their balance sheets are weak. For financial institutions that are
sufficiently close to their leverage constraints, predatory short selling equilibria co-exist with
no-liquidation equilibria (the vulnerability region) or may even be the unique equilibrium
outcome (the doomed region). In the vulnerability region there are two stable equilibria.
In one equilibrium, no predatory short selling occurs. In that case, the financial institution
does not violate its constraint and can hold its long-term investments until maturity. In the
second equilibrium, however, predatory short selling causes the financial institution to vio-
late its leverage constraint, leading to a complete liquidation of its long-term asset holdings.
In the doomed region, there is a unique stable equilibrium in which predatory short sellers
force the financial institution to liquidate its entire long-term asset holdings.
   Comparing a regime with short selling to one with short-sale restrictions shows that, dur-


                                                 2
ing “normal times” when financial institutions are well capitalized, the fundamental value of
the financial institution cannot be affected by the presence of predatory short sellers. In this
region short sellers exclusively fulfill their beneficial roles of providing liquidity and prevent-
ing overvaluation and bubbles that may distort real investment decisions—confirming the
consensus view that restricting short selling during normal times is likely to have undesired
consequences. However, this changes once a financial institution enters the vulnerability
region or the doomed region. Here, short sellers can force inefficient liquidation of the finan-
cial institutions’ long-term assets, such that restrictions on short selling can potentially be
welfare-enhancing.
   By highlighting the possibility of multiple equilibria, our model underlines the important
role of coordination in short-selling attacks. Specifically, adding a large short seller (or,
equivalently, a mass of small short sellers that can coordinate their actions) to our competitive
benchmark model expands the doomed region, where a predatory short-selling attack and full
liquidation is the unique (and inefficient) outcome. This contrasts sharply with the situation
where sellers are regular shareholders (rather than short sellers): In this case, adding a large
shareholder (or a mass of coordinated small shareholders) increases the safety region, in
which no liquidation is the unique equilibrium. Finally, we show that when there is a large
short seller and a potential large support buyer, the doomed region depends on the relative
strength (or ability to coordinate) of the large short seller and the support buyer.
   Overall, our results provide a potential justification for temporary short-sale restrictions
for financial institutions at times when their balance sheets are weak. These restrictions
should be temporary and targeted specifically at weak financial institutions because well-
capitalized financial institutions are not susceptible to predatory short-selling attacks, such
that the only effect of a ban on short selling for those institutions would be a reduction
in liquidity and market quality of their stock. Moreover, because our results are driven
by a constraint on market leverage that is imposed by short-term creditors, it highlights
the particular vulnerability of financial institutions—because of the maturity mismatch and


                                                3
liquidity mismatch inherent in their business models, financial institutions are subject to
financial fragility in the form of creditor runs, which makes them vulnerable to predatory
short sellers. Our model is less likely to apply to firms with more stable capital structures.
Finally, our analysis has implications on the disclosure of short positions. By facilitating
coordination among short sellers, full and timely disclosure of short positions may in fact
make it easier for short sellers to prey on vulnerable financial institutions.
       The empirical evidence on the recent short-sale bans in the U.S. and Europe unambigu-
ously documents reductions in market liquidity and market quality as a result of short-sale
bans. However, there is no strong empirical support for positive price effects of recent short-
sale bans, perhaps the main motivation for these bans. Using daily international data on
recent short-sale bans around the world, Beber and Pagano (2013) document that the short-
sale bans implemented during the financial crisis of 2007-09 led to reductions in market
liquidity and slower price discovery. They also document that short-sale constraints failed
to support stock prices, except potentially those of large U.S. financial stocks. In a similar
spirit, Boehmer, Jones, and Zhang (2013), using intraday data on the 2008 short-sale ban in
the U.S., document a deterioration of liquidity and market quality in response to the short-
sale ban. Yet, their analysis also finds little evidence that short-sale bans supported prices:
Only the largest financial institutions had (permanent) positive abnormal returns during the
2008 short-sale ban, and Boehmer, Jones, and Zhang (2013) point out that the price effects
of the short-selling ban are hard to disentangle from the effects of the contemporaneous
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP).3
   3
     A number of other studies have investigated the effects of recent short-sale bans. For example, Marsh
and Payne (2012) document a decrease in market quality in UK equity markets in response to the 2008 short-
selling ban. Using U.S. and European data, Lioui (2011) documents an increase in volatility in response
to the 2008 short-selling ban, but no effect on the price skewness. Autore, Billingsley, and Kovacs (2011)
document that during the 2008 short-sale ban in the U.S., stocks with a larger decline in liquidity also
have poorer contemporaneous returns, consistent with the model of Amihud and Mendelson (1986). Harris,
Namvar, and Phillips (2013) use a factor model to document price inflation in banned stocks as a result of the
2008 short-selling ban in the U.S., particularly for firms without traded options. Their results suggest that
price effects were temporary for stocks with negative pre-ban performance and permanent for firms with
positive pre-ban performance. Kolasinski, Reed, and Thornock (2013) document that variations in short
interest had larger price effects during the shorting ban, consistent with an increase in the informativeness
of short sales in response to increased short-sale restrictions.


                                                      4
      Our results may help interpret the existing empirical findings on the effect of short-selling
bans and may also be useful in the empirical design of future studies. First, when looking at
price effects, our model suggests that financial institutions, rather than regular firms, should
be particularly affected by short-sale bans. Second, in our model, the ability of short sellers
to prey on financial institutions depends crucially on the financial condition of the financial
institution. Hence, a second cross-sectional prediction of our model is that, in assessing the
price effects of short-sale restrictions, one should control for leverage, liquidity mismatch, or
similar variables that measure financial fragility. The prediction of our model is that it is
the vulnerable financial firms for which the price effects of short-sale bans are likely largest.
Third, our model highlights the importance of taking into account the potential multiplicity
of equilibria when interpreting the empirical evidence. For example, if investors expect that,
with some probability, there is a switch to the dominated equilibrium in which the bank
goes bankrupt, the elimination of the bad equilibrium through temporary short-selling bans
when financial institutions enter the vulnerability region may lead to permanent positive
price effects. In addition to the cross-sectional predictions above, a novel prediction of our
model is that the vulnerability of a financial institution to predatory short selling depends
not only on its own balance sheet but also on the balance sheets (or funding conditions) of
its large shareholders.
      At a theoretical level, the potential justification for restrictions on short selling provided
by our model is similar to that given in the literature on feedback effects from stock prices to
firms’ real decisions.4 For example, Goldstein and Gümbel (2008) provide an asymmetric in-
formation model, in which a feedback loop to real investment decisions allows a short seller to
make a profit even in the absence of fundamental information. Khanna and Mathews (2012)
study the interaction between an uninformed speculator and an informed blockholder to a
firm. They show that, under certain conditions, manipulation by an uninformed speculator
is possible even in the presence of an informed blockholder, whose incentives are aligned with
  4
      For a comprehensive survey of this literature, see Bond, Edmans, and Golstein (2012).



                                                      5
value maximization. A major difference between these papers and our analysis is the channel
through which short selling can be profitable. In both Goldstein and Gümbel (2008) and
Khanna and Mathews (2012), short sellers reduce price informativeness, thereby inducing
the firm (whose manager learns from prices) to inefficiently distort its (future) investments,
which makes the short position profitable. In our framework, price declines brought about by
short sellers can trigger inefficient early liquidation of existing investments via the leverage
constraint. In our view, this latter channel is particularly relevant for the recent discussion
on short-sale bans, which has centered around financial institutions. A related feedback
mechanism arises in Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013). In their model, a provider of
equity capital learns from the firm’s stock price and provides less capital to the firm when
he infers negative information from the firm’s stock price.5
   In terms of the focus on financial institutions, the paper closest to ours is that of Liu
(2011), who develops a two-stage global games model: In the first stage, short sellers take
positions. In the second stage, creditors decide whether or not to roll over their debt. As
in Goldstein and Gümbel (2008), the presence of short sellers reduces price informativeness.
The resulting increase in uncertainty about fundamentals reduces the value of short-term
debt claims (due to their concave payoff) and can induce creditors to run in the second stage.
Hence, a major difference from our paper is how short-sale attacks work: In our framework
it is the reduction in the market value of equity that makes a short-selling attack possible. In
Liu (2011), it is the increase in price uncertainty (and not the price reduction) that leads to a
creditor run. Liu’s framework leads to policy prescriptions that are broadly in line with ours.
First, as in our model, his framework implies that banks with weak fundamentals are prone
to short-sale attacks. Second, Liu argues that more maturity mismatch makes short-selling
attacks more likely. This is consistent with our model, where one can interpret the severity
of the leverage constraint as a proxy for maturity mismatch (the more short-term creditors
   5
     Khanna and Sonti (2004) and Ozdenoren and Yuan (2008) provide models with exogenous feedback from
financial markets to real outcomes.




                                                  6
the bank has, the more binding the run constraint).6
        The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a brief summary of
regulatory response to short selling during the financial crisis of 2007-09 and the European
sovereign debt crisis of 2011. Section 3 presents the model. Section 4 provides a discussion
of the model’s policy implications and empirical predictions. Section 5 concludes. All proofs
are in the appendix.



2         Recent regulatory response to short selling

As a result of the financial market turmoil in 2008, the SEC and a number of international
financial market regulators put in effect a number of new rules regarding short selling. In
July the SEC issued an emergency order banning so-called “naked” short selling7 in the
securities of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and primary dealers at commercial and investment
banks. In total 18 stocks were included in the ban, which took effect on Monday, July 21
and was in effect until August 12.
        On September 19, 2008, the SEC banned all short selling of stocks of financial companies.
This much broader ban initially included a total of 799 firms, and more firms were added
to this list over time. In a statement regarding the ban, SEC Chairman Christopher Cox
said, “The Commission is committed to using every weapon in its arsenal to combat market
manipulation that threatens investors and capital markets. The emergency order temporarily
banning short selling of financial stocks will restore equilibrium to markets. This action,
which would not be necessary in a well-functioning market, is temporary in nature and part
of the comprehensive set of steps being taken by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and the
    6
     More broadly, our paper also relates to the literatures on market manipulation and on predatory trading.
Allen and Gale (1992) provide a model in which a non-informed trader can make a profit if investors think the
manipulator may be an informed trader. Other papers that consider manipulative trading strategies include
Allen and Gorton (1992), Benabou and Laroque (1992), Kumar and Seppi (1992), Gerard and Nanda (1993),
Chakraborty and Yilmaz (2004), and Brunnermeier (2005). Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005) provide a
model in which a predatory trader can exploit another trader’s need to liquidate.
   7
     In a naked short-sale transaction, the short seller does not borrow the share before entering the short
position.



                                                     7
Congress.” This broad ban on all short selling in financial institutions was initially set to
expire on October 2, but was extended until Wednesday, October 9.
      In addition to measures taken by the SEC, a number of international financial regulators
also acted in response to short selling. On September 21, 2008, Australia temporarily banned
all forms of short selling, with only market makers in options markets allowed to take covered
short positions to hedge. In Great Britain, the Financial Services Authority (FSA) enacted
a moratorium on short selling of 29 financial institutions from September 18, 2008 until
January 16, 2009. Also Germany, Ireland, Switzerland, and Canada banned short selling
of some financial stocks, while France, the Netherlands, and Belgium banned naked short
selling of financial companies.
      International restrictions on short selling of financial stocks reappeared in 2011. In August
2011, market regulators in France, Spain, Italy, and Belgium imposed temporary restrictions
on the short selling of certain financial stocks as European banks came under increasing
pressure as part of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe. For example, both Spain and Italy
imposed a temporary ban on new short positions, or increases in existing short positions, for
a number of financial shares. France temporarily restricted short selling for 11 companies,
including Axa, BNP Paribas, and Credit Agricole.8 On August 26, France, Italy, and Spain
extended their temporary bans on short selling until at least the end of September.
      Of course, measures against short selling are not exclusive to these recent episodes. In
response to the market crash of 1929, the SEC enacted the uptick rule, which restricts traders
from selling short on a downtick. In 1940, legislation was passed that banned mutual funds
from short selling. Both of these restrictions were in effect until 2007. Going back even
further in time, the UK banned short selling in the 1630s in response to the Dutch tulip
mania.
  8
   See Howard Mustoe and Jesse Westbrook, “Short Selling of Stocks Banned in France, Spain,” Bloomberg,
August 12, 2011.




                                                  8
3     Model

We consider a simple model with three periods, t = 0, 1, 2. At t = 0, a financial institution
has invested in X units of a long-term asset. The financial institution has also taken out
demandable debt with face value D0 . We take both the initial position in the risky asset as
well as the initial debt outstanding as given.
    Most of our analysis focuses on the interim date t = 1. Seen from t = 1, the long-term
asset is expected to pay off a deterministic amount R at t = 2. If needed, the long-term asset
can be liquidated at t = 1, but early liquidation is subject to a discount; the liquidation
value at t = 1 is given by δR, where δ < 1. Hence, early liquidation is inefficient. For
simplicity, we assume that the financial institution holds no cash, but the model could be
straightforwardly extended to allow for cash holdings.
    Leverage constraint. Key to our analysis is that the financial institution is subject to
a leverage constraint. Specifically, we assume that debt as a fraction of debt plus the market
value of equity cannot exceed a critical amount γ ∈ [0, 1]:

                                        D
                                           ≤ γ.                                             (1)
                                       D+E

    This leverage constraint captures in a simple way a fundamental difference between fi-
nancial institutions and regular corporations. Specifically, relative to corporations that can
match maturities of assets and liabilities, the business model of a financial institution almost
necessarily involves maturity and liquidity mismatch (see, e.g., Diamond and Dybvig (1983)
and Brunnermeier, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2013)). Moreover, beyond the maturity
mismatch that is inherent in their business model, financial institutions may have an addi-
tional incentive to take on significant maturity mismatch because of collective moral hazard
(Farhi and Tirole (2012)) or because their inability to commit to longer-term financing leads
to a maturity rat race (Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2013)).
    In the presence of maturity mismatch, the leverage constraint (1) emerges because unin-


                                                 9
sured depositors and creditors of the bank withdraw their funding when the bank’s market
leverage exceeds γ at the interim date. While we do not model this formally, what we have
in mind is that creditors use the market price of equity to update their expectations on
the bank’s prospects and refuse to roll over their loans whenever the financial institution’s
market leverage exceeds a threshold γ. One can thus think of the leverage constraint as a
“run constraint,” in the sense that creditors run on the bank following negative signals about
the value of the bank’s equity relative to its outstanding debt obligations (as in models of
fundamental bank runs, such as Postlewaite and Vives (1987), Jacklin and Bhattacharya
(1988), or Goldstein and Pauzner (2005)). This interpretation of the leverage constraint also
highlights the connection to the literature on feedback effects of asset prices—the constraint
captures, in reduced form, the feedback that arises when providers of capital learn from
prices (as, for example, in Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013)).
       We formulate the leverage constraint in terms of market leverage. However, what ulti-
mately is important for the model is that—independent of its particular form—the leverage
constraint implies that when the financial institution’s market value of equity falls below
a certain value, the financial institution is forced to liquidate some of its long-term assets
in order to repay creditors. As we will show below, in certain circumstances this feedback
mechanism, triggered by stock price declines, can make the financial institution vulnerable
to short sellers in the equity market.9
       Equity market. At date t = 1, the equity of the financial institution is traded in a
financial market. This financial market is populated by two types of investors, a competitive
fringe of passive long-term investors and active traders that act as short sellers. More
generally, one could think of the short sellers as arbitrageurs that can take both long or
short positions. However, since the main results of our paper revolve around the effects of
short selling, we will refer to them as short sellers. We also assume that short sellers start
   9
    This particular vulnerability of financial institutions is echoed in the SEC’s justification of the 2008
short-selling ban, which highlights the potential loss of confidence of trading counterparties in response to
short selling.



                                                     10
with a zero position in the financial institution’s equity. We discuss the case of regular sellers
and differences between selling and short selling in Section 3.3.
       The long-term investors are competitive and offer demand schedules to the short sellers.
The long-term investors are thus not active traders themselves; they simply form a residual
demand curve that short sellers can sell into. Upon observing the demand schedules offered
by the long-term investors, short sellers decide whether to take a position in the stock. Short
sellers are competitive and thus make zero profits in equilibrium.
       We focus on the interaction in the equity market at the intermediate period, t = 1. At
t = 1, the two types of players, long-term investors and short sellers, interact in the following
way. Long-term investors choose the slope and intercept of a demand schedule that they
offer to the short sellers. We denote the intercept by P and the slope by λ. Formally the
long-term investors’ action space is thus given by the pair (P , λ) ∈ R × R+ . Note that
by assumption λ > 0, i.e., the residual demand curve for the stock is downward sloping.
However, as we will argue below, the slope of the demand curve can be arbitrarily small.10
Upon observing the demand schedules offered to them, the short sellers decide how much of
the stock they want to sell short. Their action space is thus the size of their short position,
S ∈ R.11 Given these ingredients, we can write price of the financial institution’s equity at
t = 1 as


                                            Pe = P − λS.                                                (2)


       Equilibrium. The equilibrium amount of short selling will be determined by a zero
profit condition, meaning that the stock price at t = 1, Pe = P − λS, must be a rational
prediction of the value of equity at t = 2, when the long-term investment pays off and equity
  10
     There are a number of ways to justify a downward-sloping demand curve. For example, our assumption
may capture in reduced form that long-term investors are risk averse and need to be compensated for risk
that they hold in equilibrium. The downward-sloping demand curve may also be the result of information
asymmetries (as in Kyle (1985)) that are not modeled explicitly here.
  11
     While we focus on short positions, we do not rule out long positions, which can be taken by picking a
negative S. Hence, short sellers in this model are not short sellers by assumption—rather, they take short
positions to exploit the financial institution’s constraint, which is not possible by taking long positions.


                                                    11
investors receive their payoff. Denoting the payoff to equity holders at date t = 2 by P , the
equilibrium condition is thus given by


                                                 Pe = P.                                                     (3)


Predatory short selling. We distinguish two types of short selling. In an equilibrium
with regular short selling, short sellers are active, but their only effect is to ensure that the
stock price coincides with the given fundamental value of the financial institution’s equity.
In other words, regular short selling ensures that the price is right, but does not affect the
fundamental value of the firm. In an equilibrium with predatory short selling, on the other
hand, the act of short selling reduces the fundamental value of the financial institution—it
forces early liquidation of long-term assets at a loss. Through this feedback mechanism,
predatory short selling reduces the value of equity and thus becomes self-fulfilling. Hence,
while regular short selling ensures that prices are right for a given fundamental and is thus
beneficial, predatory short selling destroys fundamental value and is inefficient.
       Note that, in our formulation, long-term investors act essentially as passive sharehold-
ers. Specifically, we rule out that current shareholders can meet the leverage constraint
by recapitalizing the bank. This assumption reflects that recapitalization via issuing new
equity may be hard in the midst of a short-selling attack (in addition to the more general
observation that issuing equity may be costly because of the usual asymmetric information
considerations). Similarly, we rule out that the financial institution renegotiates its debt, for
example, through a debt-for-equity swap. This assumption seems reasonable given that a fi-
nancial institution that faces dispersed short-term creditors (or depositors) will usually have
a hard time renegotiating debt, because of the coordination issues inherent in renegotiating
dispersed debt issues.12
  12
     Potentially, the coordination problems in renegotiating debt could be mitigated if the financial institution
issued some amount of reverse convertible debt that can be converted into equity when the leverage constraint
is binding. However, recall that in the Diamond and Rajan (2001) model of banking, it is precisely the
inability to renegotiate debt that makes financing with dispersed short-term debt efficient for financial
institutions.


                                                       12
3.1    Benchmark Case without Leverage Constraint

We first solve a benchmark model without the leverage constraint. As we will see, in this
setup short sellers serve a role in ensuring that the financial institution’s equity is fairly priced
(through regular short selling), but the short sellers’ actions do not have any influence on
the fundamental value of the financial institution. Hence, in the absence of the leverage
constraint, predatory short selling cannot occur in equilibrium.

Lemma 1. When financial institutions are not subject to the leverage constraint (1), preda-
tory short selling does not occur in equilibrium.

   The intuition behind Lemma 1 is simple. Because, absent the leverage constraint, the
fundamental payoff to equity holders is fixed at XR − D0 , only regular short selling can
occur in equilibrium: Short sellers may take a short position to ensure that the financial
institution’s equity is valued correctly in cases where the long-term investors pick an intercept
that exceeds fundamental value, i.e., P > XR−D0 . However, there is no way for short sellers
to affect the fundamental value of the financial institution’s equity, which makes predatory
short selling impossible.
   Lemma 1 thus highlights the beneficial role of regular short selling. When equity is
overpriced relative to fundamental value, the ability to take short positions allows short sellers
(or, more generally, arbitrageurs) to correct such overvaluation and make sure that equity
is fairly priced. This is beneficial because overvaluation may lead to distorted investment
incentives and, ultimately, misallocation of resources. This beneficial role of regular short
selling is the main reason why unconditional short-selling bans are undesirable.
   For the remainder of the paper, we will focus on predatory short selling and put aside
the beneficial role of short selling illustrated in Lemma 1. To do this, we focus on the case
in which the intercept chosen by long-term investors reflects the fundamental value of equity
in the absence of short selling. For example, if in the absence of short selling the financial
institution does not have to sell any assets at the interim date, the long-term investors pick


                                                 13
P = XR − D0 . Focusing on the case implies that there is no role for regular short sellers,
since in the absence of leverage constraints short sellers would never take a position. This
assumption thus allows us to restrict our analysis to predatory short selling. However, as we
discuss below, focusing on the case in which long-term investors set the intercept P equal
to the fundamental value of equity in the absence of short selling is essentially without loss
of generality: With slight adjustments the analysis generalizes to arbitrary P . The main
difference between the two cases is that when P can deviate from fundamental value, short
sellers may also serve a beneficial role by reducing overpricing.


3.2      Introducing the Leverage Constraint

We now introduce leverage constraint. Recall that the leverage constraint (1) requires the
financial institution to keep leverage (defined as debt divided by debt plus the market value
                                        D
of equity) below a critical level γ:   D+E
                                             ≤ γ. When the leverage constraint is violated at
date t = 1, the financial institution must repay some of its debt to reduce leverage and thus
has to liquidate some of the long-term asset holdings.
   Denote the number of units of the long-term asset the financial institution has to sell at
t = 1 by ∆X(S), where S is the position taken by short sellers. If at t = 1 the financial
institution sells ∆X(S) units of the long-term asset to repay debt, this leads to an equity
payout at time t = 2 of


                          P = max [XR − D0 − (1 − δ)R∆X(S), 0] .                          (4)


The reduction in equity value, (1 − δ)R∆X(S), reflects the fact that the long-term asset can
only be sold at a discount. Using equation (4), we can thus rewrite the equilibrium condition
(3) as


                    P − λS = max [XR − D0 − (1 − δ)R∆X(S), 0] .                           (5)



                                                14
   How much does the financial institution have to liquidate? In order to find po-
tential equilibria, we need to determine how much the financial institution needs to liquidate
at t = 1. First note that when, given a short position of S, the leverage constraint is not
violated, the financial institution does not have to liquidate any of its long-term investments.
In this case ∆X(S) = 0. On the other hand, when the equity value at t = 1 (including the
price effects of the short position S) is such that the constraint is violated,

                                           D0
                                                   > γ,                                     (6)
                                       D0 + P − λS

the financial institution has to sell ∆X(S) units of the long-term asset and repay debt in
order to satisfy the constraint. The amount the financial institution has to liquidate is then
determined by the following condition:

                                    D0 − ∆X(S)δR
                                                      = γ.                                  (7)
                                D0 − ∆X(S)δR + P − λS

The numerator in (7) is the amount of debt remaining after liquidating ∆X(S) units of the
long-term investment and thereby reducing outstanding debt by ∆X(S)δR. The denomina-
tor contains remaining debt D0 − ∆X(S)δR plus the market value of equity P − λS. Solving
(7) for ∆X(S) yields the following result:

Lemma 2. The amount of the long-term asset that the financial institution needs to liquidate
under the leverage constraint (1), and in the presence of short sellers that take an aggregate
short position S, is given by
                           
                                                                           D0
                            0                                    if               ≤γ
                           
                                                                       D0 +P −λS
                ∆X(S) =            h                          i                         .   (8)
                            min       (1−γ)D0 −γ(P −λS)                   D0
                           
                                            Rδ(1−γ)
                                                         ,X       if   D0 +P −λS
                                                                                   >γ


   Figure 1 illustrates what happens once we introduce the leverage constraint. In the
illustration, absent short sales the leverage constraint is satisfied. However, a sufficiently


                                                  15
large position by short sellers can force the financial institution to liquidate some of its long-
term asset holdings. These forced sales reduce the financial institution’s equity value because
the long-term asset has to be sold at a discount to fundamental value (when sold at t = 1, it
yields δR rather than R). Hence, the fundamental value of the financial institution’s equity
has a kink at the point where the leverage constraint becomes binding and forces the financial
institution to sell assets. To facilitate comparison to the benchmark case discussed above,
the dashed line indicates the fundamental value of equity in the absence of the leverage
constraint.
       Recall the equilibrium condition, Pe = P . This condition implies that potential equilibria
are intersections of the two lines in Figure 1, i.e., points where the price in the equity market
at t = 1 rationally reflects the fundamental value of the equity of the financial institution
at t = 2. Turn first to the top panel of Figure 1. We continue to assume that long-term
investors choose the intercept P to be equal to fundamental value absent short sales, i.e.,
P = XR − D0 .13 Because the two lines only intersect once, the only equilibrium remains
the one without short selling: Even though the short sellers can drive down the fundamental
value of the financial institution by forcing it to liquidate some of its long-term investments,
they invariably lose money in the process. This is the case whenever the liquidation value of
the long-term asset, which is parameterized by δ, is sufficiently large. In this case, the value
destruction in response to a violation of the leverage constrained is small, such that predatory
short selling is not profitable. The unique equilibrium is the one where P = XR −D0 . When
P = XR − D0 , this implies that the equilibrium amount of short selling is S = 0. More
generally, when P 6= XR−D0 , short selling can occur in equilibrium, but only in its beneficial
role of ensuring that prices are equal to the fundamental XR − D0 .
       The bottom panel of Figure 1, on the other hand, shows that when δ is sufficiently small,
predatory short selling can emerge. In this case, in addition to the equilibrium without short
  13
     As we show below, this assumption is not crucial in the sense that the equilibria are independent of the
particular choice of P and λ. We focus on the case P = XR − D0 because it allows us to focus exclusively
on predatory short selling. The main difference from the case P 6= XR − D0 is that now also the beneficial
role of short selling (as discussed above) emerges.


                                                     16
selling, two further equilibria emerge. Both of these additional equilibria involve predatory
short selling: Short sellers cause a decrease in the financial institution’s equity value at t = 1,
which forces the financial institution to liquidate long-term asset holdings to an extent that
allows short sellers to break even. As is usually the case, the middle equilibrium is unstable
(such that a small perturbation would lead to migration to either of the two stable equilibria).
                                                        
 P, P                                                 P, P

 35                                                   35

 30                                                   30

                      P
 25                                                   25

                                                                              
 20          P                                        20                       P
 15                                                   15

 10                                                   10              P

  5                                                    5



  -10    0       10   20   30    40    50    60
                                                  S    -10   0   10       20       30   40   50   60
                                                                                                       S


Figure 1: Introducing the leverage constraint. When the leverage constraint is intro-
duced (in this figure, γ = 0.7), a sufficiently large short position can force the financial
institution to liquidate some of its long-term asset holdings. In the top panel, the loss to the
financial institution from liquidating the long asset is not large enough to make a predatory
short position profitable (δ = 0.75). The only equilibrium is the one in which no predatory
short selling occurs. In the bottom panel, on the other hand, we see that when the losses
from liquidating the long-term asset are large enough, two predatory short-selling equilibria
emerge in addition to the equilibrium without predatory short selling (δ = 0.6). The middle
equilibrium is unstable. The remaining parameters in this figure are X = 10, R = 10, D = 68,
and λ = 0.75

      Equilibrium prices are independent of λ and P . One convenient feature of our
model is that, as long as short sellers are not restricted in the number of shares they can short,
the equilibrium prices and the equilibrium amount of the long-term asset that the financial
institution needs to liquidate are independent of the particular P and λ chosen by the long-
term investors. Hence, while there are many equilibria involving different combinations of
P , λ, and S, these equilibria are isomorphic in terms of equilibrium prices and liquidation
quantities. One implication of this feature of the model is that, while setting the intercept P
equal to fundamental value absent short selling allows us to focus exclusively on predatory


                                                  17
short selling, equilibrium prices and the existence of predatory short-selling equilibria do not
depend on this assumption.

Lemma 3. When short sellers are unconstrained in the size of the short position they take,
the equilibrium prices and the amount that has to be liquidated by the financial institution
are independent of λ and P .

   This independence result is illustrated in Figure 2 for the case in which the leverage
constraint is satisfied absent short selling. The top panel shows that when λ is decreased
from 0.75 (dashed line) to 0.6 (solid line), the equilibrium amount of short selling changes,
but equilibrium prices remain the same. The bottom panel shows that when, in addition,
the intercept P is increased from 32 to 34, the equilibrium prices again remain unchanged.
In this case, the equilibrium in which P = RX − D0 exhibits beneficial short selling, while
the other two equilibria exhibit predatory short selling.
   Lemma 3 is convenient since it allows us to classify equilibria by looking only at equilib-
rium prices and the amount of the long-term asset that has to be liquidated by the financial
institution.
   Overview of equilibria. We are now in a position to summarize the equilibria in the
equity market at t = 1. In the proposition, we focus on the case where the long-term asset is
relatively illiquid, δ < γ. This is the case depicted in the right panel of Figure 1. The (less
interesting) case, δ ≥ γ, is discussed in the appendix.

Proposition 1. In the presence of the leverage constraint (1), when δ < γ we distinguish
three regions.

                                                                                             D0
  1. Safety region: When the financial institution is sufficiently well capitalized, R >     δX
                                                                                                ,
      there is a unique equilibrium in which the financial institution does not have to liquidate
      any of its long-term holdings. No predatory short selling can occur, ∆X(S) = 0, and
      P = XR − D0 .



                                               18
                                                                
 P, P                                                         P, P

 35                                                           35

 30                                                           30

 25                                                           25

 20                                                           20

 15                                                           15

 10                                                           10

  5                                                            5



  -10     0     10     20    30    40     50         60
                                                          S    -10          0      10      20   30   40   50   60
                                                                                                                    S


Figure 2: Equilibrium prices are independent of P and λ. The top panel shows that
when λ is decreased from 0.75 (dashed line) to 0.6 (solid line), the equilibrium amount of
short selling changes, but equilibrium prices remain the same. The bottom panel shows that
when, in addition, also the intercept P is increased from 32 to 34, the equilibrium prices
again remain unchanged. In this case, the equilibrium in which P = RX − D0 exhibits
beneficial short selling, while the other two equilibria exhibit predatory short selling. The
remaining parameters are R = 10, X = 10, δ = 0.6, γ = 0.7, and D = 68.

                                               D0                    D0
      2. Vulnerability region: When            γX
                                                    ≤R≤              δX
                                                                        ,   there are two stable equilibria and one
        unstable equilibrium.

         (a) In one stable equilibrium, the financial institution does not liquidate any of its
              long-term holdings, ∆X(S) = 0, and P = XR − D0 .

         (b) In the other stable equilibrium, the financial institution is forced to liquidate its
              entire holdings of the long-term asset, i.e., ∆X(S) = X and P = 0.

         (c) In the unstable equilibrium, the financial institution has to liquidate part of its
                                                    0D
                                                γ− XR                           1−γ
              equity holdings, ∆X(S) = X         γ−δ
                                                              and P =           γ−δ
                                                                                    (D0   − δXR).

                                          D0
      3. Doomed region: When R <          γX
                                             ,      there is a unique stable equilibrium and an unstable
        equilibrium.

         (a) In the stable equilibrium, short sellers are active and the financial institution
              liquidates its entire holdings of the long-term asset, ∆X(S) = X and P = 0.

                             D0              D0
         (b) In the region   γX
                                  > R >    δX(1+γ)
                                                          an unstable equilibrium exists, in which short


                                                          19
           sellers are not active and the financial institution liquidates part of the long-term
                                           D0
                                                −γ                          1−δ
           asset holdings, ∆X(0) = X δ−γ(1−δ)
                                      XR
                                              and P = XR − D0 −           δ−γ(1−δ)
                                                                                     [D0 − γXR].

   Figure 3 illustrates the equilibria as a function of XR, the fundamental value of the
financial institution’s long-term asset holdings. As Proposition 1 points out, there are three
regions of interest. First, when R is sufficiently high, short sellers cannot profitably force
the financial institution to liquidate long-term asset holdings. In this region, the financial
institution is sufficiently well-capitalized, such that the only equilibrium is the one in which
the financial institution holds its long-term investments until maturity. We refer to this region
as the safety region. In the safety region, short sellers solely fulfill the beneficial function
of correcting the equity value of the financial institution when the long-term investors offer
an intercept higher than the fundamental value of equity. One important implication from
this region is that, when financial institutions are healthy, one should not be concerned
about predatory behavior by short sellers. Hence, our framework does not lend support to
unconditional short-selling bans.
   However, when R drops sufficiently, there is a second region with multiple equilibria. In
this region, the leverage constraint is satisfied if short sellers do not take predatory short
positions. Hence, there still is an equilibrium without short selling and without liquidation by
the financial institution. However, there are now also two equilibria in which short sellers take
predatory short positions and force the financial institution to liquidate some or all of its long-
term asset holdings. In this region, the financial institution is vulnerable to predatory short
selling, even though, absent short selling, the leverage constraint is not binding. We thus
refer to this region of multiple equilibria as the vulnerability region. This vulnerability region
emerges only when δ < γ, i.e., when the long-term asset held by the financial institution is
sufficiently illiquid. This highlights the importance of liquidity mismatch (illiquid long-term
assets financed with short-term credit) in facilitating predatory short selling.
   Finally, there is a third region with two equilibria, one stable and one unstable. In the
stable equilibrium, short sellers are active and force the financial institution to liquidate its

                                                     20
entire asset holdings, such that the equity value of the financial institution is given by P = 0.
In the unstable equilibrium, short sellers are not active and the financial institution liquidates
part of its long-term asset holdings. Because in this region the unique stable equilibrium
involves a complete liquidation of the financial institution, we refer to this region as the
doomed region.

              P                   no short selling HstableL
            100                   no short selling HunstableL
                                  short selling HunstableL
                                  short selling HstableL
             80

                      Doomed        Vulnerability
                      Region          Region
             60


                                                                     Safety
             40
                                                                     Region


             20



                  8      9        10            11              12       13   14
                                                                                   XR

Figure 3: Overview of equilibria. This plot shows the equilibrium equity value of the
financial institution as a function of R. For high values of R, there is a unique equilibrium
without predatory short selling (safety region). Once R drops sufficiently low, there is a
region with multiple equilibria (when γ > δ). In this vulnerability region predatory short
selling can emerge. The middle equilibrium is unstable. When R is so low that the leverage
constraint binds in the absence of short selling, there is a stable equilibrium with predatory
short selling and an unstable equilibrium without predatory short selling (the doomed region).
The parameter values in this graph are X = 10, δ = 0.6, γ = 0.7, and D = 68.


   The effect of banning short selling. We are now in a position to compare outcomes
under a regime in which short selling is allowed and a regime in which short selling is
prohibited. When short selling is restricted, the financial institution only needs to liquidate at
date t = 1 when the leverage constraint is violated absent predatory short sellers. Proposition
2 compares the two regimes, focusing on stable equilibria.

Proposition 2. Consider again the case δ < γ. The effect of banning short selling on

                                                     21
              P
            100

                                       Vulnerability             Safety
                      Doomed Region
                                         Region                  Region
             80



             60



             40



             20




                  8          9        10           11       12            13       14
                                                                                         XR

Figure 4: The effect of banning short selling. This figure compares equilibria with and
without short selling, focusing on stable equilibria. When short selling is allowed (solid line),
there are multiple equilibria once the financial institution enters the vulnerability region.
In one of the two stable equilibria, predatory short sellers force the financial institution to
liquidate its entire long-term asset holdings. In the doomed region, in the unique stable
equilibrium short sellers always force the financial institution to unwind its entire asset
holdings. When short selling is not allowed (dashed line), the financial institution does not
have to liquidate in the vulnerability region and P = XR − D0 . Moreover, in the doomed
region, the financial institution only has to liquidate part of its long-term asset holdings
when short selling is restricted (except when R is so low that the financial institution has
to liquidate everything even in the absence of short selling). The parameter values in this
example are X = 10, δ = 0.6, γ = 0.7, and D = 68.

equilibrium prices and the quantity of the long-term investment liquidated by the financial
institution depends on the equilibrium region:

                                                                                                    D0
  1. Safety region: When the financial institution is sufficiently well capitalized (R >            δX
                                                                                                       ),
      equilibrium prices and the amount the financial institution needs to liquidate coincide.
      In both cases, the unique equilibrium is P = XR − D0 and ∆X = 0.

                                                         D0                    D0
  2. Vulnerability region: In the vulnerability region ( γX ≤R≤                δX
                                                                                  ),   when short selling
      is restricted, no liquidation takes place and the unique equilibrium is given by P =
      XR − D0 and ∆X = 0. When short sellers are present, on the other hand, there is a
      second stable equilibrium, in which predatory short sellers force the financial institution

                                                       22
      to liquidate its entire long-term asset holdings: ∆X = X and P = 0.

                                                             D0
   3. Doomed region: In the doomed region (R <               γX
                                                                ),   when short selling is restricted,
      the financial institution liquidates part of its long-term asset holdings as long as R >
                                                 D0
        D0                                            −γ                 1−δ
      δX(1+γ)
              .   In this region, ∆X(0) = X δ−γ(1−δ)
                                             XR
                                                     and P = XR − D0 − δ−γ(1−δ) [D0 − γXR].
                      D0
      When R ≤      δX(1+γ)
                            ,   the financial institution liquidates its entire long-term asset hold-
      ings even when short selling is restricted, and P = 0. When short sellers are present,
      in the doomed region the financial institution always liquidates its entire holdings and
      P = 0.

   Figure 4 illustrates the main differences between a regime with short selling (solid line)
and a regime in which short selling is restricted (dashed line). First, note that, when short
sales are restricted, there is no vulnerability region—the financial institution only has to
liquidate some of its long-term asset holdings if the leverage constraint is violated in the
absence of temporary price movements caused by short sellers. When short selling is allowed,
on the other hand, the vulnerability region emerges and there is a second equilibrium in which
short sellers prey on the financial institution, forcing it to unwind its entire long-term asset
holdings. Hence, in this region predatory short sellers can force a collapse of the financial
institution, even though the financial institution would be sound in the absence of short
selling.
   Second, when the leverage constraint is violated even in the absence of short selling, the
amount the financial institution has to liquidate is (weakly) smaller when short selling is
restricted. This is the case because, in the doomed region, in the unique stable equilibrium
short sellers force the financial institution to liquidate its entire portfolio. When no short
sellers are present, on the other hand, the financial institution can in general satisfy the
leverage constraint by selling only part of its long-term asset holdings, except when R drops
so low that the financial institution enters a “death spiral” (i.e, it has to liquidate all long-
term asset holdings even when no short sellers are present). In the figure, this happens at
the point where the dashed line meets the x-axis.

                                                   23
   Of course, one caveat of the analysis above is that we have focused exclusively on the case
in which, absent short selling, the equity of the financial institution is priced correctly. This
allowed us to focus exclusively on characterizing the conditions under which predatory short
selling can occur. More generally, the potential welfare costs of predatory short selling have
to be weighed against the beneficial effects of regular short selling through the elimination
of overvaluation and improvements in market quality and liquidity. As discussed above, in
the safety region predatory short selling cannot occur and the only effect of short sellers is
the elimination of mispricing. Clearly, in this region, a short-sale ban is not desirable. In the
vulnerability region, on the other hand, the costs of potential predatory short selling have
to be weighed against the potential benefits from regular short selling. The desirability of
a potential short-selling ban, then, depends on the relative size of these two effects. While
formally our model does not deliver predictions on how large these two effects may be in
practice, it does provide some informal guidance. For example, if one believes that a financial
institution is only temporarily in the vulnerability region, a short-selling ban may prevent
the collapse of the financial institution, while the costs of temporary overvaluation of the
financial institution’s equity might be moderate. Similarly, in the doomed region one would
have to weigh the benefits of controlled deleveraging that is possible in the absence of short
sellers against the potential costs of overvaluation in this region.


3.3    Regular selling versus short selling

Up to now our analysis has focused exclusively on short selling. In this section, we contrast
our results to those that would obtain if we replaced short sellers with regular sellers (i.e.,
investors who have an initial endowment of shares in the financial institution). This will
sharpen the distinction between regular selling and short selling and highlight the important
role of coordination.
   The distinction between short selling and regular selling is particularly relevant in the
vulnerability region where, as shown above, multiple Pareto-ranked equilibria are possible: In


                                               24
the Pareto-dominant equilibrium, the financial institution does not have to sell any of its long-
term asset holdings and survives. In contrast, in the dominated equilibrium, the financial
institution is forced to liquidate all long-term asset holdings and fails. The discussion in this
section revolves around the following questions: Can the dominated equilibrium also emerge
in a setting with regular sellers as opposed to short sellers? If yes, is there reason to believe
that it is more likely to emerge as a result of short selling as opposed to regular selling?
   Recall that in the competitive setup developed above, when all trades are executed at the
final market-clearing price, short sellers are indifferent between the two equilibria that are
possible in the vulnerability region—they make zero profits in either. More generally, if short
sellers can walk down the demand curve when establishing their short position (i.e., when
not all trades are executed at the final price) they strictly prefer the equilibrium in which
they collectively prey on the financial institution. This contrasts with the situation that
would arise if short sellers were regular sellers: While a setup with regular sellers instead of
short sellers would lead to the same two equilibria in the vulnerability region, regular sellers
strictly prefer the equilibrium in which they hold on to their shares and do not sell. Hence,
with regular sellers, the dominated equilibrium can emerge only as a result of coordination
failure—existing shareholders sell because they expect everyone else to sell, comparable to
the dominated equilibrium in Diamond and Dybvig (1983). While this, of course, does
not rule out the dominated equilibrium, it is a reasonable proposition that the dominated
equilibrium is less likely to emerge through a pure coordination failure of regular sellers than
through a (weakly) profitable attack by predatory short sellers.
   In addition, as soon as we depart from the competitive benchmark and allow for some
amount of coordination among short sellers or shareholders, the equilibrium regions differ
depending on whether sellers are regular sellers or short sellers. Specifically, some amount of
coordination among short sellers increases the doomed region, where the unique equilibrium
involves a complete liquidation of the financial institution. In contrast, some amount of
coordination among regular sellers increases the safety region, where the unique equilibrium


                                               25
involves no liquidation.
   Formally, we model the degree of coordination by assuming there is a large trader or,
equivalently, a mass of small traders who can coordinate their actions. The large trader
(or coordinated traders) internalize that their trading decision moves the share price. The
remaining traders form a competitive fringe and take prices as given. In the short-selling
case, we assume that the large short seller can take a maximum short position of S MAX . In
the case of regular sellers, we assume that the large shareholder owns S MAX shares in the
financial institution, while the competitive fringe owns SCMAX shares. We also assume that
if both the large shareholder and the competitive fringe sell their shares, the share price
drops to zero and the financial institution has to liquidate all of its long-term asset holdings.
Formally, this assumption requires that, in the case of regular sellers, S MAX + SCMAX = S,
                                                                                         e

where Se is defined by Pe = P − λSe = 0. Note that in both the regular and the short-selling
case S MAX proxies for the amount of coordination that is possible.
   For simplicity and to reflect the role of large traders (such as George Soros) as first
movers, we assume that the large trader moves first and that the competitive fringe moves
after the large trader’s order has been executed. However, as we describe in more detail
below, the findings in Proposition 3 do not depend on the specific assumptions on the move
and execution order. For example, we could alternatively assume that the large trader and
the competitive fringe submit their orders and are executed simultaneously, or that the
execution order is random and traders submit limit orders. Both of these alternative setups
would leave the equilibrium regions described in Proposition 3 unchanged (see footnotes 16
and 17 for more details).
   Consider first the case of short sellers. The large short seller moves first and chooses
S ∈ [0, S MAX ]. The large short seller’s trade is then executed at P (S) = P − λS. Then, the
competitive fringe moves and chooses SC . The orders of the competitive fringe are executed
at P (S + SC ) = P − λ(S + SC ). Whenever the maximum short position of the large short
seller, S MAX , is sufficiently large to make the short sale profitable irrespective of the actions


                                                26
of other short sellers, the unique equilibrium involves predatory short selling. This is the
case whenever S MAX > S ∗ , where S ∗ denotes the short position required to make a short sale
profitable (for a formal definition of S ∗ , see equation (15) in the appendix). This condition
holds when the financial institution is sufficiently close to its leverage constraint. Hence, the
presence of a large short seller expands the doomed region in which the unique equilibrium
involves complete liquidation of the financial institution.
       In contrast, in the case of regular sellers the presence of the large trader expands the safety
region in which the unique equilibrium involves no liquidation by the financial institution:
This is the case when the blockholder’s decision not to sell his shares can ensure that no
coordination failure occurs, which is the case when S MAX > Se − S ∗ : Given that the large
shareholder does not sell, the competitive fringe cannot profitably coordinate to sell because
Pe(SCMAX ) < P (SCMAX ). The unique best response is thus SC = 0 and no liquidation is the
unique equilibrium.14 Solving for S MAX > S ∗ and S MAX > Se − S ∗ in terms of the parameters
of the model yields the following proposition.

Proposition 3. Assume there is a large trader or, equivalently, a mass of small traders that
can coordinate their actions up to a maximum of S MAX shares.

   1. Short selling: If traders who coordinate up to S MAX are short sellers, the doomed
         region (with a unique short-selling equilibrium) expands to

                                                                              
                                         D0    γ−δ             D0
                              R ∈ 0, min    +         λS MAX ,                       .
                                         γX (1 − δ)γX          δX


   2. Regular selling: If traders who coordinate up to S MAX are regular sellers, the safety
         region (with a unique no-liquidation equilibrium) expands to

                                                                  
                                       D0      γ−δ       MAX D0
                             R ∈ max      −           λS    ,      ,∞ .
                                       δX   (1 − γ)δX         γX
  14
    The role of the large short seller or blockholder discussed here is similar to the role of large players
in the literature on currency crises. See, in particular, Corsetti, Pesenti, and Roubini (2002) and Corsetti,
Dasgupta, Morris, and Shin (2004) for a setting in which traders face a binary decision on whether or not
to attack a currency.

                                                     27
   The equilibrium regions in the presence of a large trader are illustrated in Figure 5. The
top panel illustrates the expansion of the doomed region in the presence of a large short
seller. The bottom panel illustrates the expansion of the safety region in the presence of a
large shareholder in the regular selling case.




Figure 5: Equilibrium regions under short selling and regular selling. The figure
compares equilibrium regions under short selling and regular selling in the presence of a
large trader (or a mass of small traders who can coordinate their actions) of size S MAX .
The parameter region for which the unique equilibrium involves liquidation of the financial
institution is larger under short selling than under regular selling. Conversely, the parameter
region for which the unique equilibrium involves no liquidation by the financial institution
is larger under regular selling than under short selling.


   Proposition 3 shows that once a certain amount of coordination is possible, there is a
sharp difference between short selling and regular selling: While in both cases coordination
shrinks the parameter vulnerability region (the region with multiple equilibria), in the short-
selling case this happens via an expansion of the doomed region (in which predatory short
selling is the unique equilibrium), whereas in the case of regular sellers this happens through
an expansion of the safety region (where no liquidation is the unique equilibrium). In the
extreme, the vulnerability region vanishes completely. In the short-selling case, the financial

                                                 28
institution is then liquidated as soon as short sellers have the ability to force the financial
                                                                               D0
institution to violate its leverage constraint (i.e., when R <                 δX
                                                                                  ).   In the case of regular
sellers, on the other hand, no liquidation occurs unless the financial institution violates its
                                                                                  D0 15 16 17
leverage constraint in the absence of short sellers (i.e., when R <               γX
                                                                                     ).


3.4      Support buying by a large trader

Next, we discuss the effect of adding investors who can step in to buy shares (recall that
up to now the long-term investors that form the residual demand curve were assumed to
be completely passive and thus never acted as active support buyers). To do this, consider
the case in which both a large short seller (or a mass of short sellers who can coordinate)
and a large support buyer (or a mass of traders who can coordinate to purchase stock in the
financial institution) are present. We assume that the support buyer (this could, for example,
be a blockholder or another large trader with a vested interest in the financial institution)
can buy up to B MAX additional shares to support the financial institution. For simplicity,
we set the support buyer’s initial endowment in shares of the financial institution to zero.
  15
      One interesting implication of Proposition 3 is that the region in which the unique equilibrium involves
predatory short selling depends on the slope of the demand curve λ, which we have taken as given here. This
is the case when the position limit for the short seller is in terms of the maximum number of shares that can
be shorted, S MAX . Alternatively, if position limits are defined as “price impact” limits (which would be of
the form S MAX /λ), the region in which predatory short selling is the unique equilibrium is independent of
the slope of the demand curve λ, thereby recovering the irrelevance property of Lemma 3.
   16
      If instead of sequential orders and execution we were to assume that orders are submitted and executed
simultaneously, the resulting equilibrium regions would be identical to those in Proposition 3. The main
difference is that, in the simultaneous-move game, it is the threat of the large short seller that eliminates
the no-liquidation equilibrium. As before, when S MAX > S ∗ , the large short seller has a strictly profitable
deviation from a conjectured no-liquidation strategy profile. However, the large short seller cannot be part of
a zero-profit short-selling equilibrium with S + SC = S, e because from any such equilibrium he would have an
incentive to slightly reduce the size of his short position and make positive (instead of zero) profits. Hence,
when S MAX > S ∗ the unique equilibrium is a predatory short-selling equilibrium in which the competitive
fringe takes a short position of SC = Se in response to the threat of a short position by the large short seller.
   17
      A setup with a random execution order in which traders can submit limit orders leads to the same
equilibrium regions. Because there is a one-to-one mapping between the execution price and the order of
execution, limit orders allow traders to effectively condition their sell orders on when they are executed. If
the large trader is executed first, the analysis is identical to the one discussed in the text (the analysis in the
text is a limiting case of the more general limit order setup: the probability that the large trader is executed
first is one). In the case where the large trader is executed after the competitive fringe, the equilibrium
regions remain the same, but in the coordination-failure equilibrium the large shareholder may sell slightly
less if he anticipates that his order will be executed after the competitive fringe (and thereby at a lower
price). See the appendix for more details.

                                                        29
As before, the large short seller can short a maximum of S MAX shares. As in the previous
subsection, we assume that the large traders (the short seller and the support buyer) trade
first, followed by the competitive fringe.
   In this case, the region in which predatory short selling is the unique equilibrium de-
pends on the relative strength of the support buyer vis-à-vis the short seller. Specifically,
starting from a conjectured no-liquidation equilibrium, the short seller’s maximum position
S MAX must now be sufficiently large to make deviation profitable even if the support buyer
purchases the maximum amount of shares B MAX . If this is the case, the unique equilibrium
involves predatory short selling. As in Proposition 3, we can then characterize the regions
in which the unique equilibrium involves predatory short selling as follows:

Proposition 4. Assume there is a large short seller or, equivalently, a mass of small traders
that can coordinate their actions up to a maximum of S MAX shares. Assume also there is a
large support buyer (or a mass of small support buyers coordinate) who can purchase B MAX
additional shares to support the share price of the financial institution. Then the doomed
region (with a unique short-selling equilibrium) is given by

                                                          
                              D0    γ−δ      MAX    MAX +
                                                        
                       R ∈ 0,    +         λ S    −B         .
                              γX (1 − δ)γX

   Relative to Proposition 3, we thus see that the presence of a support buyer shrinks the
doomed region, in which full liquidation is the unique equilibrium. This is because the
boundary of the doomed region is now determined by the relative strength of the large
short seller and the support buyer, as captured by S MAX − B MAX . Moreover, under the
interpretation that S MAX and B MAX reflect the extent to which multiple blockholders and
multiple short sellers can coordinate, Proposition 4 highlights how, in addition to their sheer
financial strength, the relative ability of blockholders and short sellers to coordinate becomes
an important element in determining which equilibrium obtains.




                                              30
4     Discussion

While the simple model presented above does not provide a full welfare analysis of short
selling, our analysis generates a number of predictions that may help in devising a more
differentiated regulatory approach to short selling. Moreover, the empirical predictions of
our model may be helpful in interpreting existing empirical evidence as well as in providing
guidance for the design of future empirical studies on short selling.


4.1    Regulatory Implications

Vulnerability of financial institutions to short sales. One of the main predictions of
our model is that financial institutions are vulnerable to predatory short selling. Predatory
short selling can emerge because of a leverage constraint that captures the run risk faced
by financial institutions that inherently have significant maturity and liquidity mismatch.
This run constraint allows short sellers to capitalize on financial weakness by forcing an
institution to liquidate long-term investments, leading to a reduction in fundamental value.
This reduction in fundamental value, in turn, allows short sellers to break even on their
positions. Hence, the potential unwillingness of creditors to renew their funding leads to
a fragility in financial institutions’ funding structures that can potentially be exploited by
predatory short sellers. Firms with more stable capital structures, on the other hand, should
be less susceptible to the predatory behavior characterized in this paper.
    Temporary short-sale bans. In terms of regulations that restrict short selling, our
analysis implies that, while banning short selling during normal times is not desirable, it
can make sense to restrict short selling of financial stocks temporarily when balance sheets
across most financial institutions are weak: When banks are well capitalized (and predatory
short selling does not occur in equilibrium), short sellers merely carry out their beneficial
role of enforcing the law of one price, providing liquidity and incorporating information into
prices. Our model thus does not provide a justification for a general ban of short selling



                                              31
on the grounds of predatory behavior. However, when financial institutions’ balance sheets
are weak and they enter the vulnerability region, destabilizing predatory short selling can
occur, leading to inefficient liquidation of long-term investments by vulnerable institutions.
Hence, while we want to stress that our paper does not provide a full welfare analysis of short
selling, this result provides a potential justification for temporary short-sale restrictions to
curb predatory behavior (if one believes that the costs of potential predatory short selling
outweigh potential overvaluation and reduction in liquidity during a short-selling ban).
       Disclosure of short positions. A major result of our analysis is the role of multiplicity
of equilibria in the vulnerability region. Because there are two stable equilibria in this region,
coordination among short sellers is crucial in determining which of the two equilibria we end
up in. This has implications for the disclosure of short positions. In particular, in addition
to recent short-sale restrictions, a number of regulators have enacted tougher disclosure
requirements for short positions. In the U.S., the SEC enacted a rule requiring institutional
investors to publicly disclose their short positions on a weekly basis.18 In the UK, the FSA
implemented a rule that requires investors to disclose on each day any short positions in
excess of 0.25% of the ordinary share capital of financial companies at the end of trading
the previous day.19 Since November 1, 2012, EU regulation requires short sellers to report
to regulators if they intend to short sell more than 0.2% of a company’s tradable shares and
to publicly report short positions that exceed 0.5% of tradable shares.20
       Our analysis indicates that such public disclosure of short positions can, in fact, be
counterproductive. In particular, requiring public disclosure of all short positions may in
fact facilitate coordination among predatory short sellers. When short sellers are required
to publicly disclose positions, it may thus be more likely that we end up in the predatory
equilibrium when in the vulnerability region. One way to capture this formally in our model
  18
     See SEC release 34-58785, available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2008/34-58785.pdf.
  19
     See   “Implementing     aspects     of   the   Financial   Services    Act    2010”   available  at
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/cp/cp1 18.pdf.
  20
     See “Europe’s naked short selling ban leaves investors with skin in the game,” Reuters, December 4,
2012.



                                                  32
is to consider an increase in the amount of shares up to which short sellers can coordinate,
S MAX . It follows directly from Proposition 3 that such an increase in coordination enlarges
the doomed region, in which a predatory short-selling attack is the unique equilibrium. This
suggests that disclosure either should only be made to the regulator, or should be made
public only with sufficient time delay.
   Other regulatory interventions. Up to now, we have limited our discussion of poten-
tial regulatory interventions to restricting short sales. In this section, we briefly discuss other
potential regulatory measures that may reduce the vulnerability of financial institutions to
predatory behavior by short sellers.
   First, the leverage constraint arises because short-term creditors may withdraw funding
from the financial institution. This implies that interventions to increase the stability of the
financial institution’s financing may be desirable. For example, such an intervention could
take the form of limiting liquidity mismatch, thus reducing financial fragility and increasing
the resilience of the financial institution against short-selling attacks. Another potential
regulatory intervention that would help financial institutions fend off predatory short-selling
attacks is a requirement for financial institutions to hold more equity. Such a requirement
would make it less likely that the financial institution enters the vulnerability region and
thus reduces the financial fragility that can be exploited by short sellers. Alternatively (if
additional equity capital is costly), a requirement to issue at least some amount of reverse
convertible debt that converts into equity if the leverage constraint binds would allow the
financial institution to reduce leverage without selling any of its long-term asset holdings.
   Second, in our model a credible promise to recapitalize the financial institution could
eliminate that “bad” equilibrium: If short sellers anticipate that the financial institution
never has to liquidate any of its long-term asset holdings, they will never attack, knowing that
they cannot break even on their short positions. However, such an intervention effectively
amounts to a government guarantee for the financial sector. In a richer model where financial
institutions choose their investments, this would lead to substantial moral hazard concerns.


                                                33
It is thus not clear that such a guarantee would be desirable (at least if it is anticipated ex
ante).
   Third, to the extent that regulators use temporary short-sale bans to protect vulnerable
financial institutions from predatory short-selling attacks, this will likely increase the im-
portance of prompt corrective action by regulators. Specifically, if short-sale bans make it
harder for market participants to single out financial institutions that should be shut down
or restructured (e.g., so-called zombie banks), then the regulator’s role in identifying these
institutions becomes all the more important.
   Panic sales. While the focus of this paper is on short selling, another novel result of
our analysis is that, in addition to short sales, regulators may also want to consider the
possibility of destabilizing “panic sales” by current investors in the financial institution’s
equity. In particular, if current shareholders fear that other shareholders are likely to sell
their holdings, such panic sales can become self-fulfilling for financial institutions that are
subject to leverage constraints of the type described in our model. Hence, akin to the
classic bank run problem described in Diamond and Dybvig (1983), our analysis implies
that regulators may want to watch for runs on the equity of financial institutions that are
subject to leverage constraints. As shown in Proposition 3, this concern is stronger the less
likely it is that current shareholders can coordinate their actions.


4.2      Empirical Predictions

Existing empirical evidence. A number of recent papers empirically examine the effects
of recent short-selling bans in the U.S. and Europe. For example, Beber and Pagano (2013)
use international data to document the effects of short-sale bans across different markets.
Boehmer, Jones, and Zhang (2013) provide a detailed investigation of the U.S. ban on short
sales imposed by the SEC in September 2008. The main findings of these (and a number
of other) studies is that short-sale bans led to an unambiguous and significant reduction in
liquidity, market quality, and the speed of price discovery (as measured, for example, by


                                              34
bid-ask spreads, effective spreads, or price impact measures). However, the results regarding
the effect of short-sale bans on prices—perhaps the main motivation for intervention—are
much weaker. For example, Boehmer, Jones, and Zhang (2013) find significant abnormal
excess returns only for the largest U.S. financial institutions and point out that those may
have been caused by the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), which was launched more
or less at the same time. In fact, because their analysis suggests that the price effects were
permanent, they conclude that the TARP may have been the more likely cause.
   Cross-sectional predictions from our model. Our analysis may help interpret some
of the findings of these recent empirical studies. Moreover, the empirical implications of
our analysis could potentially be helpful in the design of future empirical studies of short-
selling bans on financial institutions. First, our model suggests that financial institutions, as
opposed to other firms, should be particularly affected by short-sale bans. Second, the ability
of short sellers to prey on financial institutions depends crucially on the financial condition
of the financial institution. Hence in assessing the price effects of short-sale restrictions, one
should control for leverage, maturity mismatch, or similar variables that measure financial
fragility. The cross-sectional prediction of our model is that it is vulnerable financial firms
for which the price effects of short-sale bans are largest. Third, our model highlights the
importance of taking into account the potential multiplicity of equilibria when interpreting
the empirical evidence. For example, if investors expect that, with some probability, there is
a switch to the dominated equilibrium in which the bank goes bankrupt, the elimination of
the bad equilibrium through a short-selling ban may lead to a permanent price effect. This
can be the case even if the ban itself is temporary: Investors now anticipate that regulators
may impose another ban should financial institutions reenter the vulnerability region. Hence,
according to our analysis the permanent price increase documented by Boehmer, Jones, and
Zhang (2013) could also be attributed to a short-sale ban that eliminates the likelihood of
the dominated equilibrium.
   The funding of blockholders. In addition to the cross-sectional predictions above, a


                                               35
novel prediction of our model is that the vulnerability of a financial institution to predatory
short selling depends not only on its own balance sheet but also on the balance sheets (or
funding conditions) of its large shareholders and other potential support buyers. Specifi-
cally, if large shareholders or other support buyers are important in fending off short-selling
attacks, their ability to do so depends on their own funding liquidity, as proxied by the
parameter B MAX in Proposition 4. Hence, our model makes the prediction that, in the cross
section, financial institutions with less well-capitalized blockholders are more vulnerable to
predatory short-selling attacks. Moreover, in the time series, predatory short-selling attacks
are more likely to be successful when funding conditions for blockholders are tight on average
(for example, during financial crises). Finally, our model predicts that the vulnerability of
financial institutions to predatory short selling depends on the ability of blockholders (and
short sellers) to coordinate. Empirically, the number of blockholders may provide a proxy
for their ability to coordinate.
   Predictions on price skewness. In addition to cross-sectional predictions spelled
out above, our model also predicts that large downward price movements can occur when a
financial institution enters the vulnerability region or the doomed region. This means that, in
our model, short selling increases negative skewness in equity prices, which is opposite to the
prediction in Hong and Stein (2003), where banning short selling leads to negative skewness.
Consistent with our prediction, Bris, Goetzmann, and Zhu (2007) find evidence that there
is significantly less negative skewness in markets in which short selling is either not legal or
not practiced. In addition, our model makes the testable prediction that, absent short-sale
restrictions, negative skewness should be observed particularly for financial institutions with
weak balance sheets (i.e., those that approach the vulnerability region or doomed region).




                                              36
5     Conclusion

This paper provides a model of predatory short selling. Predatory short selling occurs when
short sellers exploit financial weakness or liquidity problems of a financial institution. In
our model, predatory short sales occur in equilibrium because the drop in equity valuation
caused by short sellers leads non-insured depositors and short-term creditors to withdraw
funding from the financial institution. Because of this effective leverage constraint, short
sales can force the financial institution to liquidate long-term asset holdings at a discount.
The resulting value reduction can allow short sellers to break even on their positions.
    Our analysis shows that financial institutions can be vulnerable to attacks from predatory
short sellers when their balance sheets are weak. In the vulnerability region there are two
stable equilibria. One of these stable equilibria does not involve short selling, while in
the other predatory equilibrium short sellers force a complete liquidation of the financial
institution’s long-term asset holdings. In the doomed region there is a unique predatory
equilibrium in which the financial institution liquidates its entire long-term asset holdings.
The doomed region increases in size when short sellers are better able to coordinate their
actions.
    While our model does not develop a full welfare analysis of bans on short selling, the pos-
sibility of predatory short selling in the vulnerability region and the doomed region provides
a potential justification for temporary restrictions on short selling of financial institutions in
those regions. However, the benefits of such restrictions have to be weighed against the cost
of preventing short sellers from performing their beneficial role of eliminating overvaluation
and contributing to market quality and liquidity.



Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1: Absent the leverage constraint, the fundamental value of the financial
institution’s equity is given by XR−D0 , irrespective of the short sellers’ actions. This follows


                                               37
immediately from the fact that, in this case, the financial institution never has to liquidate
early. Given the fixed fundamental value XR − D0 , competition among short sellers ensures
that the share price is equal to the fundamental value XR − D0 . To see this, consider first
the case in which the intercept chosen by long-term investors is larger than the fundamental
value of equity, i.e., P > XR − D0 . In this case, short sellers take a short position S > 0
and, because short sellers make zero profits in equilibrium, the equilibrium short position S
is such that the share price is equal to fundamental value, i.e., Pe = XR − D0 . Now consider
the case in which the intercept chosen by the long-term investors is below fundamental value.
Analogously to before, short sellers now take a long position (they act, more generally, as
arbitrageurs) to ensure that the equity is fairly priced. Finally, when the intercept chosen
by the long-term investors is equal to fundamental value, i.e., P = XR − D0 , short sellers do
not take a position in equilibrium, i.e., S = 0. Because in all of these cases the fundamental
value of equity is fixed at XR − D0 , predatory short selling cannot occur. In all three cases,
the equilibrium condition (3) can thus be rewritten as P − λS = XR − D0 .
   Proof of Lemma 2: In the case that the constraint is violated, the result follows directly
from solving (7) for ∆X(S). Combining this with the fact that no liquidation occurs when
the constraint is satisfied, and that the maximum amount that can be liquidated is X, yields
the result.
   Proof of Lemma 3: The result comes from the fact that, in equilibrium, a change in
either P or λ will be exactly offset by a corresponding change in the equilibrium level of
the short position S, such that the equilibrium condition Pe = P is satisfied. Equilibrium
prices and the equilibrium amount that has to be liquidated by the financial institution thus
remain unaffected.
   Proof of Proposition 1: We first analyze the case δ < γ, which is the case highlighted
in the proposition. For completeness, we then also briefly discuss the cases δ > γ and δ = γ,
which are not discussed in the main text.
   Intuitively, when δ < γ, the P -curve is steeper than the Pe-curve, as depicted in the


                                              38
bottom panel of Figure 1. We now consider the three regions in the proposition in turn.
First, we compute the region in which no predatory short selling can occur (the safety
region). Short sellers cannot break even on a predatory short position if, after forcing the
financial institution to liquidate its entire long-term asset holdings, the fundamental equity
value at t = 2 still exceeds the stock price that forces this maximum liquidation at t = 1. In
this case, no matter how aggressive their selling, short sellers have to buy back at a higher
price than they receive when shorting the stock at date t = 1.
   To calculate the parameter region for which this is the case, consider the case in which
short sellers choose a short position S such that the entire portfolio of the financial institution
is liquidated, i.e., ∆X(S) = X. This requires that

                                  (1 − γ)D0 − γ(P − λS)
                                                        = X,                                   (9)
                                         Rδ(1 − γ)

which yields

                                       P   (1 − γ)(δXR − D0 )
                                  S=     +                    .                               (10)
                                       λ           λγ

This strategy cannot be profitable when the stock price that forces the financial institution
to unwind all of its long-term asset holdings is smaller than the fundamental value of equity
after such a liquidation, i.e.,


                                  XR − D0 − λS < δXR − D0 .                                   (11)


Using (10) to solve (11) for R yields

                                                 D0
                                            R>      ,                                         (12)
                                                 δX

which is the expression defining the safety region in the proposition. When (12) is satis-



                                                 39
fied, the financial institution is well capitalized, and the unique equilibrium is one without
predatory short selling and P = Pe = XR − D0 . Intuitively, in the safety region the liqui-
dation value of the financial institution’s long-term assets is higher than the face value of
outstanding debt.
                                             D0             D0
     Second, consider the region in which    γX
                                                    ≤ R ≤   δX
                                                                 (vulnerability region). In this
region, the leverage constraint is not violated in the absence of predatory short selling, since
D0
XR
     ≤ γ. This means there is still an equilibrium in which no predatory short selling occurs
and P = Pe = XR − D0 . However, now there is also an equilibrium in which short sellers
force the financial institution to liquidate its entire asset holdings. In this equilibrium, by
the zero profit condition, we have


                     Pe = XR − D0 − λS = max [δXR − D0 , 0] = P,                            (13)


where S ≥ S. Since we know that in this region δXR − D0 ≤ 0, the equilibrium price must
be P = 0. In words, the financial institution has to liquidate all of its long-term assets, which
are not sufficient to repay debt, and the equity value is zero. Both of these two equilibria
are stable. Finally, there is a third, unstable equilibrium, in which only part of the financial
institution’s long-term asset holdings are unwound. Denote the amount of short selling in
the unstable equilibrium by S ∗ . In this equilibrium, ∆X(S ∗ ) < X, such that we must have


                        P − λS ∗ = XR − D0 − (1 − δ)R∆X(S ∗ ).                              (14)


Substituting in for ∆X(S ∗ ) from equation (8) and solving for S ∗ yields

                                     P   (1 − γ)(D0 − δXR)
                             S∗ =      −                   .                                (15)
                                     λ         λ(γ − δ)




                                               40
Using this expression for S ∗ , we can determine the price in the unstable equilibrium as

                                                  1−γ
                              P = P − λS ∗ =          (D0 − δXR).                             (16)
                                                  γ−δ

Substituting into (10) yields that the amount the financial institution has to liquidate in the
                                            D 0
                                          γ− XR
unstable equilibrium is ∆X(S ∗ ) = X       γ−δ
                                                  , as stated in the proposition.
   Third, consider the region in which the leverage constraint is violated even in the absence
                              D0
of predatory short selling,   XR
                                    > γ. In this region, long-term investors set the intercept P
equal to the fundamental equity value in the absence of short selling: P = AR − D0 − (1 −
δ)R∆X(0), where ∆X(0) satisfies

                                      D0 − δR∆X(0)
                                                       = γ,                                   (17)
                                    XR − (1 − δ)R∆X(0)

                               D0                                D0
                                    −γ                                −γ
which yields ∆X(0) = X δ−γ(1−δ)
                        XR
                                . When ∆X(0) = X δ−γ(1−δ)
                                                  XR
                                                          < X, partial liquidation is
                                                                                    D0
                                                                                         −γ
possible and the equilibrium price is given by P = XR − D0 − (1 − δ)XR δ−γ(1−δ)
                                                                        XR
                                                                                , which
                             1−δ
simplifies to P = XR −D0 − δ−γ(1−δ) [D0 − γXR], which is the expression in the proposition.
In the presence of competitive short sellers, this is an unstable equilibrium: A perturbation
that leads to a small decline in the financial institution’s stock price triggers selling by short
sellers and drives the stock price to zero, forcing a complete liquidation of the financial
institution’s long-term asset holdings. This full-liquidation outcome is the unique stable
equilibrium: Short sellers force the financial institution to sell its entire asset holdings,
∆X = X. Because δXR − D0 ≤ 0, the equilibrium price must be P = 0. This is the doomed
region.
   To complete the proof, note that, in the doomed region, short sellers (or, more generally,
arbitrageurs) cannot profitably act as support buyers by pushing the stock price up such that
the financial institution does not have to liquidate assets. Because at price Pe = XR−D0 the
leverage constraint is violated, preventing liquidation by buying the stock requires driving
up the price to a level that strictly exceeds the fundamental value XR − D0 . Since absent

                                                    41
liquidation the value of equity is exactly XR − D0 , this cannot be an equilibrium.
   Now we briefly consider the case δ > γ. Intuitively, when δ > γ, the P -curve is less steep
than the Pe-curve, as depicted in the left panel of Figure 1. The first thing to note is that
                                                         D0        D0                                    D0
now the vulnerability region disappears, since           γX
                                                               >   δX
                                                                      .   In this case, as long as R >   γX
                                                                                                            ,   the
financial institution is well capitalized and no predatory short selling occurs. As a result,
                                                 D0                         D0
liquidation takes place only when R <            γX
                                                    .    When R <           γX
                                                                               ,   the financial institution has
                                      D0
                                           −γ
to liquidate ∆X(0) = X δ−γ(1−δ)
                        XR
                                , if it can satisfy the leverage constraint through a partial
liquidation (i.e., ∆X(0) < X). If ∆X(0) ≥ X, the financial institution has to liquidate
its entire asset holdings. Because the P -curve is less steep than the Pe-curve, short sellers
cannot force a full liquidation if the financial institution can satisfy the constraint through
a partial liquidation.
   Finally, consider the knife-edge case when γ = δ. In this case, the P and Pe curves have
                                                        D0
the same slope. This means that when R >                γX
                                                              predatory short selling cannot occur, while
             D0
when R <     γX
                  the financial institution is forced to liquidate all its holdings and P = 0. When
     D0
R=   γX
        ,   the equilibrium price can lie on any point on the interval [0, XR − D0 ].
   Proof of Proposition 2: We again focus on the more interesting case δ < γ, which
is the one depicted in Figure 4. The stable equilibria in the presence of short selling follow
directly from Proposition 1. The equilibrium prices when short selling is restricted are
determined as follows. As before, we assume that the long-term investors are rational, such
that they correctly anticipate the t = 2 payoff P = XR − D0 − (1 − δ)R∆X(0). As long
                                                   D
as the leverage constraint is not violated,        XR
                                                             < γ, the financial institution does not have
                                                                           D
to liquidate (∆X(0) = 0) and P = XR − D0 . When                            XR
                                                                                > γ, the financial institution
                                                   D0
                                                      −γ
has to liquidate an amount ∆X(0) = X δ−γ(1−δ) , which can be derived as in (17). When
                                                   XR

                  D0
                       −γ
∆X(0) = X δ−γ(1−δ)
           XR
                   < X, partial liquidation is possible and the equilibrium price is given by
                                       D0
                                            −γ                         1−δ
P = XR − D0 − (1 − δ)XR δ−γ(1−δ)
                         XR
                                 , which simplifies to P = XR − D0 − δ−γ(1−δ) [D0 − γXR].
                            D0
                                 −γ
When ∆X(0) = X δ−γ(1−δ)
                XR
                        ≥ X, then the financial institution is forced to liquidate all its
long-term asset holdings at t = 1 and P = 0 even in the absence of short sellers. Solving the


                                                        42
                                                                                 D0
above expression for R shows that full liquidation is required whenever R ≤    δX(1+γ)
                                                                                       .
   Proof of Proposition 3: We consider the large short seller first. Recall that the large
short seller moves first and chooses S ∈ [0, S MAX ]. The large short seller’s trade is then
executed at P (S) = P − λS. Then, the competitive fringe moves and chooses SC . The
orders of the competitive fringe are executed at P (S + SC ) = P − λ(S + SC ).
   Conjecture a no-liquidation equilibrium. If S MAX < S ∗ , the large short seller does not
have a profitable deviation: For all S ∈ [0, S MAX ] we have Pe(S) < P , such that a short
sale is unprofitable for the large short seller. Hence, the short seller chooses S = 0 and
the no-liquidation equilibrium is indeed an equilibrium: SC = 0 is a best response for the
competitive fringe.
   Now assume that S MAX > S ∗ . The short sale is now strictly profitable for the large short
seller, since for any S ∈ (S ∗ , S MAX ] we have Pe(S) > P (S). Hence, the large short seller
chooses S > S ∗ . This makes it optimal for the competitive fringe to choose SC = Se −S (such
that the zero profit condition holds for the competitive fringe). Hence, when S MAX > S ∗
predatory short selling becomes the unique equilibrium. Inserting (15) for S ∗ and solving
for R yields

                                  D0    γ−δ
                             R<      +         λS MAX .                                    (18)
                                  γX (1 − δ)γX

Accordingly, the parameter region in which multiple equilibria are possible is given by R ∈
h                         i
  D0     γ−δ      MAX D0
  γX
     + (1−δ)γX
               λS    , δX
                            . The region with a unique predatory short-selling equilibrium
                                  h                      
                                      D0     γ−δ
(doomed region) expands to R ∈ 0, γX     + (1−δ)γX λS MAX .
   Now consider the case of regular sellers. Recall that the large shareholder and the compet-
itive fringe hold S MAX and SCMAX shares, respectively, and that S MAX +SCMAX = S.
                                                                                e The large

shareholder moves first and chooses S ∈ [0, S MAX ]. This trade is executed at P (S) = P −λS.
Then the competitive fringe chooses SC ∈ [0, SCMAX ]. The orders of the competitive fringe
are executed at P (S + SC ) = P − λ(S + SC ).



                                             43
     First consider S MAX < Se −S ∗ . In this case, irrespective of the large shareholder’s decision
to sell, the competitive fringe can still cause a coordination failure by selling SCMAX > S ∗
shares (in such a coordination-failure equilibrium they will always sell the maximum amount).
Anticipating this, the large shareholder will sell some or all of his shares at price Pe = P −λS:
                        
S = arg max S P − λS + (S MAX − S)P (SCMAX + S).
     However, when S MAX > Se − S ∗ , the large shareholder’s decision not to sell rules out
the coordination-failure equilibrium. Given that the large shareholder does not sell, the
competitive fringe cannot profitably coordinate to sell because Pe(SCMAX ) < P (SCMAX ). The
unique best response is thus SC = 0 and no liquidation is the unique equilibrium. Using the
conjectured equilibrium condition P − λSe = 0, we can rewrite the condition S MAX > Se − S ∗
as

                                                                  
                         MAX     XR − D0     P   (1 − γ)(D0 − δXR)
                     S         >         −     −                     .                         (19)
                                    λ        λ         λ(γ − δ)

Inserting P = XR − D0 and simplifying yields

                                            (1 − γ)(D0 − δXR)
                                  S MAX >                     .                                (20)
                                                  λ(γ − δ)

Accordingly, the parameter region in which multiple equilibria are possible is given by R ∈
h                         i
  D0 D0      γ−δ      MAX
    ,
  γX δX
         − (1−γ)δX
                   λS       . The region where no liquidation is the unique equilibrium (safety
                                                  
                           D0      γ−δ
region) expands to R ∈ δX      − (1−γ)δX λS MAX , ∞ .
     The analysis is similar in the case with random execution and limit orders. The main
insight is that limit orders effectively allow traders to condition on whether they are executed
first or second. Hence, we can analyze these two cases in turn. When the large trader
moves first, the equilibrium is exactly as just discussed. This leaves us to describe the
equilibrium when the competitive fringe moves first. Consider the short-selling case first.
The competitive fringe makes zero profit in equilibrium, such that both SC = 0 and SC = Se
are possible in equilibrium. If the competitive fringe chooses SC = 0, then the large short


                                                  44
seller picks S = arg max S[P − λS] if S MAX > S ∗ and S = 0 otherwise. If the competitive
fringe picks SC = S,
                  e the large short seller chooses S = 0.

   Now consider the case of regular sellers when the competitive fringe moves first. If
S MAX > Se − S ∗ (or equivalently SCMAX < S ∗ ), then no matter what the fringe does, it is
optimal for the large trader to set S = 0. But then the competitive fringe optimally responds
by setting SC = 0, given that any SC ∈ (0, SCMAX ] leads to strictly negative profits. Hence,
the unique equilibrium is the no-liquidation equilibrium.
   If S MAX > Se − S ∗ , then there are multiple equilibria. In the “good” equilibrium, the
competitive fringe chooses SC = 0 and the large trader optimally responds by setting S = 0.
In the “bad” equilibrium, the competitive fringe sets SC = SCMAX > S ∗ . The large shareholder
optimally responds with S = arg max S[P − λ(SCMAX + S)] + (S MAX − S)P (S + SCMAX ) > 0.
The optimal amount sold by the large shareholder is strictly less than S MAX , since this would
lead to a zero payoff.
   Taken together, the setup with random execution and limit orders thus leads to exactly
the same equilibrium regions as the setup in which the large trader moves first. The one
difference is that in the coordination-failure equilibrium in which the large shareholder moves
second, he may sell less aggressively, internalizing that he will be executed at a relatively
lower price.
   Proof of Proposition 4: This proof follows along similar lines to the proof of Propo-
sition 3. We assume that the large short seller and support buyer simultaneously sub-
mit their orders and are executed first. The large short seller chooses a short position
                                                                    
S ∈ 0, S MAX . The support buyer chooses a buy order B ∈ 0, B MAX . The orders of
the large short seller and support buyer are executed at Pe(S − B) = P − λ(S − B). Af-
ter the large traders have moved, the competitive fringe chooses SC and is executed at
Pe(S − B + SC ) = P − λ(S − B + SC ).
   First, assume that S MAX > B MAX . The predatory short-selling equilibrium is the unique
equilibrium when, starting from a conjectured no-liquidation equilibrium, the short seller


                                              45
can effect a profitable short sale, irrespective of the action of the support buyer. When
S MAX − B MAX < S ∗ , the support buyer’s best response to any short position S ∈ [0, S MAX ]
is to lean against the short seller, making the short sale unprofitable. Hence, no liquidation
remains an equilibrium. When S MAX − B MAX > S ∗ , on the other hand, any S > S ∗ + B MAX
is a profitable deviation for the large short seller. In this case, no liquidation cannot be
an equilibrium. In the unique liquidation equilibrium, the support buyer optimally chooses
B = 0 (for any B > 0 he would lose money) and, by the zero profit condition, the competitive
fringe chooses SC = Se − S.
   Now consider the case S MAX ≤ B MAX . In this case, the support buyer can always
profitably counter short sales by the large short seller, such that the upper boundary of
the region in which the unique equilibrium involves short selling and liquidation is given by
     D0
R<   γX
        . Taken together, the two cases imply that the region with a unique short-selling
                                           h                                + 
                                               D0     γ−δ
                                                             
equilibrium (doomed region) is given by R ∈ 0, γX + (1−δ)γX λ S MAX − B MAX     .



References

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1992, Stock-price manipulation, Review of Financial
  Studies 5, 503–529.

Allen, Franklin, and Gary Gorton, 1992, Stock price manipulation, market microstructure
  and asymmetric information, European Economic Review 36, 624–630.

Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal
  of Financial Economics 17, 223–249.

Autore, Don M., Randall S. Billingsley, and Tunde Kovacs, 2011, The 2008 short sale ban:
  Liquidity, dispersion of opinion, and the cross-section of returns of US financial stocks,
  Journal of Banking & Finance 35, 2252–2266.




                                             46
Beber, Alessandro, and Marco Pagano, 2013, Short-selling bans around the world: Evidence
  from the 2007-09 crisis, Journal of Finance 68, 343–381.

Benabou, Roland, and Guy Laroque, 1992, Using privileged information to manipulate mar-
  kets: Insiders, gurus, and credibility, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 921–958.

Boehmer, Ekkehart, Charles M. Jones, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2008, Which shorts are in-
  formed?, Journal of Finance 63, 491–527.

       , 2013, Shackling short sellers: The 2008 shorting ban, Review of Financial Studies
  26, 1363–1400.

Boehmer, Ekkehart, and Julie Wu, 2013, Short selling and the price discovery process, Review
  of Financial Studies 26, 287–322.

Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Golstein, 2012, The real effects of financial markets,
  Annual Review of Financial Economics 4, 1–22.

Bris, Arturo, William N. Goetzmann, and Ning Zhu, 2007, Efficiency and the bear: Short
  sales and markets around the world, Journal of Finance 62, 1029–1079.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., 2005, Information leakage and market efficiency, Review of Fi-
  nancial Studies 18, 417–457.

       , Gary Gorton, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Liquidity mismatch, in Markus K.
  Brunnermeier, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, ed.: Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and
  Macro Modeling (University of Chicago Press).

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Martin Oehmke, 2013, The maturity rat race, Journal of
  Finance 68, 483–521.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Predatory trading, Journal of
  Finance 60, 1825–1863.


                                             47
Chakraborty, Debasish, and Bilge Yilmaz, 2004, Informed manipulation, Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory 114, 132–152.

Chang, Eric C., Joseph W. Cheng, and Yinghui Yu, 2007, Short-sales constraints and price
  discovery: Evidence from the Hong Kong market, Journal of Finance 62, 2097–2121.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Amil Dasgupta, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin, 2004, Does one
  Soros make a difference? A theory of currency crises with large and small traders, Review
  of Economic Studies 71, 87–113.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini, 2002, The role of large players in
  currency crises, in Sebastian Edwards, and Jeffrey A. Frankel, ed.: Preventing Currency
  Crises in Emerging Markets (University of Chicago Press).

Dechow, Patricia M., Amy P. Hutton, Lisa Meulbroek, and Richard G. Sloan, 2001, Short-
  sellers, fundamental analysis, and stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 77–
  106.

Desai, Hemang, Srinivasan Krishnamurthy, and Venkataraman Kumar, 2006, Do short sellers
  target firms with poor earnings quality? Evidence from earnings restatements, Review of
  Accounting Studies 11, 71–90.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig, 1983, Bank runs, deposit insurance, and
  liquidity, Journal of Political Economy 91, 401–419.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2001, Liquidity risk, liquidity creation, and
  financial fragility: A theory of banking, Journal of Political Economy 109, 287–327.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1987, Constraints on short-selling and asset
  price adjustment to private information, Journal of Financial Economics 18, 277–311.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole, 2012, Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and
  systemic bailouts, American Economic Review 102, 60–93.

                                            48
Gerard, Bruno, and Vikram Nanda, 1993, Trading and manipulation around seasoned equity
  offerings, Journal of Finance 48, 213–245.

Goldstein, Itay, and Alexander Gümbel, 2008, Manipulation and the allocational role of
  prices, Review of Economic Studies 75, 133–164.

Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan, 2013, Trading frenzies and their impact
  on real investment, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 566–582.

Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2005, Demand-deposit contracts and the probability of
  bank runs, Journal of Finance 60, 1293–1327.

Harris, Lawrence, Ethan Namvar, and Blake Phillips, 2013, Price inflation and wealth trans-
  fer during the 2008 SEC short-sale ban, Journal of Investment Management 11, 1–23.

Harrison, J. Michael, and David M. Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock
  market with heterogeneous expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323–336.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2003, Differences of opinion, short-sales constraints
  and market crashes, Review of Financial Studies 16, 487–525.

Jacklin, Charles J., and Sudipto Bhattacharya, 1988, Distinguishing panics and information-
  based bank runs: Welfare and policy implications, Journal of Political Economy 96, 568–
  592.

Khanna, Naveen, and Richmond D. Mathews, 2012, Doing battle with short sellers: The
  conflicted role of blockholders in bear raids, Journal of Financial Economics 106, 229–
  246.

Khanna, N., and R. Sonti, 2004, Value creating stock manipulation: Feedback effect of stock
  price on firm value, Journal of Financial Markets 7, 237–270.

Kolasinski, Adam C., Adam V. Reed, and Jacob R. Thornock, 2013, Can short restrictions
  acually increase informed short selling?, Financial Management 42, 155–181.

                                               49
Kumar, Praveen, and Duane J. Seppi, 1992, Futures manipulation with “cash settlement,”
  Journal of Finance 47, 1485–1502.

Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.

Lioui, Abraham, 2011, Spillover effects of counter-cyclical market regulation: Evidence from
  the 2008 ban on short sales, Journal of Alternative Investments 13, 53–66.

Liu, Xuewen, 2011, Short-selling attacks and creditor runs: When Morris-Shin meets
  Diamond-Dybvig, Working Paper, HKUST.

Marsh, Ian W., and Richard Payne, 2012, Banning short sales and market quality: The UK’s
  experience, Journal of Banking and Finance 37, 1975–1986.

Miller, Edward M., 1977, Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance
  32, 1151–1168.

Ozdenoren, Emre, and Kathy Yuan, 2008, Feedback effects and asset prices, Journal of
  Finance 63, 1939–1975.

Postlewaite, Andrew, and Xavier Vives, 1987, Bank runs as an equilibrium phenomenon,
  Journal of Political Economy 95, 485–491.

Saffi, Pedro, and Kari Sigurdsson, 2011, Price efficiency and short selling, Review of Financial
  Studies 24, 821–852.

Scheinkman, José A., and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal
  of Political Economy 111, 1183–1219.




                                              50
