NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CRISIS AND COMMITMENT:
INFLATION CREDIBILITY AND THE VULNERABILITY TO SOVEREIGN DEBT CRISES
Mark Aguiar
Manuel Amador
Emmanuel Farhi
Gita Gopinath
Working Paper 19516
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19516
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

We thank Marios Angeletos, Fernando Broner, Hal Cole, Tim Kehoe, Juan Pablo Nicolini, Chris Phelan,
Vincenzo Quadrini, Ken Rogoff and Ivan Werning for helpful comments. Manuel Amador acknowledges
NSF support under award number 0952816. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Crisis and Commitment: Inflation Credibility and the Vulnerability to Sovereign Debt Crises
Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath
NBER Working Paper No. 19516
October 2013
JEL No. E31,E4,E62,F34,G15
ABSTRACT
We propose a continuous time model of nominal debt and investigate the role of inflation credibility
in the potential for self-fulfilling debt crises. Inflation is costly, but reduces the real value of outstanding
debt without the full punishment of default. With high inflation credibility, which can be interpreted
as joining a monetary union or issuing foreign currency debt, debt is effectively real. By contrast, with
low inflation credibility, sovereign debt is nominal and in a debt crisis a government may opt to inflate
away a fraction of the debt burden rather than explicitly default. This flexibility potentially reduces
the country's exposure to self-fulfilling crises. On the other hand, the government lacks credibility
not to inflate in the absence of crisis. This latter channel raises the cost of debt in tranquil periods and
makes default more attractive in the event of a crisis, increasing the country's vulnerability. We
characterize the interaction of these two forces. We show that there is an intermediate inflation
credibility that minimizes the country's exposure to rollover risk. Low inflation credibility brings
the worst of both worlds—high inflation in tranquil periods and increased vulnerability to a crisis.
Mark Aguiar
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
mark@markaguiar.com

Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu

Manuel Amador
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
amador.manuel@gmail.com

Gita Gopinath
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Littauer 206
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gopinath@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Several countries’ debt-to-GDP ratios are near or above record levels. These include the
U.S, U.K, Japan, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and Italy, among others. Some of these
countries, such as those on the periphery of the euro area, have experienced dramatic spikes
in yields on their debt, while others, such as the U.S., U.K, and Japan, have not. One
factor that is often held responsible for this difference is that the latter countries directly
control the supply of the currency in which they issue debt.1 The euro-area economies,
as well as emerging markets that issue debt in foreign currency, must repay debt solely
through real fiscal surpluses. The US, UK, and Japan, on the other hand, have the option
of lowering the real burden of nominal debt through inflation. A plausible conjecture is that
the availability of this additional instrument makes domestic-currency debt less susceptible
to outright default, and therefore less susceptible to self-fulfilling debt crisis.2 In this paper
we explore the validity of this conjecture.
We develop a tractable, continuous-time model of self-fulfilling debt crises with nominal
bonds, building on the canonical models of Barro and Gordon (1983), Calvo (1988) and Cole
and Kehoe (2000).3 A benevolent government in a small open economy makes decisions
over time without commitment. In every period, it chooses inflation, a level of borrowing,
and whether to repay or default. Explicit default incurs real costs, modeled here as a drop
in endowment and permanent exclusion from financial markets. Exploiting nominal bonds’
vulnerability to ex post inflation is not costless, either, as in practice inflation involves real
economic distortions as well. We embed these costs in the government’s objective function,
1

See De Grauwe (2011) and Krugman (2011) for recent policy discussions.
The fact that European Central Bank’s Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) announcement significantly reduced the spreads in Southern European countries in 2012 is consistent with the view that high
spreads were to a large extent self fulfilling. Under this view, the ECB President Draghi’s statement to “do
whatever it takes to preserve the euro,” including purchases of sovereign bonds in secondary markets, would
be interpreted as a signal of the ECB’s off-equilibrium willingness to intervene in the event of a run on euro
sovereign debt. Such a policy in an environment of self-fulfilling crises can eliminate or reduce the possibility
of a crisis, explaining the immediate reduction in spreads.
3
The literature on self-fulfilling debt crises is large, some of which is surveyed and discussed in Aguiar
and Amador (in progress). In addition to Calvo (1988) and Cole and Kehoe (2000), other classic references
include Alesina et al. (1992) and Giavazzi and Pagano (1989). Our paper is also related to Da-Rocha et
al. (forthcoming) which models the interplay of devaluation expectations and default in a model in which
debt is denominated in foreign goods and the government chooses both a real exchange rate and a debt
policy. Another closely related paper is Araujo et al. (2012), which considers the welfare gains or costs from
issuing debt in local versus foreign currency. They model the costs of local currency debt as arising from an
exogenous shock to inflation. Our model focuses on the joint dynamics of debt and inflation. Recent papers
exploring themes involving currency denomination of debt or self-fulfilling crises include Corsetti and Dedola
(2013), Jeanne (2011), Jeanne and Wang (2013), Kocherlakota (2011) and Roch and Uhlig (2011). Another
recent related paper is Lorenzoni and Werning (2013) who explore debt dynamics in a dynamic version of
Calvo (1988).
2

2

and refer to the relative weight on inflation disutility as the economy’s “inflation credibility.”
Our environment nests foreign currency debt as the limiting case in which inflation costs
become arbitrarily large, rendering nominal bonds effectively real.
Our model highlights the fact that partial default via inflation versus explicit default
may have asymmetric costs, and the key comparative static is in regard to the relative
costs of inflation. A useful feature of separating the costs of full default from those of
inflation is that a country can credibly commit not to partially default through inflation by
issuing bonds in foreign currency; a similar commitment technology for explicit default is
not as readily available. We therefore can address the positive and normative implications
of issuing domestic versus foreign currency bonds in an environment of limited commitment,
and how this tradeoff varies with the level of inflation commitment when the government
issues domestic-currency bonds.
In equilibrium, risk-neutral foreign investors purchase sovereign bonds at prices that reflect anticipated government decisions to repay, default, or inflate. In turn, the government’s
optimal policy depends on the equilibrium interest rate, raising the possibility of self-fulfilling
debt crises. Our environment allows us to explore how the degree of inflation credibility alters the country’s vulnerability to self-fulfilling debt crises. A main finding of the analysis is
that inflation credibility—and by implication the choice of domestic versus foreign currency
bonds—has an ambiguous impact on the possibility of a self-fulfilling debt crises and on
welfare.
To provide intuition for the ambiguous role of inflation credibility in preventing selffulfilling debt crises, consider the case of real bonds and a zero-one default decision. If
creditors fail to roll over bonds, the government is faced with a choice of default versus
repaying the entire principal on all maturing debt. For large enough debt levels, outright
default is preferable, and this may be the case even if the government were willing to service
interest payments rather than default, raising the possibility of multiple equilibria. On the
other hand, if the debt is denominated in domestic currency, the government has a third
option; namely, inflate away part of the principal and repay the rest. What is perhaps the
conventional wisdom regarding debt crises is that this third option lowers the burden of
repayment and eliminates the desirability of full default, at least for a range of debt stocks.
That is, adding another policy instrument (partial default through inflation) reduces the
occurrence of outright default. However, this conclusion must be tempered by the fact that
the lack of commitment to bond repayments also extends to inflation. If the commitment to
low inflation is weak, then high inflation will be the government’s policy even in the absence
of a crisis. This drives up the nominal interest rate in the non-crisis equilibrium, making
default relatively attractive in all equilibria. This latter effect can generate an environment
3

in which nominal bonds are more vulnerable to self-fulfilling runs; that is, the option for
partial default makes outright default more likely.
More precisely, we establish a threshold for inflation credibility below which an economy
is more vulnerable to crises for a larger range of debt. A middle-range of inflation credibility
generates the conventional wisdom of less vulnerability. It is this level of credibility at which
the economy can best approximate the state-contingent policy of low inflation in tranquil
periods and high inflation in response to a liquidity crisis. High inflation credibility renders
nominal bonds into real bonds, recovering the Cole and Kehoe (2000) analysis.
In terms of welfare, when inflation credibility is low issuing foreign currency (real) bonds
is preferable to domestic currency (nominal) bonds. This follows because with domestic
currency debt, the vulnerability to a crisis is greater and inflation is high in all equilibria. This
rationalizes the empirical fact that emerging markets typically issue bonds to foreign investors
solely in foreign currency, the so-called “original sin.” Borrowing in domestic currency also
reduces the country’s equilibrium borrowing limit. On the other hand, a moderate level of
inflation credibility makes nominal bonds strictly preferable for intermediate levels of debt,
where the reduction in crisis vulnerability is at work.
In some contexts, there may exist a richer set of options in designing institutions that
govern monetary and fiscal policy. Delegation of certain economic decisions to agents with
different objectives has long been understood to be a possible solution to lack of credibility.
In the event such delegation is feasible, our analysis suggests that an attractive option is
to delegate the conduct of policy to an institution that places a very high cost on inflation
in normal times and a very low cost in crisis times. Such an institution delivers inflation
only when it is needed, when confronted with a rollover crises. If it is successful at doing
so then it can eliminate rollover crises altogether and guarantee no inflation in equilibrium.
However, such solutions are confronted by the inherent difficulty of building institutions that
follow objectives that conflict with those of the government.
Finally, we also make a technical contribution in this paper. We show that, in our
continuous time formulation, the government’s problem can be represented as an optimal
control problem on a stratified domain: that is, a situation where both the payoffs to the
government and the choice set for the control may change discontinuously as a function of
the state variable. In our model this occurs because of two reasons: first, the probability
of a self-fulfilling debt run discontinuously switches from zero to a strictly positive number
as the country accumulates debt, generating both a discontinuity in the payoff function
as well as in the equilibrium interest rate. But also, our model features an equilibrium
inflation choice that is discontinuous, generating an additional discontinuity in the equilibrum
interest rate. Recent advances on the existence and uniqueness of the value function for
4

problems on stratified domains (see Bressan and Hong, 2007) allow us to provide a complete
characterization of the equilibria in our environment.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the environment;
section 3 analyzes the equilibrium in the absence of self-fulfilling crises; section 4 introduces
the possibility of self-fulfilling rollover crises and performs our main comparative statics and
welfare comparisons; and section 5 concludes. All proofs are in the appendix.

2

Environment

2.1

Preferences and Endowment

We consider a continuous-time, small-open-economy environment. There is a single, freelytraded consumption good which has an international price normalized to 1. The economy
is endowed with y units of the good each period. We consider an environment in which
income is deterministic, and for simplicity assume that y is independent of time. The local
´t
currency price (relative to the world price) at time t is denoted Pt = P (t) = P (0)e 0 π(t)dt ,
where π(t) denotes the rate of inflation at time t. To set a notational convention, we let
π : [0, ∞) → R+ denote inflation as function of time and let π(t) or πt denote the evaluation
of π at time t. When convenient, we use π ∈ R+ to denote a particular inflation choice. A
similar convention is used for other variables of interest, like consumption and debt.
The government has preferences over paths for aggregate consumption and domestic
inflation, x(t) = (c(t), π(t)) ∈ R2+ , given by:
ˆ

ˆ

∞
−ρt

e

U=
0

∞

e−ρt (u (c(t)) − ψ(π(t))) dt.

v(x(t))dt =

(U)

0

Utility over consumption satisfies the usual conditions, u0 > 0, u00 < 0, limc↓0 u0 (c) = ∞, plus
an upper bound restriction: limc→∞ u(c) ≤ ū < ∞ needed for technical reasons.4 Power
utility with a relative risk aversion coefficient greater than one satisfies these conditions.
The disutility of inflation is represented by the function ψ : R+ → R+ , with ψ 0 > 0 and
ψ 00 ≥ 0. In the benchmark model discussed in the text, we let ψ(π) = ψ0 π, ψ0 ≥ 0, and we
restrict the choice of inflation to the interval π ∈ [0, π̄]. We retain this functional form for
tractability reasons and discuss later how our results extend to the case with strictly convex
inflation costs.
While we do not micro-found preferences over inflation, a natural interpretation is that ψ
is a reduced-form proxy for a reputational cost to the government of inflation. A large cost
4

In particular this is needed to apply the results of Bressan and Hong (2007) to our set up. See Appendix.

5

represents an environment in which the government has a relatively strong incentive for (or
commitment to) low inflation.5 The cost ψ is not state contingent; in particular, the costs of
inflation will be independent of the behavior of creditors, although we discuss implications
of relaxing this assumption in section 4.5.
When performing comparative statics with respect to ψ0 , we have in mind institutional
features of monetary and fiscal policy that vary across countries, such as the extent of
inflation indexing in the private sector and the flexibility of prices; the political economy
that governs the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy; the legislative mandate of the
central bank and how readily this can be amended; and the ability to raise revenue through
taxation in a non-distortionary manner. As discussed below, inflation serves as a device to
partially default on certain bonds. Another interpretation of ψ0 is the extent of creditor
protection when bonds are issued under domestic law. That is, how easily can terms of the
original bond contract be amended through legislation or litigation in courts.
The government chooses x = (c, π) from a compact set X ≡ [0, c̄] × [0, π̄]. The upper
bound on consumption c̄ is assumed to never bind.6 The upper bound on π will bind in the
benchmark case of linear cost, and as we shall see it yields a discrete choice between low
(zero) inflation or high (π̄) inflation. Let X denote admissible controls: the set of measurable
functions of time x : [0, ∞) → X.

2.2

Bond Contracts and Budget Sets

The government can trade a nominal non-contingent bond. Let Bt denote the outstanding
stock of nominal bonds, and let bt ≡ Bt /Pt denote the real value of outstanding debt. The
initial P (0) is assumed to be pre-determined. This, plus the fact that P (t) is a continuous
function of time, implies that bt can be treated as a state variable.
The government contracts with competitive (atomistic) risk-neutral lenders who face an
opportunity cost in real terms given by the world interest rate r? = ρ. We assume the
wealth of the lenders in aggregate is sufficient to finance the stock of sovereign bonds in
our equilibrium, and foreign lenders are willing to hold these bonds as long as the expected
real return is r? . Bonds carry an instantaneous interest rate that is conditional on the
outstanding stock of real debt. In particular, we consider stationary equilibria in which the
government faces a time-invariant interest rate schedule r : Ω → R+ , where Ω = [0, bmax ]
5

The reputational cost can be augmented by real distortions to a good that enters separably from tradable
consumption. Allowing for inflation to reduce the (instantaneous) tradable endowment as well would pose
no difficulties; for example, replacing y(t) = y with y(t) = (1 − π(t))y.
6
As we discuss in the next sub-section, we impose an upper bound on assets (or lower bound on debt),
so an upper bound on consumption does not become an issue. The upper bound on assets is not restrictive
for the analysis.

6

denotes the domain of real debt permissible in equilibrium. The debt domain is characterized
by a maximal debt level bmax ∈ R+ above which the government cannot borrow. The value
of bmax will be an equilibrium object. For expositional convenience, we put a lower bound
on debt of zero; the analysis is not sensitive to allowing the economy to accumulate a finite
amount of foreign assets. As the government is the unique supplier of its own bonds, it
understands the effects of its borrowing decisions on the cost as given by the entire function
r.
The evolution of nominal debt is governed by:
Ḃ(t) = P (t)(c(t) − y) + r(b(t))B(t).
Dividing through by P (t) and using the fact that Ḃ/B = ḃ/b + π gives the dynamics for real
debt:
ḃ(t) = f (b(t), x(t)) ≡ c(t) − y + (r(b(t)) − π(t))b(t).

(1)

A key feature of (1) is that inflation reduces the real burden of debt repayment, conditional on
r(b). This reflects that ex post inflation and partial default are equivalent to the bond holder
in terms of real returns. In practice, one could think of the central bank “printing money”
to repay bond holders; in our environment, to the extent that printing money generates
inflation and its associated costs, such effects are captured by π and ψ(π), respectively. In a
non-cashless economy there would an additional term in the budget constraint corresponding
to seignorage revenues.7 We abstract from these effects because seignorage revenues tend to
be small. However, their inclusion will not fundamentally change our results.
We are interested in environments in which r may not be a continuous function. For
technical reasons, we need to place some restrictions on the nature of these discontinuities.
Definition 1. Given a domain Ω = [0, bmax ], the set R(Ω) consists of functions r : Ω → R+
such that
(i) r is bounded and lower semi-continuous on Ω;
(ii) r is such that y − (r(b) − π̄)b ≥ M > 0 for all b ∈ Ω; that is, it is always feasible to
have ḃ = 0 with strictly positive consumption;
(iii) r contains a finite number of discontinuities denoted by b1 , b2 , ..., bN with 0 < bn <
bn+1 < bmax for all n ∈ {1, 2, .., , N − 1};
7

If real money demand is inelastic and equal to κ then the additional term on the right hand side of
equation (1) will be (−κπ).

7

(iv) r is Lipschitz continuous on sets Ωn for all n ∈ 0, ..., N , where Ω0 ≡ (0, b1 ); Ωn ≡
(bn , bn+1 ) for n = 1, ..., N − 1; and ΩN = (bN , bmax ).8
Denote the closure of Ωn as Ωn , and note that Ω = ∪N
n=0 Ωn . The debt-dynamics equation
(1) implies that b(t) is always continuous in time; however, f (b, x) = c + (r(b) − π)b − y may
not be continuous in b. For r ∈ R(Ω), continuous policies imply continuous dynamics except
at finitely many points {b1 , ..., bN }, at which the dynamics can change discretely.

2.3

Limited Commitment

The government cannot commit to repay loans or commit to a path of inflation. At any
moment, it can default and pay zero, or partially inflate away the real value of debt. As
noted above, we model the cost of inflation with the loss in utility ψ(π). We model outright
default as follows. If the government fails to repay outstanding debt and interest at a point in
time, it has a grace period of length δ in which to repay the bonds plus accumulated interest.
During this period, it cannot issue new debt, but is also not subject to the full sanctions of
default. If it repays within the grace period, the government regains access to bond markets
with no additional repercussions. If the government fails to make full repayment within the
grace period, it is punished by permanent loss of access to international debt markets plus
a potential loss to output.9
The grace period allows a tractable, continuous time representation such that it is feasible
to repay and partly inflate away a positive stock of debt if creditors do not purchase new
bonds. The length of the grace period δ can be thought of as proxying for debt maturity.10 As
with the costs of inflation and default, we treat δ as a primitive of the environment.
We let V represent the continuation value after a default, which we assume is independent
of the amount of debt at the time of default.11 As we shall see, in equilibrium the government
will opt for full repayment only if the payoff to doing so weakly dominates V . We assume
that V > u(0)/ρ, so the country prefers default to consuming zero forever.12 We discuss the
payoff to utilizing the grace period in section 4.1.
That is, for all n, there exists Kn < ∞ such that r(b0 ) − r(b00 ) ≤ Kn |b0 − b00 | for all (b0 , b00 ) ∈ Ωn × Ωn .
In practice countries can exit default status by repaying outstanding debt in full. We proxy this with a
grace period, which allows the government to avoid the full punishment of default by repaying outstanding
principal and interest.
10
An alternative formulation is the one in He and Xiong (2012) in which each debt contract has a random
maturity, which generates an explicit iid sequencing of creditors at any point in time. Long-maturity debt
poses tractability issues in solving for an equilibrium given that the interest rate charged to new debt is a
function of the inflation policy function over the bond’s maturity horizon.
11
For concreteness, we can define V = u((1 − τ )y)/ρ as the autarky utility, where τ ∈ [0, 1) represents the
reduction in endowment in autarky.
12
We also assume u(y)/ρ > V , so that strictly positive debt can be sustained in equilibrium.
8

9

8

Modeling limited commitment in this manner has a number of advantages. First, by separating the costs of inflation from the costs of outright default, we can consider environments
in which the two are treated differently by market participants. It may be the case that the
equilibrium costs or “punishment” of inflation may be greater or less than that of outright
default, and the model encompasses both alternatives. For example, the high inflation of the
1970s in the US and Western Europe eroded the real value of outstanding bonds; however,
the governments did not negotiate with creditors or lose access to bond markets, as typically
occurs in cases of outright default. A short-coming of the analysis is we do not present a
micro-founded theory of why these costs may differ in practice; we take them as primitives,
and explore the consequences for debt and inflation dynamics. Second, our modeling allows
us to compare the implications of issuing domestic currency debt (ψ0 < ∞) which can be
inflated away, versus issuing foreign currency debt (ψ0 = ∞) which cannot be inflated away.
We can also interpret π(t) as capturing a partial default technology. Some forms of
debt contracts such as those issued under domestic law may be more pliable to partial
restructuring as opposed to those issued under foreign law. The ψ(π) function can then be
interpreted as capturing this variation in the ability to partially default. Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009) identify several historical episodes of overt default on domestic debt (as opposed to
only inflating it away). Du and Schreger (2012) estimate the credit risk associated with
local currency debt and find it to be consistently positive and in certain countries and time
periods of the order of magnitude of a few hundred basis points.
As noted in the introduction, there is a readily available commitment technology for
ruling out partial default through inflation; namely, issuing bonds in a foreign currency.
Whether opting for such commitment is welfare improving will be taken up in section 4.6.

3

No-Crisis Equilibria

In this section we characterize equilibria in which creditors can commit to (or coordinate on)
rolling over debt. In particular, we assume that the government can always trade bonds at
an equilibrium schedule r with no risk of a rollover crisis. There remains limited commitment
on the part of the government with regard to inflation and default. We solve the government’s problem under the restriction that default (with or without subsequent repayment)
is never optimal on the domain Ω. This is not restrictive in equilibrium.In particular, in the
deterministic environment under consideration in this section, the equilibrium restricts debt
to a domain on which it is never optimal to default.
Limited commitment with respect to inflation and linear inflation costs gives rise to a
threshold level of debt bπ above which a country chooses high inflation π̄ (and where interest
9

rates are high) and below which inflation is zero (and interest rates are low). Since the
government internalizes the impact of its choice of inflation on the interest rate it faces, for
debt levels above bπ the government has an incentive to save so as to escape high interest
rates and high inflation. There is no other incentive to save/borrow because r? = ρ and y is
fixed. We then describe the impact of the level of inflation commitment, ψ0 , on the inflation
threshold, on debt dynamics and on welfare. Besides being of independent interest, this
comparative static is an important ingredient of the analysis in Section 4 when we introduce
rollover risk.
For a given Ω; r ∈ R(Ω); and for all b0 ∈ Ω; the government’s value function can be
written as
ˆ ∞
V (b0 ) = max
e−ρt v(x(t))dt,
(P1)
x∈X

0

subject to:
ˆ t
b(t) = b0 +
f (b(t), x(t))dt
0
ˆ t
= b0 +
(c(t) + (r(b(t)) − π(t)) b(t) − y) dt, and
0

b(t) ∈ Ω for all t.
Posing the government’s problem in sequence form raises the question of whether the solution
is time consistent, both in regard to default and inflation. Before discussing this and other
aspects of the solution to the government’s problem, we define our equilibrium concept:
Definition 2. A Recursive Competitive Equilibrium is an interval Ω = [0, bmax ], an interest
rate schedule r : Ω → R+ , a consumption policy function C : Ω → [0, c̄], an inflation policy
function Π : Ω → [0, π̄], and a value function V : Ω → R such that
(i) r ∈ R(Ω);
(ii) given (Ω, r) and for any b0 ∈ Ω, the policy functions combined with the law of motion (1) and initial debt b0 generate sequences x(t) = (C(b(t)), Π(b(t))) that solve the
government’s problem (P1) and deliver V (b0 ) as a value function;
(iii) given C(b) and Π(b), bond holders earn a real return r? , that is, r(b) = r? + Π(b) for
all b ∈ Ω; and
(iv) V (b0 ) ≥ V for all b ∈ Ω.

10

The final equilibrium condition imposes that default is never optimal in equilibrium. In
the absence of rollover risk, there is no uncertainty and any default would be inconsistent with
the lender’s break-even requirement. As we shall see, condition (iv) imposes a restriction
on the domain of equilibrium debt levels.13 It also ensures that problem (P1), which imposes
no default, is without loss of generality. That is, by construction the state constraint b(t) ∈
Ω̄ in (P1) ensures that the government would never exercise its option to default in any
equilibrium.
The time consistency of optimal inflation policy in the above sequence formulation is
more subtle. The potential for time inconsistency is embedded in the equilibrium interest
rate function r(b) = r? + Π(b). The government takes this function as given and does not
internalize that its policies are ultimately determining the equilibrium interest rate schedule. We can view this expression as the limit of a discrete time environment in which the
relevant inflation for bond pricing is that chosen by the “next period’s” government, which
is not under the current incumbent’s control. Given an r(b) function, the government is
indifferent between choosing inflation ex-ante or period by period. Therefore, the sequence
problem written above, for a given r(b), satisfies the recursive problem when choices are
made period-by-period under limited commitment. This contrasts with the full commitment
Ramsey solution in which the government commits to a path of inflation at time 0, with the
understanding that its choices will affect the equilibrium interest rate; that is, the Ramsey
government does not take r(b) as given. The Ramsey solution would be to set π(t) = 0 for
all t and lock in r(t) = r? . This solution however may not be time consistent under limited
commitment, as the government in the future may choose to deviate from its promises.
In recursive form, we solve the government’s problem using the continuous time Bellman
equation. Let H(b, q) : Ω × R → R be defined as
H(b, q) = max {v(x) + qf (b, x)}
x∈X

(2)

= max {u(c) − ψ(π) + q (c − y + (r(b) − π)b)} .
(c,π)∈X

Note that H is defined conditional on an equilibrium interest rate schedule, which we suppress
in the notation. The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation is:
ρV (b) − H(b, V 0 (b)) = 0.

(HJB)

We proceed to show that the value function is the unique solution to (HJB). There
13

It must also be the case that the government never prefers to default and then repay within the grace
period. We postpone that discussion until section 4.1.

11

are two complications. The first is that r may not be continuous, so the HJB may be
discontinuous in b. The second is that the value function may not be differentiable at all
points, so its derivative, V 0 (b), may not exist. Nevertheless, the value function is the unique
solution to (HJB) in the viscosity sense. We use the definition of viscosity introduced by
Bressan and Hong (2007) for discontinuous dynamics adapted to our environment:
Definition 3. For a given Ω and r ∈ R(Ω), a viscosity solution to (HJB) is a continuous
function w ∈ C 0 (Ω) such that for any ϕ ∈ C 1 (Ω) we have:
(i) If w − ϕ achieves a local maximum at b, then
ρw(b) − H(b, ϕ0 (b)) ≤ 0;
(ii) If the restriction of w − ϕ to Ωn achieves a local minimum at b ∈ Ωn , then
ρw(b) − H(b, ϕ0 (b)) ≥ 0,
where Ωn is defined in Definition 1;
(iii) For b ∈ {0, b1 , b2 , ..., bmax },
ρw(b) − max {u(y − (r(b) − π)b) − ψ(π)} ≥ 0.
π∈{0,π̄}

We make a few remarks on these conditions, and how we use them. First, suppose V is
differentiable at b and r is continuous at b. In this case, a local max or min of V − ϕ implies
V 0 (b) = ϕ0 (b). The first two conditions then are equivalent to the classical Bellman equation
ρV − H(b, V 0 (b)) = 0.
Aside from points where V is differentiable, condition (i) concerns points where V may
have a concave kink. As we show below, the equilibrium value function is smooth at points
of continuity in r(b). However, condition (i) allows for a concave kink in the value function V
at points of discontinuity in r(b). As we will see below, such kinks are indeed a feature of our
solution, and we will use condition (i) when characterizing the value function at discontinuity
points in r(b).14
Condition (ii) applies only on the open sets Ωn ; that is, only at points at which r(b) is
continuous. We refer to this condition above, along with condition (i), to obtain the classical
Bellman equation at points of differentiability in V . Where V is non-differentiable, then
14

We also use condition (i) in the proof of Lemma 1 to rule out equilibra with interior inflation choices.

12

condition (ii) applies if there is a convex kink. The condition places a lower bound on the
value function at such points.
The government always has the option of staying put at the point of discontinuity, and
thus the value function is weakly greater than the steady state value function, which is
condition (iii). Note that condition (ii) only refers to the open sets on which the interest
rate is continuous, and thus condition (iii) provides the relevant floor on the value function
at the points of discontinuity.
The following proposition states that we can confine attention to the viscosity solution
of (HJB):
Proposition 1. For a given Ω and r ∈ R(Ω), the government’s value function is the unique
bounded Lipschitz-continuous viscosity solution to (HJB).
It is a natural restriction to consider equilibria where the interest rate is weakly increasing
with the level of debt: that is, a government is more tempted to inflate at higher levels of
debt. For the rest of the paper, we will restrict attention to monotone equilibria:15
Definition 4. An equilibrium is motone if r is a non-decreasing function of b for all b ∈ Ω̄.
We can now characterize monotone equilibria in the no-rollover-crisis environment. At
points where the value function is differentiable the HJB is given by,
ρV (b) = max {u(c) − ψ0 π + V 0 (b) (c − y + (r(b) − π)b)}
(c,π)∈X

Where V is differentiable, the first order conditions are:
u0 (c) = −V 0 (b)


0
π=
π̄

if ψ0 ≥ −V 0 (b)b = u0 (c)b
if ψ0 < u0 (c)b

(3)

(4)

The first condition is the familiar envelope condition equating the marginal value of an
additional unit of debt (more consumption today) to the the marginal cost of repaying that
debt going forward (V 0 (b)). The second condition captures the trade off between inflating
away the debt or repaying it through lower consumption. The marginal cost of inflation is
ψ0 . The marginal benefit is that the entire stock of debt is reduced in real terms, which is
15

In general, non-monotone equilibria may exist but the non-monotonicity is restricted to appear within
the interval {bπ , bπ }, where these values are defined below.

13

why b is represented on the right hand side of (4). This reduction in debt is translated into
utility terms via V 0 (b) (or, equivalently, u0 (c)). The first order condition has the intuitive
implication that the government is tempted to inflate if the stock of outstanding debt is high.
It also implies that inflation is preferable when the cost of raising real resources is high; this
is captured in our framework by the marginal utility of consumption.
The assumption that the marginal cost of inflation is constant, together with the restriction to monotone equilibria, generates a “bang-bang” solution for the inflation rate in
the government’s problem: for low levels of debt, zero inflation is optimal, while high levels of debt involve high inflation. The following lemma, whose proof exploits the viscosity
conditions of Definition 3, states this formally:
Lemma 1. In any monotone no-crisis equilibrium, r(b) ∈ {r∗ , r∗ + π̄}. In particular, in any
such equilibrium there exists a bπ such that r(b) = r? for b ∈ [0, bπ ] and r(b) = r? + π̄ for
b ∈ (bπ , bmax ].
The threshold bπ characterizes the equilibrium r(b) and is not uniquely determined. Instead, we can define an interval [bπ , b̄π ] which contains all possible bπ . The upper threshold
b̄π is the highest value of debt below which the government chooses zero inflation when
faced with the interest rate r? . The lower threshold bπ is similarly defined, but when the
government faces the interest rate r? + π̄.
Definition 5. The values b̄π , bπ are given by the unique solutions to:
ψ0 = u0 (y − r? b̄π )b̄π ,

and

ψ0 = u0 (Cπ (bπ ))bπ

where b 7→ Cπ (b) ∈ (0, y − r? b) is defined uniquely by16,17
u(y − r? b) − u(Cπ (b)) + ψ0 π̄ + u0 (Cπ (b))(Cπ (b) − y + r? b) = 0.

(5)

When faced with an interest rate of r? , since r? = ρ, there is no incentive to save or
borrow if inflation is zero and c = y − r? b. From the first order conditions we have that low
inflation is optimal as long as u0 (y − r? b)b − ψ0 ≥ 0. For b > b̄π , this condition is violated.
The threshold bπ and the associated function Cπ relate to the solution of (HJB) when the
interest rate is r? + π̄. In particular, as discussed below, Cπ (bπ ) denotes optimal consumption
16
To see that Cπ (b) exists, fix b and consider the function G(c) = u(y−r? b)−u(c)+ψ(π̄)+u0 (c)(c−y+r? b),
which is the left hand side of (5). Note that G0 (c) > 0 for c < y − r? b, G(y − r? b) = ψ(π̄) > 0, and
limc↓0 G(c) < 0 by the condition that limc↓0 u0 (c) → ∞.
17
Note that if we do not restrict attention to c < y − r? b, there is another solution to (5), at which
c > y − r? b. As we shall see, the solution with c < y − r? b is the appropriate consumption level that satisfies
the Bellman equation.

14

assuming high inflation in the neighborhood above bπ , and the condition defining bπ ensures
that optimal consumption is consistent with high inflation. Note that both b̄π and bπ exist
and are such that y/r? > b̄π > bπ > 0.
The following proposition characterizes the set of recursive competitive equilibria and
the associated equilibrium objects:
Proposition 2. All monotone recursive competitive equilibria can be indexed by bπ ∈ [bπ , b̄π ]
and are characterized as follows. For a given bπ , define the following extended-domain value
function V̂ : (0, y/r? ) → R,

u(y−r? b)



 ρ
V̂ (b) = V̂ (bπ ) − u0 (Cπ (bπ ))(b − bπ )



 u(y−r? b)−ψ0 π̄
ρ

if b ≤ bπ
if b ∈ (bπ , b∗ ]
if b ∈ (b∗ , y/ρ),

where b∗ = (y −Cπ (bπ ))/r? . Define b̄ = max{b ≤ y/r? V ≤ V̂ (b) }. Then for any 0 ≤ bmax ≤
b̄, define Ω = [0, bmax ], and the following constitutes a recursive equilibrium:
(i) The interest rate schedule r : Ω → {r? , r? + π̄} defined by

r(b) =


r ?

if b ≤ bπ

r? + π̄

if b ∈ (bπ , bmax ];

(ii) The value function V : Ω → R defined by V (b) = V̂ (b) for b ∈ Ω;
(iii) The consumption policy function C : Ω → R+ defined by

C(b) =


y − r ? b

if b ≤ bπ or b ≥ b∗

C (b )
π π

if b ∈ (bπ , b∗ ).

(iv) The inflation policy function Π : Ω → {0, π̄} defined by:

0
Π(b) =
π̄

if b ≤ bπ
if b ∈ (bπ , b̄].

Proposition 2 characterizes the set of possible equilibria, in which each equilibrium is
indexed by the value of bπ . That is, each equilibrium corresponds to an interest rate function
which has a jump at bπ . If bπ ≥ b̄, then inflation is zero for the entire domain Ω as default
15

is preferable to the consequences of inflation. More generally, each value bπ ∈ [bπ , bπ ] ∩ Ω
specifies a distinct equilibrium with an interest rate function that jumps up at bπ .
To provide some intuition for the construction of the equilibrium we use Figure 1. Figure
1(a) depicts two steady state value functions. For b ≤ bπ , V1 = u(y − r∗ b)/ρ is the steadystate value function with low inflation when the government faces a low interest rate. As
noted above, low inflation is indeed chosen when r(b) = r? for b ≤ b̄π . Moreover, this value
function and c = y − r? b satisfy (HJB) for b < bπ . The second function V3 is the steady
state value function with high inflation when the government faces a high interest rate,
V3 = (u(y − r∗ b) − ψ0 π̄)/ρ. V3 satisfies (HJB) for b > bπ .
While V1 and V3 satisfy (HJB) locally, they are not a viscosity solution over the entire
domain Ω. This is due to the fact that they are not equal at bπ . The difference between
V1 and V3 at bπ is equal to the discounted cost of inflation ψρ0 π̄ . As a result, stitching
V1 and V3 together gives rise to a discontinuity, and is therefore not a solution. In the
neighborhood above bπ , the government’s optimal response to the jump in the interest rate
is to reduce debt to bπ , and not to remain in the high-inflation zone indefinitely. By doing
so it can attain discretely higher welfare. It therefore will consume less than the steady
state consumption level y − (r(b) − π̄)b = y − r? b. Given the value function at bπ , we can
solve for optimal consumption from (HJB). It is given by Cπ (bπ ), introduced in Definition
+
5, which uses the value matching condition V̂ (b−
π ) = V̂ (bπ ) and the envelope condition
0
0
0 −
0 +
−V̂ 0 (b+
π ) = limb↓bπ u (C(b)) = u (Cπ (bπ )). Note that V̂ (bπ ) 6= V̂ (bπ ), so the value function
has a kink at bπ . This kink reflects that consumption equals y − r? b to the left of bπ , but
is strictly lower to the right given the incentive to save. To ensure that this consumption
is indeed the solution to (HJB) at bπ , high inflation must be optimal. This is the case if
ψ0 < u0 (Cπ (bπ ))b for b > bπ , which motivates the definition of bπ in Definition 5.
As r? = ρ, there is no incentive to vary consumption while the government saves. That
is, the desire to save is in response to the discontinuity in the interest rate at bπ , not because
the current (real) interest rate is high relative to impatience. Thus C(b) = Cπ (bπ ) over the
domain of active savings, and then jumps to y − r? bπ at bπ . The domain of active savings
extends to b∗ , at which point Cπ = y − r? b∗ , and consumption is equal to the steady state
consumption level. At this level of debt, the government is indifferent between saving towards
bπ or remaining at that debt level forever. From the envelope condition, −V̂ 0 (b) = u0 (Cπ (bπ ))
for b ∈ (bπ , b∗ ); that is, the slope of the value function is constant over this region. This is
represented by the linear portion V2 (b) depicted in Figure 1(b). Note that V2 is tangent to
V3 at b∗ , as by definition Cπ (bπ ) is the steady state consumption at b∗ .
For a given bπ ∈ [bπ , b̄π ] the solution for the value function, interest rates, consumption
and inflation policy are depicted in Figure 2.
16

V (b)

V (b)

V1

V1

V2

V3

V

bπ

V3

V

b

bπ

(a)

b∗

b

(b)

Figure 1: Construction of Value Function

V (b)

r(b)

V1

r? + π̄

◦

r?

•

V2

V

V3
bπ

b

bπ

(a) Value Function

b

(b) Interest Rate

C(b)

Π(b)

•
◦

bπ

b∗

π̄

◦

0

•

b

(c) Consumption Policy

bπ
(d) Inflation Policy

Figure 2: Equilibrium with No Crisis

17

b

3.1

Comparative Statics

In this section we evaluate how debt dynamics depend on the inflationary regime; that is,
as we vary ψ0 . An increase in ψ0 increases the gains from reaching the low-inflation region.
This increases the incentive to save, while reducing the utility in the high inflation region. At
the same time a higher ψ0 gives rise to a larger low inflation region, shifting some debt levels
from high to low inflation, and thus reducing the need to save. As a result, the implications
for savings and welfare are ambiguous. Consequently the impact on the debt limit is also
ambiguous. We now provide a detailed analysis.
Consider an increase in the cost of inflation ψ0 to ψ00 > ψ0 . To characterize what happens
to the set of monotone equilibria, note that the expressions in Definition 5 imply that bπ and
b̄π increase.18 Let b0π and b̄0π denote the new thresholds, respectively.
First, consider a bπ that is consistent with equilibrium under both ψ0 and ψ00 , and that
the shift in ψ0 does not change the equilibrium bπ . This is possible for bπ ∈ [b0π , b̄π ]. The
low-inflation steady state value function remains unaffected by the increase in ψ0 , while the
high-inflation steady state value function shifts down in a parallel fashion by the amount
(ψ00 −ψ0 )π̄
. From the expression for Cπ in Definition 5, Cπ (bπ ) declines, which means a higher
ρ
savings rate and steeper slope associated with the linear portion of the value function. The
decline in Cπ implies that b∗ = (y − Cπ (bπ ))/r? increases as well, so the domain for the linear
portion increases. The steeper slope and larger domain for the linear segment is consistent
with the shift down and strict concavity of the high-inflation steady state value function.
The new value function is strictly below the original for all b > bπ . For a given value of V ,
this implies that the amount of debt that can be sustained has decreased (as long as b̄ is
higher than bπ ). This is shown in panel (a) of Figure 3.
Consider now what happens when bπ shifts in response to the change in ψ0 . For example,
suppose the initial equilibrium feataured bπ = bπ < b0π , which cannot survive the increase
in ψ0 . In panel (b) of figure 3 we contrast the value function for an initial equilibrium bπ
with a new equilibrium b0π > bπ . The region (bπ , b0π ] shifts from being a high-interest rate
zone to a low-interest rate zone. The new optimal policy of low inflation in this zone implies
higher welfare, as the government avoids the costs of inflation. That is, the value function
is now higher in that region, and by continuity will be higher even at debt levels in which
the interest rate jumps up. This reflects the increased proximity to the low-inflation zone.
However, given that the linear portion of the value function has a steeper slope under ψ00 ,
The increase in b̄π follows directly from the definition u0 (y − r? b̄π )b̄π = ψ0 . The definition of
u (Cπ (bπ )) bπ = ψ0 implies that the lower threshold depends on ψ0 directly from this first-order condition,
and indirectly through the definition of the function Cπ given in equation (5). Nevertheless, manipulating
these expressions yields an unambiguous implication that bπ is increasing in ψ0 .
18

0

18

eventually the new value function intersects the original one from above (see panel (b) of
Figure 3). Note that depending on the level of V , the borrowing limit b̄ can shift up or down.
The implication for savings of an increase in ψ is therefore mixed. In panel (a), the
savings rate is always weakly greater when ψ0 is higher, and strictly so for the range (bπ , b∗0 ).
In panel (b), when bπ shifts up as a result of the increase in ψ0 , there is a region (bπ , b0π ]
in which the low-ψ economy is saving while the high-ψ economy is not. This reflects that
the inflation rate is higher in this region for the low-ψ economy, and savings is the method
to regain commitment to a low inflation rate. As we let ψ0 go to infinity, the low inflation
zone covers the entire space, and savings is zero everywhere. In this limiting case, a strong
commitment to low inflation is consistent with weakly higher steady state debt levels and a
higher maximal debt limit.
V (b)

V (b)

V

V
bπ

b

(a) No Change in bπ

bπ

b0π

b

(b) Change in bπ

Figure 3: The Role of Inflation Commitment Absent a Crisis: An Increase in Inflation Costs
ψ0

As discussed, bπ is not uniquely determined and is contained in the interval [bπ , b̄π ].
Going forward we consider equilibria in which the low inflation zone is as large as possible.
As creditors are indifferent and the government prefers a low interest rate, the maximal
domain is weakly Pareto superior. We focus on these upper-bound thresholds, tracing out
the Pareto-dominant equilibrium interest rate function, conditional on parameters. In the
no-crisis case this implies bπ = b̄π . The important feature of this equilibrium selection is
that comparative statics of bπ with respect to ψ can be pinned down unambiguously. While
ruling out switching among possible non-crisis equilibria, the fact that the entire range of
possible equilibria shifts up with ψ suggests our focus on b̄π is representative when it comes
to comparative statics. 19
19

With the piecewise-linear ψ(π) function, we can characterize the non-crisis interest rate function by the

19

4

Equilibria with Rollover Crises

The preceding analysis constructed equilibria in which bonds were risk free. We now consider
equilibria in which investors might refuse to purchase new bonds and the government defaults
in equilibrium. This links the preceding analysis of nominal bonds with Cole and Kehoe
(2000)’s real-bond analysis of self-fulfilling crises. Importantly, it allows us to explore the
role of inflation credibility in the vulnerability to debt crises.
In the no-crisis case we demonstrated a threshold bπ such that when debt exceeded this
threshold inflation was high and interest rates were high. Now with rollover risk we construct
a second threshold bλ . When debt exceeds this threshold the government defaults whenever
the investors refuse to purchase new bonds. In keeping with the terminology of Cole and
Kehoe (2000) we refer to the region b ∈ (bλ , bmax ] as the “crisis zone” and its complement
b ∈ [0, bλ ] as the “safe zone”. Unlike the safe zone, in the crisis zone the government is
exposed to self-fulfilling debt crises that occur with exogenous Poisson probability λ.
Interest rates in the crisis zone are higher than in the safe zone because of the probability of default. In the safe zone, which mimics the analysis of the no-crisis equilibria, the
government may choose to save to escape high inflation and high nominal interest rates.
In the crisis zone there is an additional incentive to save so as to escape self-fulfilling debt
crisis and the associated higher interest rates. By saving out of the crisis zone they trade
off temporarily lower consumption for higher steady state consumption when they enter the
safe zone.
In the following sections we characterize the impact of inflation credibility on the vulnerability to debt crises, that is we determine how the threshold bλ is impacted by changes
in ψ0 . The answer depends in important ways on how bπ is impacted by changes in ψ0 . A
main result is that the impact of ψ0 on bλ is non-monotonic.
We proceed by first characterizing the grace-period problem of the government. Recall
that bonds mature at every instant. If investors refuse to roll over outstanding bonds,
the government will be unable to repay the debt immediately. However, the government
has the option to repay the nominal balance within the grace period δ to avoid the full
punishment of default (in real terms the government can use a combination of inflation and
real repayments). After characterizing this sub-problem of a government that enters the
default state but repays the debt within the grace period, we characterize the government’s
single threshold bπ , the potential domain of which is increasing in ψ0 . For the family of quadratic inflation
costs that are parameterized by ψ0 : ψ(π) = ψ0 π 2 , a similar comparative static applies, although the entire
interest rate schedule over the domain b > 0 shifts up with ψ0 . The convenience of the piecewise-linear cost
function is the complete characterization of the schedule, and associated comparative statics, based on a
single threshold.

20

full problem and characterize equilibria with rollover crises.

4.1

The Grace-Period Problem

To set notation, let W (b0 , r0 ) denote the government’s value at the start of the grace period
with outstanding real bonds b0 carrying a nominal interest rate r0 . We re-normalize time to
zero at the start of the grace period for convenience. To avoid the costs of outright default,
the government is obligated to repay the nominal balance on or before date δ, with interest
accruing over the grace period at the original contracted rate r0 . This r0 embeds equilibrium
inflation expectations. The government can reduce its real debt burden by resorting to
inflation.
We impose the pari passu condition that all bond holders have equal standing; that is, the
government cannot default on a subset of bonds, while repaying the remaining bondholders.
Therefore, the relevant state variable is the entire stock of outstanding debt at the time the
government enters the grace period.
The function W (b0 , r0 ) is the solution to the following problem:
ˆ
x∈X

δ

e−ρt v(x(t))dt + e−ρδ V (0),

W (b0 , r0 ) = max

(6)

0

subject to :
ḃ(t) = c(t) + (r0 − π(t))b(t) − y
b(0) = b0 , b(δ) = 0, ḃ(t) ≤ −π(t)b(t),
where for the grace-period problem the controls x and admissible set X refer to measurable
functions [0, δ] → X. The V (0) in the objective function represents the equilibrium value of
returning to the markets with zero debt (which is to be determined below in equilibrium)
at the end of the grace period. Note that if the government repays before the end of the
grace period, it could exit default sooner. However, as it has no incentive to borrow again
once b = 0, it is not restrictive to impose no new debt for the entire grace period. The
final constraint, ḃ(t) ≤ −π(t)b(t) is equivalent to the constraint of no new nominal bonds,
Ḃ(t) ≤ 0.
The grace period problem is a simple finite-horizon optimization with a terminal condition
for the state variable. We do not discuss the solution in depth, but highlight a few key
implications. An important feature of (6) is that W (b0 , r0 ) is strictly decreasing in both
arguments. Moreover, W is decreasing in ψ0 , and strictly decreasing if positive inflation is
chosen for a non-negligible fraction of the grace period. In order to repay its debt quickly,
the government has an incentive to inflate away a portion of the outstanding debt. The cost
21

of doing so is governed by ψ0 .
Regarding a piece of unfinished business left over from the no-crisis analysis, with W
in hand we can state explicitly why the government would never choose to enter default
in the non-crisis equilibria discussed in the previous section. In particular, the government
could always mimic the grace period policy in equilibrium. The one caveat is that r0 is
held constant in the grace period, while the equilibrium interest rate varies with b outside of
default. However, as debt is strictly decreasing and r(b) must be monotone in any no-crisis
equilibrium, this caveat works against choosing to default.

4.2

Rollover Crises

If investors do not roll over outstanding bonds, the government will be forced to default,
but may decide to repay within the grace period to avoid the full punishment inherent in V .
If such an event occurs at time t, then the government will repay within the grace period
if and only if W (b, r(b)) ≥ V . The weak inequality assumes that the government repays if
indifferent.
We assume that a rollover crisis is an equilibrium possibility only if W (bt , rt ) < V . This
assumption is motivated as follows. Suppose that lenders refuse to issue new bonds and the
government repays within the grace period (that is, W (bt , rt ) ≥ V ). The outstanding bonds
would carry a positive price in a secondary market and individual lenders would be willing
to purchase new bonds at the margin from the government at a positive price (which would
incorporate the grace-period inflation dynamics).20
On the other hand, a rollover crisis when W (bt , rt ) < V has a natural interpretation.
If this inequality holds and all other investors refuse to roll over their bonds, an individual
lender would have no incentive to extend new credit to the government. Assuming each
lender is infinitesimal, such new loans would not change the government’s default decision.
Moreover, as the government would not repay this new debt, such lending would not be
challenged by outstanding bondholders.
Similar to Cole and Kehoe (2000) we assume that, as long as W (bt , r(bt )) < V , a rollover
crisis occurs with a Poisson arrival probability equal to λ. The value of λ will be taken as a
primitive in the definition of an equilibrium below, as is δ, the grace period. We can define
an indicator function for the region in which outright default is preferable to repayment
within the grace period:
20

We choose to focus on self-fulfilling default crises and not self-fulfilling inflation crises. The latter is also
interesting but is not the main focus of this paper and something we leave for future research.

22

Definition 6. Let I : R2 → {0, 1} be defined as follows:

I(b0 , r0 ) =


1

if W (b0 , r0 ) < V

0

otherwise

The Poisson probability of a crisis at time t can then be expressed as λI(bt , rt ). Given
an equilibrium r(b), we shall refer to the set {b ∈ Ω|I(b, r(b)) = 1} as the “crisis zone,” and
its complement in Ω as the “safe zone.”

4.3

The Government’s Problem

We now state the problem of the government when not in default. As in the no-crisis equilibrium of section 3, we assume the government faces a bond-market equilibrium characterized
by domain Ω and a r ∈ R(Ω), as well as the parameters δ and λ defining the duration of the
grace period and the Poisson probability of a rollover crisis conditional on I(bt , r(bt )) = 1.
Let T ∈ (0, ∞] denote the first time a rollover crisis occurs. From the government’s and an
individual creditor’s perspective, T is a random variable with a distribution that depends on
´τ
the path of the state variable. In particular, Pr(T ≤ τ ) = 1 − e−λ 0 I(b(t),r(b(t)))dt . The realization of T is public information and it is the only uncertainty in the model. The government’s
problem is:
ˆ

∞

V (b0 ) = max
x∈X

0

e−λ
ˆ ∞

´t
0

e

+λV

I(b(s),r(b(s))ds−ρt

−λ

´t
0

v(x(t))dt

I(b(s),r(b(s)))ds−ρt

(P2)


I(b(t), r(b(t)))dt

0

subject to:

ˆ

b(t) = b0 +

t

f (b(t), x(t))dt and
0

b(t) ∈ Ω for all t.
As in the non-crisis case, we impose the equilibrium restriction on Ω that default is never
optimal in the absence of a rollover crisis.21
21

This implies that V (b) ≥ maxhV , W (b, r(b))i for all b ∈ Ω in any equilibrium.

23

The associated Bellman equation is:
(ρ + λIb )V (b) − λIb V = max {v(x) + V 0 (b)f (b, x)}
x∈X

(HJB’)

= max {u(c) − ψ(π) + V 0 (b) (c + (r(b) − π)b − y)} ,
(c,π)∈X

where Ib is shorthand for the crisis indicator I(b, r(b)). We state the viscosity definition for
this case in Appendix B, as it is similar to the one for the no-crisis case (Definition 3). As
in the no-crisis case, the government’s value function is the unique viscosity solution to the
(HJB’):
Proposition 3. For a given Ω and r ∈ R(Ω), the government’s value function defined in
(P2) is the unique bounded Lipschitz-continuous viscosity solution to (HJB’).

4.4

Crisis Equilibrium

We can now state the definition of equilibrium with crisis:
Definition 7. A Recursive Competitive Equilibrium with Crisis is an interval Ω = [0, bmax ],
an interest rate schedule r, a consumption policy function C : Ω → [0, c̄], an inflation policy
function Π : Ω → [0, π̄], and a value function V : Ω → R such that
(i) r ∈ R(Ω);
(ii) given (Ω, r) and for any b0 ∈ Ω, the policy functions combined with the law of motion (1) and initial debt b0 generate sequences x(t) = (C(b(t)), Π(b(t))) that solve the
government’s problem (P2) and deliver V (b0 ) as a value function;
(iii) given C(b) and Π(b), bond holders earn a real return r? , that is, r(b) = r? + Π(b) +
λI(b, r(b)) for all b ∈ Ω; and
(iv) V (b0 ) ≥ V for all b ∈ Ω.
Note that when λ = 0 this equilibrium corresponds to the equilibrium in Definition 2.
As in section 3, we restrict attention to monotone equilibria, that is, where the interest
rate is a non-decreasing function of b. Just as in that section, monotone equilibria feature a
bang-bang inflation policy,
Lemma 2. In any monotone equilibrium with crisis, r(b) ∈ {r? , r? + π̄, r? + λ, r? + π̄ + λ}
for all b ∈ Ω.

24

There are four discrete values for the equilibrium interest rate (as opposed to two in the
no-crisis case) because of the equilibrium probability of default λ in the crisis zone.
Thresholds for the safe zone bλ : As W is strictly decreasing in both arguments, monotonicity in r(b) ensures that I(b, r(b)) is non-decreasing as well, and the safe zone can be
defined as an interval [0, bλ ] for some bλ ∈ R++ . This threshold for the safe zone can be
characterized as follows. Define bλ and bλ by:
Definition 8. Let
?

(1 − e−r δ )y
bλ ≡ max b ≤
W (b, r? + π̄) ≥ V
ρ


?
(1 − e−r δ )y
?
bλ ≡ max b ≤
W (b, r ) ≥ V .
ρe−π̄δ



; and

These two thresholds correspond to the maximal debt the government is willing to repay
within the grace period if the interest rate is r? + π̄ and r? , respectively. This is depicted
in Figure 4. Note that we have only to consider these two interest rates because we are
defining the upper threshold for the safe zone where there is no rollover crisis in equilibrium.
From the government’s problem described in section 4.1, we have bλ < bλ . This follows from
the fact that W is strictly decreasing in both arguments. The equilibrium threshold for a
rollover crisis bλ lies in ∈ [bλ , bλ ], the exact value within this interval being determined by
equilibrium inflation.
W (b; r)

V

W (b, r? )
W (b, r? + π̄)
bλ

b̄λ

b

Figure 4: Threshold for Safe Zone

Thresholds for Low Inflation bπ : We now turn to two thresholds that determine the
optimal inflation policy. As stated in section 3, we consider equilibria in which the low
inflation zone is as large as possible. In the no-crisis equilibria, the maximum threshold
25

is b̄π from Definition 5, which is the maximal debt consistent with zero inflation when the
government is offered an interest rate of r? . With the possibility of a rollover crisis, we
introduce a second threshold, b̃π . This threshold concerns the best response when the interest
rate is r? + λ. That is, it is the maximum debt when there is the possibility of a crisis and
yet the government opts for low inflation.
The cut-off b̃π is once again determined by the condition ψ0 = u0 (C(b̃π ))b̃π . The particular
value for consumption C(b̃π ) however depends on whether the government is saving to exit
the crisis zone or if it chooses to stay. Specifically,
Definition 9. Let b̃π be defined as:
(
b̃π =

ψ0
u0 (cλ )

if cλ ≤ y −

ψ0
u0 (y−(r? +λ)b̃π )

(r? +λ)ψ0
u0 (cλ )

otherwise,

where cλ ∈ (0, y − (r? + λ)bλ ) is defined uniquely by
(ρ + λ)u(y − r? bλ )
= u(cλ ) − u0 (cλ )(cλ − y + (r? + λ)bλ ) + λV .
ρ
To motivate this definition, we consider the choice of inflation in the crisis zone. In
particular, suppose that π = 0 were optimal for some b above b̄λ . The associated consumption
level is given by c = min{cλ , y − (r? + λ)b}, where the cλ is the consumption level if the
government is saving, and y − (r? + λ)b if the government is not. To verify that π = 0 is
optimal, we require that u0 (c)b ≤ ψ0 . The threshold b̃π is the maximum debt where this
inequality is satisfied. Note that b̃π < b̄π in the range of interest, as cλ < y − (r? + λ)bλ <
y − r? bλ , where the last term is the steady-state consumption when r(b) = r? .

4.4.1

Inflation Credibility and the Crisis Zone: An Intuition

Let us now provide some intuition for the impact of inflation crediblity, ψ0 , on the determination of the crisis zone. In particular, the crisis zone is composed of levels of debt where,
for the given equilibrium interest rate schedule r, we have
W (b, r(b)) < V ,
so that the country is vulnerable to a roll-over crisis.
A change in the inflation cost, ψ0 , has two effects on the above inequality. First, an
increase in ψ0 lowers W for a given b and r(b). Because the value of defaulting, V , is
26

independent of ψ0 , it follows that an increase in the inflation cost will tend to enlarge the
levels of debt that lie within the crisis region. This is because, for a given interest rate, it
is more difficult to inflate at the higher ψ0 in a case of a crisis, making default relatively
attractive and creating room for a self-fulfilling rollover crisis. This is the conventional
wisdom: higher costs of inflation make the country more vulnerable to crisis.22
However, there is another effect of ψ0 on the inequality, which works through the equilibrium interest rate function r. In particular, consider an increase in ψ0 . One might expect
that such an increase will lead to a reduction of the equilibrium inflation rate, implying a fall
in the interest rate schedule, r. This resulting equilibrium reduction in r increases W (b, r(b))
for some levels of debt (as the cost of repaying the debt in case a rollover crisis occurs has
been reduced). Thus, an increase in ψ0 tends to shrink the crisis region through its effect on
lowering the equilibrium interest rate.
Which of the two effects described above dominates depends on the parameters of the
model (and we will provide a full characterization below). However, there are two extreme
cases where we can be more precise before moving on. Suppose for example that the inflation
costs are really low, so that the equilibrium inflation rate is at its maximum level for most
levels of debt. Then, in this case, a marginal increase in the ψ0 has no significant impact
on the equilibrium interest rate schedule (as inflation will remain high), and the first effect
dominates; that is, an increase in inflation costs will tend to enlarge the crisis region. A
similar situation occurs when ψ0 is quite large, as in that case, the equilibrium inflation rate
will be zero for most debt levels (although it may still be used in case of a rollover crisis).
A marginal increase in the inflation cost will also tend to enlarge the crisis region for this
parameter region. For intermediate levels of the inflation cost ψ0 , the equilibrium inflation
rate will however be sensitive to changes in ψ0 , bringing back the second effect into play.
To summarize, the decision to default depends both on the level of debt and the equilibrium interest rate. The ability to inflate is useful in a crisis to avoid the need to default,
perhaps eliminating the bad equilibrium at a particular debt level. On the other hand, the
temptation to inflate drives up the nominal interest rate, creating a vulnerability where perhaps none exists with foreign currency bonds. We shall see below that in the latter case, the
particularly weak commitment to inflation makes issuing foreign bonds a dominant strategy,
lowering inflation in equilibrium and at the same time shrinking the crisis zone relative to
domestic currency debt.
22

It is important to note that this result uses the assumption that the value of defaulting is independent
of ψ0 . This is a reasonable assumption within the context of our model, as the only reason why inflation
arises in equilibrium is because of the fiscal need to repay the nominal debt; a need that disappears after a
default. More generally, we could allow the function V to be affected by ψ0 , and the result would hold as
long as ψ0 affects V less than it does W .

27

In what follows, we flesh out more completely how the various thresholds are impacted
by inflation credibility. Further, we fully characterize the dynamics for consumption and
savings and the value functions under various scenarios for inflation credibility. With this
we can address welfare issues.

4.5

Inflation Commitment and Crisis Vulnerability

Any monotone equilibrium r(b) is characterized by {bπ , bλ } that determine the edge of the
low-inflation and safe zones, respectively. The values {bπ , bλ } depends on the relative magnitudes of the four thresholds {bλ , bλ } and {b̃π , b̄π }. From the above discussion, bπ ∈ [b̃π , b̄π ]
and bλ ∈ [bλ , bλ ]. While we know bλ < bλ and b̃π < bπ , the position of the inflation thresholds
relative to the crisis thresholds depends on parameters, specifically on ψ0 .
The four thresholds as functions of the parameter ψ0 are depicted in Figure 5. Recall that
the inflation cutoffs are strictly increasing in ψ0 . The crisis thresholds are strictly decreasing
in ψ0 as long as inflation is optimal in the grace-period problem, which is the case for low
ψ0 . Eventually the crisis thresholds flattens out for high enough ψ0 when the government
chooses not to inflate in the grace period.23 The portions in bold refer to the equilibrium
threshold for crisis bλ (panel (a)) and inflation bπ (panel (b)). There are three values of ψ0
that are of interest:
Definition 10. Define ψ1 as the cost of inflation such that b̄π = bλ ; define ψ2 as the cost of
inflation such that b̄π = bλ ; and define ψ3 as the cost of inflation such that b̃π = bλ .
Note that ψ1 < ψ2 < ψ3 . These three values divide the parameter space into four regions.
We now discuss the general properties regarding inflation and vulnerability to rollover
crises of increases in ψ0 . Start with the first region where ψ0 < ψ1 . In this region the
commitment to inflation is so weak that the government inflates even in the safe zone. The
relevant crisis threshold is therefore bλ = bλ . That is, the crisis threshold is determined by
W (b, r? + π̄), as inflation is high at the relevant debt level.
As ψ0 increases in this region the crisis threshold decreases as it traces out the downward
sloping curve bλ , and the inflation threshold increases. The intuition for the decline in bλ is
as follows. Given the high temptation to inflate even in tranquil times, inflation gets priced
into equilibrium interest rates. In a crisis then the government cannot generate surprise
inflation. So in the grace period while it pays the cost of higher inflation it gets none of the
23

If the grace period is long enough and ψ0 high enough, the government may not inflate during the
grace period. In this parameter space, bλ and bλ have slope zero. Figure 5 depicts the case in which the
thresholds are decreasing at the points of intersection with the inflation cutoffs. The crisis thresholds are
strictly decreasing at ψ0 = 0, as inflation will always be optimal for low enough costs. The eventual flattening
out of the crisis thresholds as ψ0 → ∞ is implied as bλ converges to the horizontal dashed line in panel (a).

28

benefit. Since W is decreasing in ψ0 when the government inflates in the grace period the
crisis cut-off decreases.
When ψ0 > ψ1 , the threshold bλ is no longer relevant because r(b) = r? at bλ . In the
region ψ0 ∈ (ψ1 , ψ2 ] we have bλ < bπ ≤ bλ . Therefore, the jump in inflation and the associated
increase in interest rate is sufficient to generate a crisis. The negative relationship between
bλ and ψ0 is therefore reversed and the safe zone starts to expand with inflation commitment.
This reflects the fact that the temptation to inflate absent a crisis creates the vulnerability
to a crisis. The stronger the commitment to inflation in tranquil periods, the less vulnerable
the economy is to a rollover crisis. The size of the safe zone peaks when ψ0 = ψ2 , at which
point the safe zone begins to shrink again.
When ψ0 > ψ2 b̄π > bλ . In this case a crisis becomes possible even if π = 0. The
equilibrium crisis threshold traces b̄λ . In the region ψ0 ∈ (ψ2 , ψ3 ] we have b̄π > bλ ≥ b̃π . This
implies that the optimal response to being in the crisis zone involves inflation. Therefore
bλ = bπ also defines the inflation zone. The reason the safe zone begins to shrink again as ψ0
increases is because in this region the costs of inflation not only reduces inflation in tranquil
periods, but also makes responding to a rollover crisis with inflation very costly.
As ψ0 becomes very large, the cost of inflation is so great that the government does not
inflate even in a crisis. This is the fourth region where ψ0 > ψ3 , b̃π > bλ , and the inflation
threshold bπ tracks b̃π . In the limit, the size of the safe zone converges to that of ψ0 = 0, as
in both cases the real value of bonds is independent of the arrival of a crisis.
As Figure 5 makes clear there is a non-monotonic relation between the size of the safe zone
and inflation credibility. It is useful to focus on the two extremes, when ψ0 = 0 and when
ψ0 = ∞. The latter extreme is analogous to the case when debt is in foreign currency and
cannot be inflated away. At this extreme the cost of inflation is so high that the government
does not inflate in tranquil or in crisis periods. The crisis threshold corresponds to the
case of real debt. At the other extreme when ψ0 = 0 it is costless to inflate so inflation is
always high, both in tranquil and crisis times. The high inflation gets priced into equilibrium
interest rates and there is no benefit from inflating in a crisis. Since the cost of inflation is
zero the crisis threshold is exactly the same as the case when debt is in foreign currency.
For intermediate ranges of ψ0 we have bλ first decreasing, then increasing before decreasing
again. For values of ψ0 near the left of ψ1 there are no benefits from inflating in the crisis
period as it is already priced into interest rates. The costs of inflation are however incurred
and W declines. Consequently the safe zone is now smaller than what it would be if the
debt was in foreign currency. That is, issuing nominal bonds enlarges the range in which
a rollover crises is possible relative to foreign currency bonds, contrary to the conventional
wisdom.
29

For values of ψ0 between ψ1 and ψ2 the safe zone increases with inflation credibility. At
some threshold ψ ∗ , nominal bonds generate a larger safe zone. This is the happy medium in
which inflation is not high in normal times, but the option to increase inflation in response
to a crisis provides insurance. For ψ0 above ψ ∗ , therefore, the economy can approximate
state-contingent inflation relatively well and is reminiscent of the conventional wisdom.24
bλ

bπ

b̄π

ψ∗

ψ1 ψ2

ψ3

b̄π

b̃π

b̃π

b̄λ

b̄λ

bλ

bλ

ψ0

ψ1 ψ2

(a) bλ as a function of ψ0

ψ3

ψ0

(b) bπ as a function of ψ0

Figure 5: Thresholds as a Function of Inflation Commitment

4.6

Welfare Implications of Foreign Currency Debt

The cutoffs depicted in Figure 5 allow us to answer the question of whether an economy is
better off issuing nominal (domestic currency) or real (foreign currency) debt. We depict
two cases in Figure 6. In each panel, the dashed line is the value function for ψ0 = ∞, which
corresponds to issuing foreign currency debt. The solid line is the value from issuing domestic
currency debt, where the two panels differ by the costs of inflation. All lines coincide for low
b as inflation is zero and there is no risk of a crisis in this region.
Panel (a) is such that ψ0 ≤ ψ ∗ , so the safe zone is smaller with domestic currency debt.
24

The fact that ψ0 has a non-monotonic impact on bλ does not require the piecewise-linear costs of inflation
or the upper bound π̄. As noted in footnote 19, in the safe zone r(b) is decreasing in ψ0 for quadratic inflation
costs of the type ψ(π) = ψ0 π 2 . All else equal, a reduction in r reduces the incentive to default in a rollover
crisis, generating a mechanism for extending the safe zone via an increase in ψ0 . On the other hand, it is
clear that for a fixed b and r, W (b, r) is decreasing in ψ0 in the quadratic case, increasing the vulnerability
to a crisis. Note that these are the same two opposing forces highlighted in the benchmark case. Numerical
simulations in the quadratic cost case show that the impact of ψ0 is non-monotonic, as first one and then
the other effect dominates, generating an intermediate ψ0 that minimizes the range of debt vulnerable to
rollover crises.

30

V (b)

V

V (b)

bπ

bλ b0λ

V

b

(a) ψ0 < ψ ∗ vs. ψ0 = ∞

b0λ

bλ bπ

b

(b) ψ0 > ψ ∗ vs. ψ0 = ∞

Figure 6: Government Welfare as a Function of Inflation Commitment

In particular, bπ , the point at which the economy begins inflating, is within the safe zone.
At this point, the domestic currency debt economy becomes worse off due to the inability
to deliver low inflation. At bλ , the economy becomes vulnerable to a rollover crisis, while
the crisis threshold is b0λ for the foreign currency debt scenario. The safe zone is smaller
with domestic currency debt as debt carries with it the burden of inflation, making default
relatively attractive. In this case, the economy is always strictly better off with foreign
currency debt. The incentive to inflate is high in equilibrium, lowering welfare without
reducing the exposure to a rollover crisis. Most emerging markets rely solely on foreign
currency debt for international bond issues. The analysis rationalizes this so-called “original
sin” as the optimal response to a weak inflationary regime, with or without self-fulfilling
debt crises.
Panel (b) depicts a case in which ψ0 > ψ ∗ . That is, domestic currency debt reduces the
exposure to a rollover crisis, but at the expense of higher equilibrium inflation for very large
debt levels. This makes domestic currency debt optimal for intermediate stocks of debt,
but sub-optimal for high levels of debt. The closer ψ0 is to the peak-safe-zone level ψ3 , the
greater the range for which domestic currency debt strictly dominates. Thus governments
that have a moderate degree of inflation commitment strictly prefer domestic currency debt
over a non-negligible interval of debt. For extremely high levels of debt, the economy will
inflate (and face a crisis), and so the commitment to zero inflation in this region is preferable.

31

4.7

Delegation

Figure 6 considered the option of issuing bonds in foreign currency, a policy readily available
in practice. In some contexts, there may exist a richer set of options in designing institutions
that govern monetary and fiscal policy, which in our environment will be reflected in ψ0 .
Delegation of certain economic decisions to agents with different objectives has long been
understood to be a possible solution to lack of credibility. However, such solutions are
sometimes met with skepticism because of the inherent difficulty in building institutions
that follow objectives that conflict with those of the government.
In the event such delegation is feasible, our analysis suggest that an attractive option is
to delegate the conduct of policy to an institution with a per-period objective function given
by u(c) − ψ˜0 π where the perceived cost of inflation ψ˜0 is (1) potentially different from the
true cost of inflation ψ0 , and (2) can be state contingent. Indeed, by choosing ψ˜0 = ∞ in
normal times and ψ˜0 = 0 in case of a rollover crisis, we eliminate rollover crisis altogether
as long as π̄ is high enough, and we also guarantee no inflation in equilibrium. Such an
institution delivers inflation only when it is needed, when confronted with a rollover crises.
It is so successful at doing so that it staves off rollover crises altogether.
Of course the inherent fragility of this solution is that the delegation of policy might be
challenged ex-post by the government in case of a rollover crisis, as the economy actually
has to bear the cost of high inflation. Moreover, while this solution eliminates rollover crises,
it might increase the vulnerability of the economy to self-fulfilling shifts in expectations in
inflation, which we have not explored in detail in this paper, but would be important to
explore if such delegation solutions were to be viable options.25

4.8

Full Characterization of Crisis Equilibria

The next four propositions fully characterize the equilibria in the four regions of the ψ0
parameter space. As the propositions share many similarities, we redefine notation when
convenient. After each proposition, we discuss the characteristics of the equilibrium before
moving to the next case.
25
This allows us to connect with the analyses of Jeanne (2011) and Corsetti and Dedola (2013). Jeanne
(2011) considers a central bank with an exogenous objective function parametrized by the degree of monetary
dominance (probability of not backstopping the government in case of a fiscal crisis). They emphasize that
if the degree of monetary dominance is equal to 0, then self-fulfilling debt crises can be eliminated. Corsetti
and Dedola (2013) consider the possibility that the central bank buys up the debt of the government and
issues its own debt, which they assume is default-free. One rationale for this assumption is that the central
bank has more commitment than the government. Another interpretation, closer to the analysis in this
section, is that the central bank would always choose to print money to repay these liabilities rather than
default.

32

Case 1: ψ0 ∈ [0, ψ1 ]
We now characterize equilibria for ψ0 < ψ1 :
Proposition 4. Suppose b̄π ≤ bλ (that is, ψ0 ∈ [0, ψ1 ]). Define cπ = Cπ (b̄π ), where Cπ (b) is
as in Definition 5. Define b∗π = (y − cπ )/r? . For b ≤ bλ , define V̂ (b) by26

V̂ (b) =


u(y−r? b)


 ρ


if b ≤ b̄π

u(y−r? b̄

π)
) − u0 (cπ )(b − b̄π ) if b ∈ (b̄π , minhb∗ , bλ i)
ρ



 u(y−r? b)−ψ0 π̄
if b ∈ [b∗ , bλ ],
ρ

Define cλ ∈ (0, y − (r? + λ)bλ ) as the solution to
(ρ + λ)V̂ (bλ ) = u(cλ ) − ψ0 π̄ − u0 (cλ )(cλ + (r? + λ)bλ − y) + λV .
Let b∗λ = (y − cλ )/(r? + λ). For b > bλ , define V̂ (b) by

V (b ) − u0 (c )(b − b )
λ
λ
λ
V̂ (b) =
? +λ)b)−ψ π̄
u(y−(r
λ
0

+
V
ρ+λ

ρ+λ

if b ∈ (bλ , b∗λ )
if b ≥ b∗λ .

Define bmax = max{b ≤ y/(r? + λ)|V ≤ V̂ (b)}. Then define Ω = [0, bmax ] for 0 ∈ R− , and
the following constitutes a recursive equilibrium with crisis parameter λ:
(i) The interest rate schedule r : Ω → {r? , r? + π̄, r? + π̄ + λ} defined by



r?


r(b) = r? + π̄



r? + π̄ + λ

if b ∈ [0, b̄π ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b̄π , bλ ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (bλ , bmax ] ∩ Ω;

(ii) The value function V : Ω → R defined by V (b) = V̂ (b) for b ∈ Ω;
26

In defining V̂ in each proposition, for notational ease we do not include the restrictions on debt that
ensure consumption is non-negative. As we later truncate V̂ to a domain on which consumption is positive,
this extended domain is not relevant to the equilibrium characterization.

33

(iii) The consumption policy function C : Ω → R+ defined by



y − r? b






c

 π
C(b) = y − r? b





cλ




y − (r? + λ)b

if b ∈ [0, b̄π ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (bπ , minhb∗ , bλ i] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b∗ , bλ ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (bλ , b∗λ ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b∗λ , bmax ] ∩ Ω;

(iv) The inflation policy function Π : Ω → {0, π̄} defined by:

Π(b) =


0

if ∈ b ∈ [0, b̄π ] ∩ Ω

π̄

if b ∈ (b̄π , bmax ] ∩ Ω.

The equilibrium is depicted in Figure 7. In the case of b̄π < bλ , the government has an
incentive to inflate in a region in which there is no probability of a crisis, reflecting the low
level of inflationary commitment. This implies that in the region b ≤ bλ , the analysis is the
same as in section 3. For low debt, the government does not inflate and enjoys steady-state
utility. This is the first segment of the value function depicted in figure 7. Low inflation is
no longer optimal for b > b̄π , and inflation and the interest rate respond accordingly. As in
the no-crisis case of section 3, this jump in inflation and the corresponding increase in the
interest rate provides an incentive to save. In the neighborhood above b̄π , consumption is
constant at cπ as the economy saves towards this threshold, with consumption satisfying the
corresponding Bellman equation. If the distance between b̄π and bλ is large enough (which is
not the case depicted in Figure 7), there may be a high-inflation/no-crisis region where the
government sets ḃ = 0 (i.e., (b∗ , bλ ]). Given the high debt levels and the low consumption,
the government’s optimal policy is to inflate, rationalizing the jump in the interest rate as
an equilibrium.
At debt greater than bλ , the economy is vulnerable to a rollover crisis. The interest
rate jumps again to r? + π̄ + λ. This provides the government with a greater incentive to
save, and reflects the kink at bλ , after which the value function declines more rapidly. The
corresponding consumption level is cλ < cπ , which satisfies the Bellman equation at bλ . Note
that consumption is discretely lower at bλ , so inflation is weakly greater, verifying that π̄ is
optimal in the crisis zone as well. The equilibrium behavior of the government therefore is
to save in a neighborhood above bλ to eliminate the possibility of a crisis as well as reduce
inflation; at bλ , it may continue to save at a slower rate in order to reduce inflation, eventually
34

r(b)
V (b)
r? + π̄ + λ
r? + π̄
r?
bπ = b̄π

bλ = bλ

bλ = bλ

bπ = b̄π

b

b
(b) Interest Rate

(a) Value Function

C(b)

Π(b)
π̄

0
bπ = b̄π

b λ = bλ

b λ = bλ

bπ = b̄π

b

b

(c) Consumption Policy

(d) Inflation Policy

Figure 7: Case 1: Crisis Equilibrium if ψ0 ∈ [0, ψ1 ]

35

reaching b̄π .

Case 2: ψ0 ∈ (ψ1 , ψ2 ]
Proposition 5. Suppose b̄π ∈ (bλ , bλ ] (that is, ψ0 ∈ (ψ1 , ψ2 ]). Define cπ ∈ (0, y − r? b̄π ) as
the solution to
(ρ + λ)u(y − r? b̄π )
= u(cπ ) − ψ0 π̄ − u0 (cπ )(cπ + (r? + λ)b̄π − y) + λV .
ρ
Let b∗ = (y − cπ )/(r? + λ). Define V̂ (b) by

V̂ (b) =


u(y−r? b)



 ρ

if b ≤ b̄π

?

u(y−r b̄π )
− u0 (cπ )(b − b̄π )
ρ



 u(y−(r? +λ)b)−ψ0 π̄ + λ V
ρ+λ

ρ+λ

if b ∈ (b̄π , b∗ )
if b ≥ b∗ .

Define bmax = max{b ≤ y/(r? + λ)|V ≤ V̂ (b)}. Then define Ω = [0, bmax ] for 0 ∈ R− , and
the following constitutes a Recursive Equilibrium with Crisis:
(i) The interest rate schedule r : Ω → {r? , r? + π̄ + λ} defined by

r(b) =


r ?

if b ∈ [0, b̄π ] ∩ Ω

r? + π̄ + λ

if b ∈ (b̄π , bmax ] ∩ Ω;

(ii) The value function V : Ω → R defined by V (b) = V̂ (b) for b ∈ Ω;
(iii) The consumption policy function C : Ω → R+ defined by



y − r? b


C(b) = cπ



y − (r? + λ)b

if b ∈ [0, b̄π ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b̄π , b∗ ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b∗ , bmax ] ∩ Ω;

(iv) The inflation policy function Π : Ω → {0, π̄} defined by:

Π(b) =


0

if b ∈ [0, b̄π ] ∩ Ω

π̄

if b ∈ (bπ , bmax ] ∩ Ω.

36

r(b)
V (b)
r? + π̄ + λ

r?
bπ = bλ = b̄π

bπ = bλ = b̄π

b

b
(b) Interest Rate

(a) Value Function

C(b)

Π(b)
π̄

0
bπ = bλ = b̄π

bπ = bλ = b̄π

b

b

(c) Consumption Policy

(d) Inflation Policy

Figure 8: Case 2: Crisis Equilibrium if ψ0 ∈ (ψ1 , ψ2 ]

37

In this case, the economy has low inflation at bλ , so this is not the relevant threshold
for the safe zone. However, inflation may be high in equilibrium at bλ , making this an
irrelevant threshold as well. We have instead that the equilibrium threshold for a crisis is
bλ = b̄π , so the jump in the interest rate due to high inflation creates room for a crisis. The
government’s value function is depicted in figure 8. The government is at a low inflation
steady state for b ≤ b̄π = bλ . At b ∈ (bλ , bλ +ε) for some ε > 0 the economy saves towards the
?
low inflation/safe zone, setting π = π̄. Consumption is cπ with π = π̄ and V (bλ ) = u(y−rρ bλ ) .

Case 3: ψ0 ∈ (ψ2 , ψ3 ]
Proposition 6. Suppose b̄π > bλ ≥ b̃π (that is, ψ0 ∈ (ψ2 , ψ3 ]). Define cλ ∈ (0, y − r? bλ ) as
the solution to
(ρ + λ)u(y − r? bλ )
= u(cλ ) − ψ0 π̄ − u0 (cλ )(cλ + (r? + λ)bλ − y) + λV .
ρ
Let b∗ = (y − cλ )/(r? + λ). Define V̂ (b) by

V̂ (b) =


u(y−r? b)



 ρ

if b ≤ bλ

u(y−r? bλ )

− u0 (cλ )(b − bλ ) if b ∈ (bλ , b∗ )
ρ



 u(y−(r? +λ)b)−ψ0 π̄ + λ V
if b ≥ b∗ .
ρ+λ
ρ+λ

Define bmax = max{b ≤ y/(r? + λ)|V ≤ V̂ (b)}. Then define Ω = [0, bmax ] for 0 ∈ R− , and
the following constitutes a Recursive Equilibrium with Crisis:
(i) The interest rate schedule r : Ω → {r? , r? + π̄ + λ} defined by

r(b) =


r ?

if b ∈ [0, bλ ] ∩ Ω

r? + π̄ + λ

if b ∈ (bλ , b̄] ∩ Ω;

(ii) The value function V : Ω → R defined by V (b) = V̂ (b) for b ∈ Ω;
(iii) The consumption policy function C : Ω → R+ defined by



y − r? b


C(b) = cλ



y − (r? + λ)b

38

if b ∈ [0, bλ ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (bλ , b∗ ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b∗ , bmax ] ∩ Ω;

r(b)
V (b)
r? + π̄ + λ

r?
bπ = bλ = bλ

bπ = b = bλ

b

b

(a) Value Function

(b) Interest Rate

C(b)

Π(b)
π̄

0
b π = bλ = bλ

bπ = bλ = b λ

b

b

(c) Consumption Policy

(d) Inflation Policy

Figure 9: Case 3: Crisis Equilibrium if ψ ∈ (ψ2 , ψ3 ]

(iv) The inflation policy function Π : Ω → {0, π̄} defined by:

Π(b) =


0

if b ∈ [0, bλ ] ∩ Ω

π̄

if b ∈ (bλ , bmax ] ∩ Ω.

This case is the mirror-image of case 2. In particular, the equilibrium crisis threshold and
the inflation threshold are equivalent, but the reason is reversed. That is, the government
increases inflation at bλ because it faces a rollover crisis and wishes to reduce debt quickly.
Therefore, the jump in interest rate due to a crisis leads the government to high inflation,
rather than vice versa, as was the situation in case 2. Given this symmetry, the value function
39

and policy functions in case 3 (Figure 9) take the same form as those in case 2.

Case 4: ψ0 > ψ3
Proposition 7. Suppose b̃π > bλ (that is, ψ > ψ3 ). Define cλ ∈ (0, y − (r? + λ)bλ ) as the
unique solution to:
(ρ + λ)u(y − r? bλ )
= u(cλ ) − u0 (cλ )(cλ − y + r? bλ ) + λV .
ρ
Define b∗λ = (y − cλ )/(r? + λ). For b ≤ b̃π , define V̂ (b) by

V̂ (b) =


u(y−r? b)



 ρ

if b ≤ bλ

?

u(y−r bλ )
− u0 (cλ )(b − bλ )
ρ



 u(y−(r? +λ)b) + λ V
ρ+λ

ρ+λ

if b ∈ (bλ , minhb∗λ , b̃π i)
if b ∈ [b∗λ , b̃π ].

Define cπ ∈ (0, y − (r? + λ)b̃π ) as the solution to
(ρ + λ)V̂ (b̃π ) = u(cπ ) − ψ0 π̄ − u0 (cπ )(cπ + (r? + λ)b̃π − y) + λV .
Let b∗π = (y − cπ )/(r? + λ). For b > b̃π , define V̂ (b) by

V (b̃ ) − u0 (c )(b − b̃ )
π
π
π
V̂ (b) =
? +λ)b)−ψ π̄
u(y−(r
λ
0

+
V
ρ+λ

ρ+λ

if b ∈ (b̃π , b∗π )
if b ≥ b∗π .

Define bmax = max{b ≤ y/(r? + λ)|V ≤ V̂ (b)}. Then define Ω = [0, bmax ] for 0 ∈ R− , and
the following constitutes a Recursive Equilibrium with Crisis:
(i) The interest rate schedule r : Ω → {r? , r? + λ, r? + π̄ + λ} defined by



r?


r(b) = r? + λ



r? + π̄ + λ

if b ∈ [0, bλ ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (bλ , b̃π ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b̃π , bmax ] ∩ Ω;

(ii) The value function V : Ω → R defined by V (b) = V̂ (b) for b ∈ Ω;

40

(iii) The consumption policy function C : Ω → R+ defined by



y − r? b






c

 λ
C(b) = y − (r? + λ)b





cπ




y − (r? + λ)b

if b ∈ [0, bλ ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (bλ , minhb∗λ , b̃π i] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b∗λ , b̃π ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b̃π , b∗π ] ∩ Ω
if b ∈ (b∗π , bmax ] ∩ Ω;

(iv) The inflation policy function Π : Ω → {0, π̄} defined by:

Π(b) =


0

if ∈ b ∈ [0, b̃π ] ∩ Ω

π̄

if b ∈ (b̃π , bmax ] ∩ Ω.

Case 4 is an environment with a strong commitment to low inflation. It is optimal to set
inflation to zero even in part of the crisis zone (b ∈ (bλ , b̃π ]), despite the strong incentive to
reduce debt in the neighborhood of bλ . As ψ0 → ∞, b̃π → ∞, and there is zero inflation over
the entire domain Ω and in response to a rollover crisis. This corresponds to the environment
of Cole and Kehoe (2000) in which debt is real, both on and off the equilibrium path. The
value and policy functions depicted in Figure 10 indicate the typical incentives to save at
each increase in the interest rate, with the value function being linear in these regions.

5

Conclusion

In this paper we explored the role inflation commitment plays in vulnerability to a rollover
crisis. We confirmed that for an intermediate level of inflationary commitment, an economy
is less vulnerable to a crisis with domestic currency debt. The intermediate commitment
provides the missing state contingency, delivering low inflation in tranquil periods but high
inflation in response to a crisis. Extreme commitment to low inflation eliminates the option
to inflate in a crisis. In the model, strong commitment can be seen as equivalent to issuing
foreign currency debt; such commitment may also arise by being a small member of a monetary union subject to idiosyncratic rollover risk. On the other hand, weak commitment to
inflation renders an economy more vulnerable to a rollover crisis if it issues domestic currency
bonds. This rationalizes the exclusive issuance of foreign currency bonds to international
investors by governments with limited inflation credibility.

41

r(b)
V (b)
bπ = b̃π

r? + π̄ + λ
r? + λ
r?
bλ = bλ

bλ

b

bπ

b
(b) Interest Rate

(a) Value Function

C(b)

Π(b)
π̄
bπ = b̃π

0
bλ = bλ

bλ = bλ

b

bπ = b̃π

b

(c) Consumption Policy

(d) Inflation Policy

Figure 10: Case 4: Crisis Equilibrium if ψ0 > ψ3

42

Appendices
A

Proofs

A.1

Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. Our model is a particular case of the general environment studied by Bressan and
Hong (2007) (henceforth, BH) in their analysis of solutions to Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equations on stratified domains, and our proof relies on their results.
The outline of the proof is as follows. First we show that the conditions for Theorem 1 in
BH are satisfied in our environment, guaranteeing the existence of an optimal solution to the
government’s problem. Then, we further argue that our environment gives the government
enough controllability of the state so that the resulting value function is Lipschitz continuous.
Lipshchitz continuity is taken as a premise in BH, as apposed to an outcome. Finally, we
argue that the conditions for Corollary 1 in BH hold, which guarantee that the value function
is the unique Lipschitz continuous solution to (HJB) as previously defined in Definition 3.
We alter some of the BH notation to be consistent with our set up, and translate their
minimization cost problem into a maximization of utility problem. In their paper, BH
consider the state space to be the entire real line, while in our case we restrict attention to
the compact set Ω̄. However, we can extend the space by following BH’s Example 2 and
letting the payoff in the complement of Ω̄ be sufficiently low, in effect forcing the solution
of the problem to lie in Ω̄ at all times when the initial state lies in Ω̄. BH also restrict
attention to non-negative costs (non-positive utility), which we incorporate by re-defining,
while abusing notation, v(x) ≡ v(x) − ū for all x ∈ X, where ū is the upper bound on utility
from consumption.
BH decompose the state space (Ω̄ in our case) into M < ∞ disjoint manifolds (intervals
in our case): Ω̄ = M1 ∪M2 ∪...∪MM . In our environment, this corresponds to the points of
discontinuity {0, b1 , ..., bN , bmax } as well as the intervening open sets, (0, b1 ), ..., (bN , bmax ).27
This decomposition of the state space satisfies the requirements of BH: if j 6= k, then
Mj ∩ Mk = ∅; and if Mj ∩ Mk 6= ∅, then Mj ∈ Mk . Let i(b) denote the index of the
interval that contains b.
Following BH, define a subset of controls Xi ⊂ X for each interval Mi that produce
tangent trajectories. That is,

Xi ≡
27


inf b0 ∈Mi |b + f (b, x)h − b0 |
x ∈ X lim
= 0 , ∀b ∈ Mi .
h→0
h

Given our previous discussion, we will ignore the “extended regions”, (−∞, 0) and (bmax , ∞).

43

Let TMi (b) denote the set of feasible tangent trajectories for b ∈ Mi . For the open sets
between points of discontinuity, all admissible controls produce tangent trajectories, and so
Xi = X and TMi (b) = [minx∈X f (b, x), maxx∈X f (b, x)]. For the boundaries, {0, b1 , ..., bmax },
we have the steady state controls: Xi = {x|f (bn , x) = 0} if Mi = {bn } and TMi (bn ) = {0}.
BH consider the following sets. Define

F̂ (b) ≡ (h, w) h = f (b, x), w ≤ v(b, x), x ∈ Xi(b)

⊂ R2 .

for all b ∈ Ω̄. This is the set of feasible tangent trajectories f (b, x), x ∈ Xi paired with the
payoff interval (−∞, v(b, x)]. For a point b, we consider the convex combinations of tangent
trajectories and associated utility in the neighborhood of b. In particular, let coS denote the
convex hull of a set S. Define
G(b) ≡

\

n
o
co (h, l) ∈ F̂ (b0 ) ||b0 − b| <  ⊂ R2 .

>0

BH define the Hamilton-Jacobian-Bellman equation as:
ρV (b) − H̃(b, V 0 (b)) = 0
where H̃(b, q) ≡

sup

(BH:HJB)

{w + qh} .

(h,w)∈G(b)

We now map the (BH:HJB) equation into our equation (HJB). Let
f∗ (b, x) ≡ c − πb − y + lim inf
r(b0 )b0 ,
0
b →b

and
f ∗ (b, x) ≡ c − πb − y + lim sup r(b0 )b0 ,
b0 →b

where x = (c, b). Because r(b) is lower semi-continuous f∗ (b, x) = f (b, x). Also note that
f∗ (b, x) ≤ f ∗ (b, x).
Let H(b) ≡ [minx∈X f (b, x), maxx∈X f ∗ (b, x)], that is, H(b) is the relevant interval of debt
dynamics for a given b. Given b, and for h ∈ H(b), define
Ŵ (h, b) ≡ max v(x), subject to f (b, x) ≤ h.
x∈X

Ŵ (h, b) represents the maximum utility of generating a change in debt less than or equal
to h. Note that Ŵ (h, b) is non-decreasing and concave in its first argument. If follows then
44

that we can rewrite G as follows,
n
o
G(b) = (h, w) h ∈ H(b), w ≤ Ŵ (h, b) .
Moreover, for q ≤ 0, we have that the Hamiltonian in equation (16) of BH can be written
as:
H̃(b, q) =

sup
(h,w)∈G(b)

{w + qh} = max{v(x) + qf (b, x)} = H(b, q).
x∈X

which corresponds to the Hamiltonian defined in our paper in equation (2). With this
equivalence, the definition of a viscosity solution given in the text corresponds to that used
in BH.28 To see this note that the definition of an upper-solution in BH (Definition 1 in BH)
is equivalent to requirement (i) of our Definition 3; and that the definition of a lower-solution
in BH (Definition 2 in BH) corresponds to requirements (ii) and (iii) of our Definition 3.
This last point follows because of the following:
• When b ∈ Ωn , the set of feasible tangent trajectories is composed of all feasible trajectories in Ωn , and the restriction to tangent trajectories has no bite in equation (26) of
BH, and in this case, Definition 2 in BH is equivalent to our condition (ii).29
• When b ∈ {0, b1 , ..., bN , bmax }, condition (ii) of the definition of the set R (in our
Definition 1) guarantees that the set of feasible tangent trajectories is nonempty and
equal to {0}, and hence, equation (26) of BH collapses to a bound on the stationary
value, which is our condition (iii).
Given this mapping from our environment into that of BH, we now verify the BH assumptions. The definition of the set R ensures that condition H1 in BH hold on Ω. BH
condition H2 holds in our environment as the tangent trajectories are either all trajectories
(on the open sets of continuity) or the steady-state dynamics on the points of discontinuity.
Note that the stationary trajectory generates a finite utility, and hence we can use Theorem
1 in BH to show that the optimization problem has an optimal solution.
Finally, to apply Corollary 1 in BH, note that given that our value function is Lipschitz
continuous (as stated and proved in Lemma 3 below), it follows that it satisfies condition
H3 in BH. Condition H4 of BH requires that V (b) is globally bounded, which is satisfied
in our environment as ūρ ≥ V (b) ≥ V for all b. Finally, equation (46) in BH requires that
28

BH define the concept of a viscosity solution in the context of a cost minimization problem. We redefine
their definition to conform to a utility maximization problem.
29
There is an important misprint in the published version of equation (26) of BH. See the correction in
Bressan (2013).

45

the flow utility function be Lipschitz continuous with respect to b. As v(x) is independent
of b in our environment, this is satisfied trivially. It follows then, from Corollary 1 in BH
and Lemma 3, that the value function is the unique Lipschitz continuous viscosity solution
to (HJB).
Proof of the Lipschitz continuity of the value function
We now state and proof the following lemma, which exploits the controllability of the system
in our model.
Lemma 3. The value function, V (b), which solves problem (P1) is Lipschitz continuous on
2
Ω; that is, there exists a K ∈ (0, ∞) such that |V (b0 ) − V (b)| ≤ K|b0 − b| for all (b, b0 ) ∈ Ω .
Proof. Choose κ ∈ [κ, κ̄], where κ > 0 and κ̄ < y − r(bmax )bmax . This is a non-empty interval
as otherwise y = r(bmax )bmax and consumption must be zero at bmax , which is not consistent
with equilibrium given that V > u(0)/ρ. Define c̄ = y − r(bmax )bmax − κ, where r is the
equilibrium interest rate schedule faced by the government. Note that c̄ > 0, and so u(c̄) is
finite. Given our upper-bound assumptions on u, we can assume that u ≤ 0 (and so V ≤ 0).
2
Now consider (b, b0 ) ∈ Ω , and without loss we can take b0 > b. Let τ be the time it takes
to transition from b0 to b pursing a policy of c(t) = c̄ and π(t) = 0 along the transition.
Note that ḃ(t) = c̄ + r(b(t))b(t) − y ≤ c̄ + r(bmax )bmax − y = −κ, where the ≤-step uses the
monotonicity of r. As debt falls at a rate weakly less than κ along the transition, we have
0
τ ≤ |b κ−b| , where the fact that κ > 0 implies this latter term is well defined. As c(t) = c̄ and
π(t) = 0 is feasible in equilibrium, we have:
ˆ

τ

0

e−ρτ u(c̄)dt + e−ρτ V (b)

V (b ) ≥
ˆ0 τ
≥

u(c̄)dt + V (b)
0

= τ u(c̄) + V (b)
≥

u(c̄)|b0 − b|
+ V (b),
κ

where the second and fourth lines use the fact that u ≤ 0 and V ≤ 0. Rearranging, we have
−u(c̄) 0
|b − b| ≥ V (b) − V (b0 ) = |V (b0 ) − V (b)|,
κ
where the last equality follows from monotonicity of V . Let K ≡
have that V is Lipschitz continuous.
46

−u(c̄)
κ

∈ (0, ∞), and we

A.2

Proof of Lemma 1

The proof the Lemma proceeds as follows. First we show that in a monotone equilibrium,
inflation can be interior only for levels of b > b̄π , where b̄π is defined in 5. We show however
that if inflation is interior for b > b̄π , then the government’s best response is to borrow at
b; that is, C(b) > y − ρb. When r(b) is at its maximum, r? + π̄, the government’s best
response is to not borrow (either save or keep debt constant); that is, C(b) ≤ y − ρb when
r(b) = r? + π̄. Hence we can find a b such that the government borrows from below and
saves from above this debt level. We then show that such a point generates a violation of
the viscosity conditions.
Recall the Hamiltonian:
H(b, q) = max{u(c) − ψ0 π + q(c − y + (r(b) − π)b)}
c,π

Let c? (b, q) and π ? (b, q) be in the argmax of the above maximization. There are two cases
to consider.
CASE 1: Suppose that there is a bb such that the equilibrium interest rate is r(b) = r? + π̄
for b > bb and r? < r(b) < r? + π̄ for b ∈ (ba , bb ). Note that the value function is differentiable
almost every where, and thus for almost all b ∈ (ba , bb ), V 0 (b) = −ψ0 /b given interiority of
π. Given that any Lipschitz continuous function is absolutely continuous, it follows that the
value function can be written as
ˆ

b

V (b) = V (ba ) −
ba

ψ0
dt
t

(7)

for b ∈ (ba , bb ), implying that V (b) is differentiable in (ba , bb ). Recall as well that conditions
(i) and (ii) of the definition of a viscosity solution imply that
ρV (b) = H(b, −ψ0 /b)
because of differentiability of the value function. Using the equilibrum condition, r(b) =
r? + Π(b), the above equation implies that
r(b) = r? + π ? (b, −ψ0 /b)x = r? +

u(c? (b, −ψ0 /b)) − ψ0 /b(c? (b, −ψ0 /b) − y + r? b) − ρV (b)
ψ0
(8)

for b ∈ (ba , bb ).
From the first order condition, it follows that c? (b, −ψ0 /b) = Ĉ(ψ0 /b) where Ĉ is the
inverse of u0 , and hence c? (b, −ψ0 /b) is continuous and differentiable in b. Equation (8)
47

implies that the interest rate is differentiable in (ba , bb ) with a first derivative equal to:
r0 (b) =

c? (b, −ψ0 /b) − y + r? b
b2

Note that c? (b, −ψ0 /b) is strictly increasing in b.
Now, suppose that ba < b̄π . Note that c? (b̄π , −ψ0 /b̄π ) = Ĉ(ψ0 /b̄π ) = y − r? b̄π (from the
definition of b̄π ), so for b < b̄π we have that c? (b, −ψ0 /b) < c? (b̄π , ψ0 /b̄π ) < y − r? b̄π < y − r? b
which implies that r0 (b) < 0, a violation of monotonicity. Hence, it must be the case that
ba ≥ b̄π .
It follows then bb > ba ≥ b̄π . So consider the points b > bb . For such points, the interest
rate is at his highest possible value and will be so for any higher debt level. Thus, the
optimal solution in this range will either keep debt constant or decrease it. This implies that
V 0 (b) ≤ −u0 (y − r? b), whenever V is differentiable.
Let ϕ1 be defined as the following differentiable function
ϕ1 (b) = p(b − bb ) + V (bb )
for some p ∈ [−u0 (y − r? bb ), −ψ0 /bb ]. First, note that ϕ1 (bb ) − V (bb ) = 0. We can then write,
´b
V (b) − ϕ(b) = bb (V 0 (t) − ϕ0 (t))dt, exploiting the Lipschitz continuity of V .
For b > bb , we have that V 0 (b) ≤ −u0 (y − r? b) ≤ p = ϕ01 (b) whenever V is differentiable,
and thus V (b) − ϕ1 (b) ≤ 0 for b > bb .
For b < bb , we have that V 0 (b) = −ψ0 /b ≥ p = ϕ01 (b) (where the strict inequality follows
from the definition of b̄π and bb > b̄π ) which implies that V (b) − ϕ1 (b) ≤ 0 for b < bb .
Hence V (b)−ϕ1 (b) achieves a local maximum at bb . The definition of a viscosity solution,
condition (i), implies that
ρV (bb ) ≤ H(bb , p)
Now consider a point to left of bb , b = bb − , for  > 0. Given that the value function is
differentiable in this region, we have that the HJB holds in the classical sense:
ρV (b ) = H(b , −ψ0 /b )
Taking the limits as  → 0 (exploiting the lower semi-continuity of r(b)), we get that
ρV (bb ) = H(bb , −ψ0 /bb )
Now recall that Ĉ(ψ0 /b ) and π(b) = r(b) − r? are in the argmax of H(b , −ψ0 /b ).
Given that H(b , −ψ0 /b ) is continuous in b for b ≤ bb then it follows that that the policies
48

Ĉ(ψ0 /bb ) and π(bb ) = r(bb ) − r? are in the argmax of H(bb , −ψ0 /bb ). The envelope condition
implies that:
∂H(bb , x)
= Ĉ(ψ0 /bb ) − y + r? bb > 0
∂x
x=−ψ0 /bb
It follows then that there exists p ∈ [−u0 (y−r? bb ), −ψ0 /bb ) such that H(bb , p) < H(bb , −ψ0 /bb ),
generating a contradiction.
CASE 2: Suppose that there is a ba such that the equilibrium interest r? < r(b) < r? + π̄ for
b ∈ (ba , bmax ). Same argument as before, implies that ba ≥ b̄π . But recall that we can extend
the domain (as discussed in the Proof of Proposition 1) to guarantee that the dynamics to
the rigth of bmax point towards bmax , and hence a similar argument to the one in case 1 for the
existence of the differentiable function ϕ1 applies, which generates the same contradiction of
the viscosity conditions.
Taken together, the two cases above imply that any monotone equilibrium cannot have an
interior equilibrium inflation rate.

A.3

The proof of Proposition 2

Proof. The proposition characterizes by construction all equilibria with bπ ∈ [bπ , bπ ]. Equilibria for bπ outside this interval can be ruled out using the definition of the intervals. In
particular, equilibrium requires that Π(b) = r(b) − r? . Impose this condition on the government’s problem and solve for optimal consumption. At bπ , implied inflation is zero and
r(b) = r? = ρ. The government’s optimal policy response is to set C(bπ ) = y − r? bπ , so that
ḃ = 0 and V (bπ ) = u(y − r? b)/ρ. We now check whether consumption is consistent with
implied inflation using the HJB equation at bπ . Optimal consumption in the neighborhood
above bπ is given by Cπ (bπ ) from equation (5). If bπ < bπ , this consumption is inconsistent
with high inflation, violating the equilibrium requirement to the right of bπ . Conversely, if
bπ > b̄π , then zero inflation is inconsistent with the steady state consumption at bπ , violating
the equilibrium requirement that Π(bπ ) = 0.

A.4

Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. The proof follows the arguments of the proof of Proposition 1, which relies on Bressan
and Hong (2007).

A.5

Proof of Lemma 2

Proof. The proof of this lemma is the same as the proof of Lemma 1.
49

A.6

Proofs of Propositions 4, 5, 6 and 7

Proof. These propositions follow by construction, verifying that the conditions for a Recursive Competitive Equilibrium (i.e., that r ∈ R, that v satisfies the viscosity conditions; that
bond holders earn a real return r? ; and that the government does not default without a
roll-over crisis, V (b0 ) ≥ V ).

B

Viscosity Definition for the Equilibrium With Rollover
Crises

As discussed in Section 3, here we state the viscosity solution definition for equation (HJB’).
Recall that Ib is shorthand notation for the crisis indicator I(b, r(b)). The definition below
uses the equilibrium knowledge that Ib is discontinuous only at points where r(b) is also
discontinuous, so that (HJB’) is continuous on sets Ωn (as defined by R in Definition 1).
Definition 11. For a given Ω and r ∈ R(Ω), a viscosity solution to (HJB’) is a continuous function w ∈ C 0 (Ω) such that for any ϕ ∈ C 1 (Ω) we have:
(i) If w − ϕ achieves a local maximum at b, then
(ρ + λIb )w(b) − λIb V − H(b, ϕ0 (b)) ≤ 0;
(ii) If the restriction of w − ϕ to Ωn achieves a local minimum at b ∈ Ωn , then
(ρ + λIb )w(b) − λIb V − H(b, ϕ0 (b)) ≥ 0,
where Ωn is defined in Definition 1;
(iii) For b ∈ {0, b1 , b2 , ..., bmax },
(ρ + λIb )w(b) − λIb V − max {u(y − (r(b) − π)b) − ψ(π)} ≥ 0.
π∈{0,π̄}

50

References
Aguiar, Mark and Manuel Amador, “Sovereign Debt,” in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan
Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics Volume 4, in
progress. 3
Alesina, Alberto, Mark De Broeck, Alessandro Prati, Guido Tabellini, Maurice
Obstfeld, and Sergio Rebelo, “Default Risk on Government Debt in OECD Countries,”
Economic Policy, 1992, 7 (15), pp. 427–463. 3
Araujo, Aloisio, Marcia Leon, and Rafael Santos, “Welfare Analysis of Currency
Regimes with Defaultable Debts,” Journal of International Economics, 2012. 3
Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon, “Rules, discretion and reputation in a model
of monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1983, 12 (1), 101–121. 1
Bressan, Alberto, “Errata Corrige,” Newtorks and Heterogeneous Media, 2013, 8, 625–625.
29
and Yunho Hong, “Optimal Control Problems on Stratified Domains,” Newtorks and
Heterogeneous Media, 2007, 2, 313–331. 1, 4, 3, A.1, A.4
Calvo, Guillermo, “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American
Economic Review, 1988, 78, 647–661. 1, 3
Cole, Harold and Timothy Kehoe, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2000, 67, 91–116. 1, 3, 4, 4.2, 4.8
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola, “The Mystery of the Printing Press: Self-Fulfilling
Debt Crises and Monetary Sovereignty,” workin, 2013. 3, 25
Da-Rocha, Jose-Maria, Eduardo-Luis Gimenez, and Francisco-Xavier Lores,
“Self-fulfilling Crises with Default and Devaluation,” Economic Theory, forthcoming. 3
Du, Wenxin and Jesse Schreger, “Local Currency Sovereign Risk,” 2012. Working paper.
2.3
Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano, “Confidence Crises and Public Debt Management,” NBER Working Papers 2926, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc April
1989. 3

51

Grauwe, Paul De, “The European Central Bank: Lender of Last Resort in the Government
Bond Markets?,” CESifo Working Paper Series 3569, CESifo Group Munich 2011. 1
He, Zhiguo and Wei Xiong, “Dynamic Debt Runs,” Review of Financial Studies, 2012,
67, 1799–1843. 10
Jeanne, Olivier, “Monetary Dominance and Government Default,” 2011. Johns Hopkins
University. 3, 25
and Hou Wang, “Fiscal Challenges to Monetary Dominance,” Johns Hopkins University
working paper, 2013. 3
Kocherlakota, N., “Central bank independence and sovereign default,” Financial Stability
Review, April 2011, (16), 151–154. 3
Krugman, Paul, “Wonking Out About the Euro Crisis (Very Wonkish),” 2011.
http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/08/wonking-out-about-the-euro-crisis-verywonkish/. 1
Lorenzoni, Guido and Ivan Werning, “Slow Moving Debt Crises,” NBER Working
Papers 19228, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc July 2013. 3
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff, This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries
of Financial Folly, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2009. 2.3
Roch, Francisco and Harald Uhlig, “The Dynamics of Sovereign Debt Crises and
Bailouts,” working paper, 2011. 3

52

