                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE INTERACTION OF SPENDING POLICIES, ASSET ALLOCATION STRATEGIES,
    AND INVESTMENT PERFORMANCE AT UNIVERSITY ENDOWMENT FUNDS

                                             Keith Brown
                                             Cristian Tiu

                                        Working Paper 19517
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19517


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




This study has benefited greatly from input provided by all of the participants at the NBER conference
on “How the Great Recession Affected Higher Education”, which was held at Cambridge, MA in September
2012. We are particularly grateful for the comments of Jeffrey Brown, Stephen Dimmock, Elroy Dimson,
Thomas Gilbert, Will Goetzmann, Caroline Hoxby, Christopher Hrdlicka, and Scott Weisbenner. We
would also like to express our appreciation to the following individuals connected to the endowment
fund industry who have provided us with valuable resources as well as their comments: John Griswold
and Bill Jarvis (Commonfund), Kenneth Redd (NACUBO), Uzi Yoeli and Bruce Zimmerman (UTIMCO),
Andrea Reed and Scott Wise (Covariance Capital), Tim Nguyen (University of Connecticut Foundation),
Ed Schneider (University at Buffalo Foundation), Chris Adkerson (Mercer) and Larry Tavares (TAP
Inc.). Finally, we also thank Sergey Maslennikov and Woongsun Yoo for their research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Keith Brown and Cristian Tiu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Interaction of Spending Policies, Asset Allocation Strategies, and Investment Performance
at University Endowment Funds
Keith Brown and Cristian Tiu
NBER Working Paper No. 19517
October 2013
JEL No. G23,I22,I23

                                              ABSTRACT

Using data for more than 800 college and university endowment funds over 2003-2011, we provide
a comprehensive analysis of the spending policies used in practice as well as how frequently and why
those mandates are revised over time. Given the long-term and relatively static nature of the investment
problem faced by the typical educational institution, existing theoretical models of endowment management
predict that the permanent portion of the stated spending policy should be highly stable. However,
we find that half of the endowments revised their rules at least once and, on average, about a quarter
of the sample changed their spending policies each year, implying a retention rate far lower than expected.
We show that larger endowments with lower historical portfolio returns and lower past payout levels
are more likely to alter their future spending formulas, but that institutions having the ability to invoke
special appropriations on a temporary basis are less likely to make adjustments to their permanent
rules. Further, we document that both spending rule changes and asset allocation adjustments persist
over time and that, consistent with hypothesized behavior, the former tends to lead the latter. Finally,
while there is some evidence that endowment funds as a group produce superior returns relative to their
policy benchmarks, we show that there is no difference in benchmark-adjusted performance between
institutions that either did or did not change their spending rules.


Keith Brown
University of Texas
kcbrown@mail.utexas.edu

Cristian Tiu
SUNY at Buffalo
ctiu@buffalo.edu
           The Interaction of Spending Policies, Asset Allocation
           Strategies, and Investment Performance at University
                             Endowment Funds



1        Introduction

Suppose that you are contemplating the launch of a new investment management firm. Before
determining the myriad logistical details involved with staffing and running the business, you
must first make a basic decision on the general approach to managing assets that the company
will adopt. Consider two alternative schemes for organizing the business:


        Approach 1 : Develop a thorough understanding of what the clients expect to accomplish by
investing their financial capital and then design an investment portfolio (i.e., asset allocation
and security selection strategies) that represents the optimal solution to the clients’ “problem”;
or:
        Approach 2 : Design the specific elements on an investment portfolio (i.e., asset allocation
and security selection strategies) and then market that portfolio to investors for whom it repre-
sents an appropriate solution to their financial problem.


        While both organizational formats are used widely in practice (e.g., private wealth man-
agement firms exemplify Approach 1; the mutual fund industry is typical of Approach 2), the
question remains as to which is the more conceptually valid method. For many investors, Ap-
proach 1 represents the proper sequence of events in that it starts with an understanding of what
the investor is trying to accomplish before proceeding to form a portfolio that represents the
optimal ex ante solution to that problem. Conversely, although Approach 2 suffers the potential
criticism of reversing that order (i.e., forming the portfolio “solution” first), it is often the more
cost-effective scheme, particularly for those investors with relatively small amounts of capital to
manage.
        For firms managing institutional assets (e.g., defined-benefit pension plans, endowment funds
and foundations, sovereign wealth funds), resolving this question is critical if for no other reason
than the amount of invested capital involved.1 Defined-benefit pension plans and university
    1
    For instance, by the end of 2005, professional managers for three of the most prominent institutions—mutual
funds, defined-benefit pension funds, and endowment funds and foundations—controlled $8.9 trillion, $4.7 trillion,
                                                                                                                    2


endowments are particularly interesting to contrast in this respect because both types of insti-
tutions face reasonably well-defined, if otherwise dissimilar, investment problems. For example,
asset allocations in pension fund portfolios are often made in response to complex asset-liability
management problems, with a broad array of client-specific (e.g., annual payout needs, workforce
age) and firm- and industry-wide (e.g., plan funded status, legal and regulatory restrictions) fac-
tors serving as constraints on the process. Further, this investment decision is complicated by
the fact that defined pension benefits are a legally binding obligation of the plan sponsor, which
creates and manages the fund portfolio for the purpose of meeting those liabilities, but must
also be prepared to cover the shortfall if fund income (or assets) proves to be insufficient. It
is for this reason that Merton (2003) argues that the relevant investment risk in pension fund
management is not that of the assets alone but rather the volatility of the surplus of fund assets
over liabilities.
    Endowment funds are even more intriguing entities because they simultaneously combine
some of the salient characteristics of other institutional investors with several features that
make them truly unique. Like pension funds, the conventional endowment portfolio—as typified
by the building and operating funds at a college or university—must be managed with regard to
a well-specified set of spending rules. However, as Garland (2005) notes, an important difference
between endowment funds and pension plans is that trustees of endowment funds “...expect to
preserve their capital for a very long time; trustees of pension funds expect their capital to be
consumed (p. 44).”2 In fact, endowment funds are among the only economic agents for which the
assumption of an infinite investment horizon is not an approximation, making them especially
well-suited laboratories for studying management practices under “textbook” conditions.3
    Given this description, arguably the most significant conceptual challenge that any endow-
ment fund must resolve is the tension that exists between the desire to increase the future
wealth of the portfolio—and in so doing help to insure the long-term viability and autonomy
of the institution it supports–and the need to provide spending capital for the current gener-
ation. Addressing this tension, which can be viewed as the primary investment problem that
endowment funds confront, is the chief role of the spending policy, which is the formal statement
and $1.3 trillion in assets, respectively. These assets under management statistics are for U.S.-based institutions
and come from the Investment Company Institute (mutual funds) and Standard & Poor’s Money Market Directory
(pension funds, endowments and foundations).
   2
     Swensen (2009), reinforces this point as follows: “Investing with a time horizon measured in centuries to
support the educational and research mission of society’s colleges and universities creates a challenge guaranteed
to engage the emotions and intellect of fund fiduciaries (p. 3, emphasis added).”
   3
     There is a well-developed literature addressing the problem of optimal portfolio choice over an infinite planning
horizon under the conditions of income consumption; see, for example, Samuelson (1969), Merton (1971), and
Bodily and White (1982).
                                                                                                          3


that the educational institution’s governing authority adopts to express its intentions. Despite
its apparent importance, though, the topics of how endowment funds are organized and how
they determine their spending policies have received remarkably little attention in the literature.
Further, much of this research is quite dated; for example, Cain (1960) summarizes the details of
a survey of 200 institutions of higher education regarding a variety of operational issues ranging
from specific investment holdings to the use of outside advisors and the existence of income
reserve accounts.4
    Still, from what has been written, there are two important hypotheses about the way in
which endowments should define and revise their spending policies that remain untested. The
first hypothesis involves the relationship between the organization’s spending and investment
policies and on this matter there are opposing predictions. One side of the argument is typified
by Litvack, Malkiel, and Quandt (1974), who concentrate on the more narrow question of how
endowment income should be defined so as “...to make investment management independent
of the spending decisions of the university (p. 433)”, which is consistent with organizational
Approach 1 defined above. Other studies reflecting this view include Tobin (1974) and Garland
(2005). On the other hand, Dybvig (1999) argues that an endowment’s choice of a spending rule
should be linked to its asset allocation decision in an explicit and dynamic fashion, while Blume
(2010) uses data simulations to conclude that a fund’s spending and investment strategies are
best determined jointly, which would be more in line with Approach 2. Gilbert and Hrdlicka
(2012), who examine the issue of the inter-generational fairness of the spending rule decision,
come to a similar conclusion.
    The second untested hypothesis from the extant literature on endowment spending involves
the identity and temporal stability of the permanent payout policy that a given institution
adopts. That is, what is the optimal spending policy in the face of the endowment’s specific
circumstances and how frequently should that rule be adjusted? On this matter, the theoretical
literature that exists is considerably less ambiguous. Specifically, Merton (1993) creates a formal
model of an endowment fund as one of several tangible and intangible assets that a university
possesses for the purpose of establishing the optimal spending and investment policies the fund
should choose. In the context of the current discussion, he shows that (i) the optimal spending
rule for any Period t should be a constant proportion of the net worth of the fund in that same
period, and that (ii) the proportion of wealth expended is not stochastic given the underlying
  4
    Cejnek, Franz, Randl, and Stoughton (2012) provide an excellent review of the endowment fund literature,
which encompasses a number of relevant topics including the determination of spending policies.
                                                                                                 4


conditions of the model. Thus, absent a substantial change in the institution’s circumstances
(e.g., the educational and research activities in which it engages), the optimal rule by which
any given endowment determines its annual expenditures should not vary over time. Woglom
(2003), who expands Merton’s conceptual framework to the explore the Tobin (1974) notion
of “inter-generational fairness” in more detail, produces a more complex optimal spending rule
but one that remains non-stochastic given the endowment’s inter-temporal rate of substitution
between current and future income needs.
   In this study, we extend and test these lines of inquiry by providing a comprehensive exami-
nation of which endowment spending policies are used in practice as well as how frequently and
why those mandates are revised over time. Starting with an overview of a typical endowment or-
ganizational structure, we consider the role that both the institution’s spending and investment
policies play in the portfolio management process. In particular, we describe an endowment’s
spending policy as consisting of two distinct elements: the spending rules, which represent the
formal set of instructions used to determine the amount of capital that will be paid out of the
endowment portfolio on an annual basis, and the policy payout rate, which is the particular
percentage level used to convert the general spending rule into a specific dollar disbursement.
Given the very long-term horizon of the sponsoring institution, as well as the relatively invariant
nature of the present-versus-future trade-off that defines its investment problem, the underlying
premise of our investigation is that the endowment spending policy should require modification
on a very infrequent basis.
   Our analysis is based on an examination of spending, asset allocation, and investment per-
formance data for more than 800 public and private university endowment funds located mainly
in North America. The primary database we utilize is constructed from the annual surveys of
the organizational structure, spending and investment policies, and spending and investment
practices that the National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO)
collects from its member institutions. Focusing of the survey years from 2003 to 2011, the
period of time for which NACUBO collected information regarding spending rules and policy
payout rates, we classify into one of seven broad categories the stated payout rules that every
endowment fund adopted in each year. The frequency with which endowments adopt these
seven spending rules is not uniform; in fact, the Moving Average rule, which sets the annual
payout as a pre-specified percentage of an average of past market values for the endowment
portfolio, is used in roughly three-quarters of the cases. Further, we also document that there is
a considerable degree of heterogeneity in spending rule adoption practices within the endowment
                                                                                                5


sample. Generally speaking, we find significant differences in the formulas favored by funds with
disparate payout needs and that larger funds are far less reliant on Moving Average rules than
are smaller endowments.
   One of the most surprising results in the study is that endowment funds modify their spend-
ing policies to a far greater extent than the investment problems faced by the sponsoring in-
stitution would seem to warrant. In particular, we show that while half of the funds in the
sample maintained the same policy throughout the 2003-2011 period, the other half changed
their permanent spending rules between one and eight times; the weighted mean frequency of
endowments altering their spending policy in a given year was almost 25%. An analysis of the
migration patterns in spending rule adoption practices showed that the various rule categories
produced dramatically different likelihoods of being retained or changed from one year to the
next; for example, Moving Average rules (and more complex Hybrid formulas involving Mov-
ing Average rules) had markedly larger retention rates than did simpler rules, such as payout
formulas based on percentage of the income the fund generated in the current year.
   Extending this investigation, we consider the effect that the global financial market crisis
which began in 2008 had on an endowment’s propensity to adjust its spending policy. By
focusing on behavior in the post-recession period (i.e., 2009-2011), our analysis documents two
significant findings. First, despite the additional funding burdens caused by a substantial loss
of market value in their asset portfolios, endowments actually showed an increased tendency to
maintain their existing permanent policies following the economic downturn. Second, roughly
one in three funds imposed some form of temporary incremental appropriations to supplement
their permanent spending rules after 2008. The combination of these effects can be viewed as a
rational marginal response to what was perceived as a temporary, albeit severe, perturbation in
normal economic conditions.
   We also examine the issue of what motivates an educational institution to alter its stated
payout policy. Our investigation of the economic determinants of spending rule changes reveals
that the larger the endowment is and the lower the return to its portfolio, the more likely it is
to make a modification. Also, spending rule changes are significantly and negatively related to
historical payout levels, but the percentage of the institution’s budget that the fund is respon-
sible for delivering is not a meaningful factor. Our lead-lag analysis of the relationship between
spending rule changes and asset allocation adjustments reveals that it is the former that tends to
precede the latter and that adjustments to both types of policy are strongly persistent over time.
Finally, despite the fact that endowment funds produce strong benchmark-adjusted returns as a
                                                                                                               6


group, there is no detectable difference in the investment performance between institutions that
either did or did not alter their spending rules. Overall, we conclude that the typical educa-
tional endowment has changed its permanent spending policy far more frequently than might be
reasonably expected and that these adjustments are linked to, or interact with, characteristics
of the funds themselves (e.g., level of assets under management, historical payout level) as well
as various aspects of the investment practices of the institution (e.g., asset allocation patterns).
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide an
overview of how, and by whom, endowment spending rules and investment practices are de-
termined. Section 3 discusses the data we use in our empirical analysis and describes our
endowment fund sample, including summary statistics on fund size, annual investment returns,
annual payout rates, asset class allocations, and the spending rules that are used in practice. In
Section 4 we present a detailed analysis of the way spending policy adoption has evolved over
time while Section 5 identifies several economic determinants of these policy modifications. Sec-
tion 6 examines the interaction between an endowment’s spending policy decision, its investment
strategy, and the portfolio’s investment performance. Section 7 concludes the study.


2        Spending and Investment at University Endowment Funds

2.1       Endowment Organization: A Brief Overview

Generally speaking, endowment funds are portfolios of assets invested in support of the short-
and long-term mission of a particular institution. Within the context of this broad definition,
Hansmann (1990) notes that endowments can have several specific purposes, from helping the
institution remain financially solvent by providing a source of funding to offset current operat-
ing expenses to insuring its continued existence and economic independence into the foreseeable
future to enhancing the reputational capital of the sponsoring institution.5 As Kochard and
Rittereiser (2008) discuss, the presence of endowment funds can be traced back to fifteenth cen-
tury England, when wealthy donors provided churches and schools with financial gifts intended
to support them in perpetuity. In the United States, university endowment investing ostensibly
began in the mid-1600s with a real estate gift bestowed upon what is now Harvard University
by several of its alumni.
    5
     Hoxby (2012) proposes a model of the university in which the institution’s objective function is to maximize
its contribution to the intellectual capital of society. Within this framework, she argues that both endowment
funds and tuition subsidies arise naturally in support of that mission.
                                                                                                                7


    For most of their existence, educational endowments have been managed under “prudent
man” laws, which have historically been rooted in state trust statues, as opposed to federal law,
and tended to focus on the disposition of individual holdings rather than the development of the
entire portfolio.6 As characterized by Sedlacek and Jarvis (2010), the management of university
endowments began to gravitate toward the precepts of modern portfolio theory in the 1950s,
culminating with the passage of the Uniform Management of Institutional Funds Act (UMIFA)
in 1972, which standardized many of the rules regarding the way in which spending and investing
could take place. In 2006, the UMIFA statutes were revised further with the Uniform Prudent
Management of Institutional Funds Act (UPMIFA). Among other things, UPMIFA updates the
old standards, particularly with regard to the level of flexibility the endowment’s governing
authority has to invest and spend assets, in the absence specific restrictions imposed by the
original donor. Under UPMIFA, an institution is permitted to accumulate or spend as much of
the endowment fund as the board deems appropriate, even to the point where the current value
of the fund falls beneath the original level (i.e., the fund is “underwater”).
    Figure 1 provides a stylized view of the way in which a typical university endowment is or-
ganized. The two main economic actors involved in the process of deploying the fund’s financial
capital are the University/Endowment Board (i.e., “Board”), which represents the governing au-
thority ultimately responsible for the endowment’s assets, and the Investment Committee/Firm
(i.e., “Staff”), to which falls the day-to-day responsibilities of designing and maintaining the
actual investment portfolio. Broadly speaking, the primary functions of the Board are two-fold:
(i) create the policy statements that define the investment problem faced by the university (i.e.,
the Spending Policy), as well as the way in which the endowment’s financial assets should be
invested to address this problem (i.e., the Investment Policy); and (ii) monitor the Staff’s on-
going operations on a regular basis to insure compliance with those policies. By contrast, the
Staff—which may comprise anything from a single individual to representatives of a multi-person
committee of the Board (e.g., Yale Investments Office) to an entirely separate operating firm
(e.g., University of Texas Investment Management Company)—is charged with the responsibil-
ity of managing the fund’s assets in the most effective manner possible, within the context of
the policy parameters set forth by the Board.7 Thus, in the typical endowment there is a clear
   6
     Indeed, prudent man laws first came into existence with the Harvard College v. Amory case in 1830, which
involved a dispute over how investments tied to the Harvard College endowment had been handled.
   7
     In its annual survey of educational endowment practices, NACUBO reported that for the 2010 fiscal year,
the average number of full-time equivalent professional staff persons employed by the 842 funds in their sample
was just 1.5. However, the cross-sectional distribution of professional staffing levels is highly skewed; the mean
number of full-time professionals employed by endowments with assets of over $1 billion is 10.0; see Walda and
Griswold (2011).
                                                                                                                 8


delineation between those responsible for defining the investment problem and setting the broad
parameters for the investment solution and those who make those mandates operational.8


2.2      Endowment Spending Policy

We begin by formally defining the spending policy adopted by a particular endowment as con-
sisting of two distinct components: (i) a spending rule, and (ii) a pre-specified payout rate. The
distinction between these two entities is that the spending rule defines the general procedure by
which the payout amount will be determined, whereas the payout rate represents the specific
percentage that is to be applied within the context of the spending rule. For example, during
the 2007 fiscal year, Texas Christian University determined their annual endowment payout
using a “50/50 Hybrid” approach in which the institution calculated a weighting consisting of
(i) 50% of the dollar amount of the prior year’s spending, incremented by the Higher Education
Price Index (HEPI) inflation index, and (ii) 50% of an amount established by taking 5.0% of
an average of the market values of the endowment portfolio over the previous four quarters,
starting at of the beginning of the current fiscal year. In this case, the rule used is actually a
combination of two more fundamental rules (i.e., Increase by Percentage and Moving Average,
as defined more formally below) while the rates specified are the HEPI inflation index for the
Increase by Percentage rule and 5.0% for the Moving Average rule.9 In the analysis that follows
below, it is important to recognize that an endowment fund can change its spending policy by
altering either the rule it uses or the rate that is applied within that rule.
       For our purposes, two endowments will initially be considered to have comparable spending
policies if those policies are based on the same spending rule. That is, funds that adopt a Moving
Average payout rule based on, say, annual portfolio valuations over the previous three years will
be classified in the same way regardless of what specific policy spending rate each fund applies
to their respective average asset values. There are seven broad categories of spending rules used
   8
      Two additional economic actors are represented in the exhibit: Consultants, who can provide guidance to
either the Board or the Staff on a variety of topics, and Portfolio Sub-Managers, who the Staff may select
to manage part or all of the endowment’s assets. This “external manager” model (i.e., in which Staff selects
investment managers from outside the endowment organization to construct asset class-specific security portfolios)
is an increasingly popular format in practice and the role of the Consultant is often to advise the Board or Staff
on which sub-managers to select. Walda and Griswold (2011) report that 80.0% of the endowments surveyed in
2010 employed an external consultant and 85.0% of those endowments using a consultant did so to advise them
on the manager selection process.
    9
      It is interesting to note that NACUBO reported that the actual payout rate for the Texas Christian University
endowment fund for the 2007 fiscal year was 4.6% (expressed as a percentage of beginning-of-period fund assets).
This indicates that there often can be a measurable difference between the ex ante policy payout rate and the ex
post actual payout rate, particularly when Moving Average spending rules that combine several past asset values
are used.
                                                                                                              9


in practice, which in turn represent aggregated versions of 20 more detailed sub-classes.10 While
the Appendix lists a more complete description of this spending rule taxonomy, the seven broad
payout policy categories are given here as:


1. Decide on an Appropriate Rate Annually: Determines the spending rate deemed appro-
priate on a yearly basis.
2. Increase Prior Year’s Spending by a Percentage: Adjusts spending upwards each year, using
either a simple formula or one based on the inflation rate.
3. Spend a Percentage of a Moving Average of Market Values: Determines annual payout as a
percentage of an average of beginning-of-period market values over a pre-specified series of past
periods.
4. Spend a Percentage of Current Yield : Spend a percentage of current income generated during
the investment period.
5. Spend a Percentage of Assets Under Management (AUM): Determines annual payout as a
percentage the beginning-of-period fund assets for the current period.
6. Hybrid Rules: Uses a simple formula to combine two or more different payout categories into
a single spending rule.
7. Other Payout Rules: Uses a formula or approach that differs from those listed above or did
not provide a complete set of information.


Thus, the TCU endowment fund from the previous example would be classified as following
a Hybrid Rule (i.e., Category 6), which itself is a combination of Category 2 (i.e., Increase Prior
Spending by Percentage) and Category 3 (i.e., Moving Average).
    At a broad level, these spending rule categories can be differentiated by the nature of the
dollar payout amount they produce. Clearly, the Decide Annually rule is the most flexible in
that it allows the Board to determine the exact amount of payout it wants to extract from
the portfolio each year. Of course, this maximizes the tension on the Board in managing the
trade-off between spending in the present versus preserving the endowment’s value for future
generations, particularly since UPMIFA removes the onus of making decisions that lead to an
underwater fund. On the other hand, the Increase by Percentage rule makes the payout level
  10
     This spending rule classification system was created after a comprehensive analysis of the series of annual
NACUBO surveys, which began collecting this information in 2003. It differs somewhat from other classification
schemes (e.g., Lapovsky (2009), Blume (2010)) primarily because the way in which NACUBO has reported
spending rule data has evolved over time, particularly after Commonfund became involved in the reporting
process in 2009. We provide a more complete discussion of the the data acquisition process in Section 3.
                                                                                                                  10


exactly predictable and preserves the real spending level of the institution when the policy payout
rate is tied to an inflation index. However, in years when asset values are falling, an Increase by
Percentage rule will exacerbate the decline in the endowment portfolio’s value. By contrast, a
Percentage of AUM rule adjusts the payout to changes in the portfolio’s beginning-of-year value,
which has the effect of making the dollar payout level extremely volatile in financial markets that
are themselves volatile. Moving Average rules attempt to mitigate this volatility by smoothing
out the portfolio value to which the payout rate is tied, whereas Percentage of Yield rules are
intended to set a payout that will not diminish the value of the endowment portfolio, which
may be a factor that the Board of a fund that is already underwater might need to take into
account. Finally, Hybrid rules, which often combine Moving Average and Increase by Percentage
Inflation rules, seek a middle ground between predictable dollar payout and the preservation of
the endowment’s market value.

2.3       Endowment Investment Policy

Beyond setting the organization’s spending policy, Figure 1 also highlights the role that the
endowment fund’s Board plays in determining the direction of its investment operation. As
summarized in the endowment’s investment policy statement, the primary function of the Board
in this regard is two-fold: (i) to select the permissable asset classes that define the endowment’s
allowable investable universe; and (ii) to specify the target investment levels (i.e., weights) for
each of these asset classes. Collectively, these two decisions represent the fund’s strategic asset
allocation policy, which is widely acknowledged to be the single most important decision that an
organization makes to increase the value of its investment portfolio over time; see, for example,
Brinson, Hood, and Beebower (1986), and Ibbotson and Kaplan (2000). Further, Acharya and
Dimson (2007) note that most endowment funds use a strategic allocation approach to arrive
at their policy portfolios due largely to the long-term nature of the investment problem they
face.11
       Of course, a crucial aspect underlying the Board’s strategic allocation judgment is the per-
ceived level of risk tolerance characterizing the organization. Like mutual funds, endowment
fund assets are most often managed without a “safety net”, such as that provided for pension
plans by the plan sponsor’s balance sheet or the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation. In
  11
     Typically, investment policy statements contain two additional features that are the responsibility of the
Board: (i) the permissible tactical ranges for the extent to which asset class-level investments can differ from
their strategic target weights; and (ii) the portfolios or indexes that represent the benchmarks for each asset class
(e.g., the S&P 500 index for U.S. public equity), which are used primarily for measuring the performance of the
managed portfolio.
                                                                                                                 11


this sense, endowment funds are often regarded as having risk tolerance similar to that of a tax-
exempt wealthy individual investor, although Black (1976) argues that endowment funds gener-
ally require less diversification in their asset portfolios than do otherwise comparable individuals.
However, this appears to be a notion that has fallen out of favor, as the so-called endowment
model approach to investing prevalent today is grounded on the principle that a wide variety
of both traditional (e.g., public fixed-income and equity securities) and non-traditional (e.g.,
hedge funds, private equity) asset classes should form the investable universe; see Leibowitz,
Bova, and Hammond (2010). Finally, endowment funds generally face the widest variety of
investment restrictions, most of which are institution-specific since there is comparatively little
regulation in this industry.12 This suggests that, as an institutional class, endowment funds
might have considerable range in their investment policies and thus represent a setting in which
the manipulation of allocation strategies might be able to add substantial value to portfolio
performance.
    Given the strategic allocation policy set by the Board, Figure 1 shows that the responsibility
for designing and maintaining the actual endowment portfolio falls to the Staff. A baseline (or
passive) approach for this process would be to mimic the strategic allocation policy by investing
in the permissible asset classes at exactly their target weights and replicating the contents of the
benchmark indexes as closely as possible; this is what Leibowitz (2005) terms “beta grazing”.
Within the context of the investment policy, the Staff can also usually engage in active portfolio
management (i.e., ”alpha seeking”) in either of two ways: (i) tactical asset allocation, in which
deviations from strategic asset class weights are selected; and (ii) security selection, in which
asset class-level security portfolios that differ from those in the respective benchmarks are held.13
In their analysis of the relationship between asset allocation and investment performance for
university endowment funds, Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu (2010) find that while strategic policy
portfolios are remarkably similar across their sample, actively managed endowments are able to
generate significantly larger alphas than passively managing ones, largely through Staff’s use of
its security selection skills. Indeed, Swensen (2009) argues that the ability to make high-quality
active management decisions is the most important factor that distinguishes two other similar
institutional investors. Thus, both Board and Staff appear to play an important role in the
development and execution of an endowment’s investment policy.
  12
     In fact, Hill (2006) implies that the largest and least restricted endowment funds essentially operate as hedge
funds in their pursuit of superior risk-adjusted returns, an observation borne out by the recent experience at the
Harvard Management Company.
  13
     In addition to tactical range restrictions or restrictions on which securities can or cannot be held (e.g., no
tobacco stocks), investment policy statements can also specify risk control measures at the aggregate portfolio
level, such as tracking error limits.
                                                                                                            12


3     Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1    Data Description

The primary source of information for the spending and investment practices of educational
endowment funds comes from a database maintained by the National Association of College and
University Business Officers (NACUBO), a service and advocacy organization formed in 1962
to represent college, university, and higher education service providers throughout the United
States, Canada, and Puerto Rico. Since 1984, NACUBO has surveyed its members on topics
ranging from asset allocation and investment performance to endowment expenditures and other
fund flows to organizational design and governance issues and then publishes a summary of that
information in its annual Study of Endowments.14 Arguably, this survey represents the most
comprehensive published source of data on college and university endowments anywhere in the
world. Although the underlying data is self-reported by the member institutions, the study is
free of survivorship bias as any college that could eventually have gone bankrupt but participated
in the survey in the early years is retained in the database (see Brown, Goetzmann, Ibbotson,
and Ross (1992)). Indeed, the large cross section of colleges represented in the survey suggests
that there is little self-selection bias. Furthermore, the study does not backfill data; that is, a
college can only fill out the survey for the current year and not for previous years in which no
information was originally provided.
    For the analysis that follows, we have obtained access to the survey data for fiscal years from
1984 to 2011.15 For the purpose of our study, easily the richest part of the NACUBO database
involves endowment investment practices. Specifically, information for some data items—such
as the AUM for a particular fund, the annual investment return (net of fees) that it produced—
is available from the inception of the surveys in 1984. However, while aggregated sample-wide
data on asset allocation patterns are available from 1984, fund-specific asset allocation data (i.e.,
where it is possible to match each endowment with its actual asset class investment weights
during the investment period) was only obtainable starting with the 1989 survey. Given the
number of partners involved in producing the annual surveys for NACUBO, it is not surprising
that the asset classes definitions have been modified three times during the 1989-2011 sample
period, most recently in 2009 with Commonfund’s administration of the surveys. To maintain
  14
     Since 2009, Commonfund has administered the survey process and jointly authored the studies with NACUBO.
Before the current arrangement, other NACUBO partners involved in producing the annual surveys included
TIAA-CREF (2000-2008) and Cambridge Associates (1988 to 1999); the NACUBO Investment Committee gen-
erated the surveys prior to 1988.
  15
     To match the academic calendar, the fiscal year for an endowment typically ends on June 30. So, the NACUBO
survey for 2011 covers the period from July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2011.
                                                                                                                 13


consistency with the most recent reporting standards, we adopt the following ten different asset
classes: U.S. Public Equity, Non-U.S. Public Equity, Fixed-Income, Real Estate, Hedge Funds,
Venture Capital, Private Equity, Natural Resources, Cash, and Other Assets. All of the asset
allocation data dating to 1989 has been adjusted, where necessary, to correspond to these asset
class definitions.16
    Unfortunately, information on spending practices in the endowment sample does not extend
as far back as does the investment data. NACUBO began reporting the actual annual payout
rate associated with a fund in 1994. This actual payout rate statistic is calculated as the
total dollar amount of the payment from the endowment to the institution during a given
fiscal year as a percentage of market value (i.e., AUM) of the portfolio at the beginning of
the fiscal year. More specific information regarding the spending policy—both spending rule
and policy rate—for every fund did not appear until the 2003 survey, meaning that we are
able to trace the evolution of this aspect of the endowment management process (as well as
the link between spending and investment practices) over the 2003-2011 period. Further, the
categories defining the spending rule classifications were modified once during this time frame
(i.e., when Commonfund got involved in the effort in 2009). Consequently, the seven spending
rule categories listed in previous section were defined with sufficient breadth to allow for the
proper placement of all 20 of the sub-categories used throughout the nine years for which this
data was reported, as indicated in the Appendix. Finally, recognize that not every endowment
self-reported spending policy data in each year for which they participated in the survey in other
ways (e.g., reported asset allocation and investment performance results). As explained in more
detail below, we assume the conservative posture that such omissions, when they occur, indicate
that the endowment did not change its spending policy from the last reporting date.


3.2    Endowment Summary Statistics: Fund Size, Returns, and Payout Rates

Table 1 provides a broad overview of the number and size, investment performance, and spending
practices for our sample of endowment funds. Specifically, the display reports on a yearly basis
summary statistics for three different variables: (i) assets under management (AUM), measured
as the market value of the total assets held in a fund as of the end of the respective reporting
year; (ii) the overall investment return, reported net of all relevant fees; and (iii) the payout
rate, which is defined as the actual dollar level of spending during the year in question expressed
  16
     For example, from 2001 to 2008, NACUBO reported twelve asset class categories by accounting for Fixed
Income in two sub-categories (i.e., U.S. and Non-U.S.) and similarly listing Real Estate in its public (i.e., REITS)
and private forms.
                                                                                                                14


as a percentage of the beginning-of-period AUM of the fund. For all three of these statistics,
the table lists the mean, median, minimum and maximum values, and standard deviations for
each of the annual cross sections.
    The first thing to note from Table 1 is that the number of institutions surveyed by NACUBO
quadrupled (i.e., from 200 to 803) from 1984 to 2011 and that there was a roughly sixteen-
fold increase in the aggregate level of assets managed in the industry (i.e., from $25.4 billion
to $408.0 billion) during that time. By contrast, the level of AUM for both the mean and
median endowment increased only four-fold over the sample period—from $127.0 million to
$508.1 million, on average—which represents a relatively modest compound annual growth rate
in net-of-payout assets of 5.3%, especially given that none of the amounts listed have been
adjusted for inflation. However, the remaining AUM data reported in the exhibit indicate that
focusing on the behavior of the “average” endowment may provide a poor representation of the
entire universe. For example, the difference between the largest and smallest funds reported
annually (e.g., $31.7 billion versus $0.6 million in 2011) shows the tremendous cross-sectional
heterogeneity in the sample and suggests that endowments of different sizes may face very
different asset management problems.
    There are two other ways in which the reported statistics for fund investment performance
and payouts suggest that the endowment universe is extremely varied. First, while the annual
distributions of the overall fund returns do not appear to be highly skewed (e.g., there is not a
large discrepancy between the mean and median returns reported for most years), the difference
between the best and worst performing funds is considerable.17 For instance, while the mean
fund returned 9.2% in 2005, the minimum and maximum returns for the 711 participating
endowments were −11.4% and 22.2%, respectively. The indicative range of performance for
this particular year was by no means abnormally large; if anything, it is less pronounced than
the most dramatic years in the sample (e.g., 1989, 2000, 2007–2009). While there are several
factors that might explain these different investment outcomes, such as portfolio risk levels or
manager-specific skills, they nevertheless underscore our earlier point regarding the diversity of
the objectives, constraints, and characteristics that represent these institutions.
    The final way in which college endowments can be differentiated with these data is by the
amount of their annual spending needs. The last five columns in the exhibit summarize the
annual distributions of the actual dollar expenditures (as a percent of AUM) paid out by the
  17
     The return data shown in Table 1 are net of fund expenses, but they are not adjusted for risk. A more thorough
analysis of the nature and sources of risk-adjusted performance across a comparable sample of endowment funds
can be found in Brown and Tiu (2010).
                                                                                                             15


funds. The average annual value for this payout rate is about 4.8%, which did not appear
to change much from one year to the next during the sample period. However, this relative
constancy in the average value masks a considerable degree of cross-sectional variation in actual
payouts rates, where the spread of values in a given year ranges from zero to 85.0%. Further, as
indicated by both the cross-sectional standard deviations and difference between the minimum
and maximum values, the sample-wide variation in payout rates appears to have increased
substantially after 2008. In fact, this highly variable pattern of endowment spending over time
is consistent with that reported by Nettleton (1987) for the pre-1985 period. In the present
context, the important point to consider is that fund spending policies may be linked to the risk
tolerance of the endowment and, as a consequence, should be related to the allocation decision
and ultimate investment performance, as suggested by Dybvig (1999).18


3.3     Endowment Summary Statistics: Asset Allocation

Table 2 lists the actual percentage allocations by the endowment fund universe to each of the ten
NACUBO asset classes in use as of the 2011 survey date: U.S. Public Equity, Non-U.S. Public
Equity, Fixed-Income, Real Estate, Hedge Funds, Venture Capital, Private Equity, Natural
Resources, Cash, and Other Assets. The figures reported represent the equally weighted average
annual values of the percentage of AUM allocated to a particular asset class using all of the
participating funds in a given year starting in 1989. Viewed over time, there are several trends
in these data that imply important shifts in the way endowment fund managers have approached
the asset allocation process. First, the percentage invested in public equities (i.e., U.S. Equities
and Non-U.S. Equities) has changed substantially over time, while remaining well below the
level advocated by Thaler and Williamson (1994). Interestingly, this allocation both started and
ended the sample period at just under 50%, but maintained a level of 55% to 65% for the years
between 1996 and 2007. Further, the composition of this allocation has changed dramatically
over the entire period, with non-U.S. equities experiencing a substantial increase (e.g., from
1.7% in 1989 to 17.0% in 2011) while U.S. equities declined significantly (e.g., from 47.0% to
31.7%). Allocations to the traditional fixed-income categories also declined dramatically during
the sample period, from around 31.7% at the beginning of the sample period to just 19.3% in
2011.
  18
     In an interesting extension of this point, Dimmock (2012) conducted a cross-sectional analysis of endowment
fund allocation patterns during the year 2003 and concluded that factors such as the riskiness of a university’s
non-financial income, cost structure and credit constraints can also affect its investment decision-making and
performance.
                                                                                                            16


    It is the Alternative Asset classes—typically defined by endowment funds to include hedge
funds, non-public equity positions (both Venture Capital and Private Equity (i.e., buyout) in-
vestments), real estate, and natural resources—that benefitted the most from the decreased
allocation to traditional fixed-income products. Some of these allocation gains were modest,
such as the increases from 0.6% to 1.3% for venture capital investments or from 3.0% to 3.4%
in real estate.19 Clearly, then, the biggest beneficiary of the increased pattern of “alternatives”
investing occurred in the Hedge Fund category, which represented just under 13.0% of the AUM
of the average endowment fund by 2011, placing them in size just below the average dollar in-
vestment in non-U.S. equity securities. Given that the first hedge fund allocation did show up in
the data until 1990, this represents a truly significant shift in the investment approach adopted
by endowment managers. To underscore this point, we also computed a more complete cross-
sectional analysis of the annual asset allocation samples, including the median, maximum, and
minimum values as well as the standard deviation of the distribution. Although not reported in
Table 2, these additional statistics are nevertheless useful in understanding the diversity in the
investment commitment to hedge funds across the endowment universe. For instance, in 2005,
the minimum allocation was 0.0% while the maximum allocation was a 82.1%! Clearly, different
endowments have very different strategies concerning alternative assets.
    A significant factor related to these different asset allocation patterns is the size of the en-
dowment fund. Simply put, larger funds invest assets in a very different fashion than do smaller
funds. This is phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 2, which provides snapshots of endowment
investments at different points of time and for funds of different size. To generate these com-
parisons, we separated the fund sample into quartiles based on beginning-of-period AUM for
each year in the sample period. We then calculated mean asset allocation percentages for each
quartile as an equally weighted average within the sub-sample, rebalancing those stratifications
on a yearly basis. Further, for comparative ease, we consolidated the asset classes into four
broader categories: Public Equity (U.S. and Non-U.S.), Fixed Income, Alternatives (Real Es-
tate, Hedge Funds, Venture Capital and Private Equity, Natural Resources), and Cash & Other
Assets. Panel A of the display compares these aggregated allocation percentages across AUM
   19
      Recall that beginning in 2009, NACUBO collapsed two Real Estate asset classes—Public (i.e., REITS) and
Private—into a single category, moving the REIT allocation to U.S. Public Equity. Consequently, to insure
comparability with the reported allocation data from 1989 to 2008, we have added (subtracted) 1.20% to the Real
Estate (U.S. Public Equity) asset class for the years 2009 to 2011. This percentage represents the average REIT
allocation for the five-year period ending in 2008.
                                                                                                                   17


quartiles at the beginning and end of the sample period, while Panel B compares how those
allocation patterns evolved over time for the largest (Q4) and smallest (Q1) size quartiles.20
    As both panels of the exhibit help make clear, while there were significant differences across
asset classes, there were relatively small differences in asset allocations patterns across endow-
ments of different size at the beginning of the sample period (e.g., investments in Alternatives
in 1989 were 3.9% and 6.5% for quartiles Q1 and Q4, respectively). However, this situation
changed dramatically by 2011, when Alternatives investing for the largest fund quartile rose to
45.0% while the Alternatives allocation for the smallest funds remained relative low at 9.6%.
To finance this increased allocation to Alternatives, the average Q4 endowment reduced its al-
location to both Public Equity (50.7% in 1989 to 37.6% in 2011) and Fixed Income (29.5% to
12.2%). Conversely, the smallest endowments actually increased their Public Equity investments
over this period (44.9% in 1989 to 56.2% in 2011) primarily by reducing their Cash allocation,
whereas their Fixed Income allocation remained relatively stable (32.2% to 26.3%). Thus, it is
reasonable to conclude that the overall trend toward an increased allocation to Alternatives at
the expense of Public Equity and Fixed Income we noted earlier is predominantly the result of
actions taken by the managers of the largest endowments.


3.4    Endowment Summary Statistics: Spending Rules

As discussed above, the annual NACUBO surveys have included details of the spending rules
used by their sample of educational endowments since the 2003 fiscal year. For each yearly
report between 2003 and 2011, we analyzed the stated rule for every available fund and placed
it into one of the 20 specific sub-categories—which, in turn, led to its placement into one of the
seven broader categories—described in the Appendix. Table 3 summarizes these classifications,
reporting for each year the following statistics: total number of sample endowments; percentage
frequency of rule use; mean (median) actual payout, as a percentage of AUM; mean (median)
AUM; mean (median) annual investment return; and mean (median) standard deviation of the
policy (i.e., benchmark) portfolio corresponding to funds in that spending rule class.21 Further,
starting with the fiscal year 2009, the spending rule portion of the NACUBO survey was ex-
   20
      To conserve space, Figure 2 compares asset allocations for the various sub-samples of the endowment universe
for just two years: 1989 and 2011. It should be noted that data for the omitted years do not change our conclusions
about how endowment allocation patterns have changed over time; we have produced a complete set of annual
findings for the entire 1989-2011 sample period and these results are available upon request.
   21
      More precisely, this volatility statistic was calculated as follows: First, for each fund in a given survey year
and rule class, we observed their asset allocation weights. Second, time-series return data for the benchmark
indexes associated with each asset class (which are described in detail in Section 6), we calculate a sample asset
class variance-covariance matrix. Finally, a policy standard deviation statistic was then calculated for each fund
as the square root of the product of its investment weights and the variance-covariance matrix; the exhibit lists
the mean (median) of these values within each rule category.
                                                                                                               18


panded to include additional information regarding the relationship between endowment payout
amounts and the institution’s budget, as well as the funding status of the portfolio. Conse-
quently, for the years 2009-2011, we also report summary statistics for: mean (median) payout
as percentage of budget; the mean number of endowments that impose a special spending ap-
propriation (i.e., temporary expenditures in addition to the stated permanent policy); and the
percentage of funds that are “underwater” (i.e., has a current market value that is less than its
original level).
       Perhaps the most intriguing finding shown in the display is the sizeable fraction of endowment
funds that base their spending policies on some form of a moving average of past portfolio values,
which is intended to smooth out year-to-year variations in the dollar level of the portfolio payout.
Looking at each of the annual samples, the fraction of funds using a Moving Average rule ranges
ranges from a low of about two-thirds (65.4% in 2010) to three-quarters (75.6% in 2008). By
contrast, the second most frequently used spending rule—the Decide Annually category—is also
the most flexible in the payout amount it allows from one period to the next and accounts for as
much as 10.6% of funds in 2011 and as few as 4.9% in 2008.22 The remaining five categories—
Increase by Percentage, Percentage of Yield, Percentage of AUM, and Hybrid—are roughly
equally distributed, with each accounting for 3.5-5.5%, on average, over the nine years for which
this data has been collected.
       Of course, an interesting question implicit in these reported frequencies is what motivates
a given endowment to select one spending rule over another? Table 3 provides some useful
indications of how funds differ by spending rule choice. In particular, notice that in each of the
yearly cross sections there is considerable variation in the average percentage payout generated
by the various rules (e.g., 3.4 to 5.1% in 2010, 4.6 to 5.6% in 2003). Generally speaking, it appears
that the Increase by Percentage and Hybrid rules are associated with the largest average payout
percentage, while the Percentage of Yield rule produces the smallest payout. Further, judging
from the data reported over the most recent three years in the sample, it also appears that those
endowments responsible for producing a larger percentage of the institution’s budget select a
Hybrid or Increase by Percentage rule (e.g., 2011 mean payout-as-percentage-of-budget statistics
of 18.2% and 17.0%, respectively), whereas endowments with payouts that are a significantly
smaller percentage of their institution’s budgets seem to gravitate toward Moving Average or
  22
    To underscore this “smoothing vs. flexibility” comparison, notice that in 2009 (i.e., the fiscal year incorpo-
rating the financial market decline of late 2008, 36.1% of the endowments using the Decide Annually rule were
underwater, compared to just 22.1% using Moving Average rules. By 2011, the economic recovery that took
place during the preceding two years had reduced the frequency of underwater funds in these two categories to
be virtually the same (i.e., 5.5% and 4.9%, respectively).
                                                                                                 19


Percentage of Yield rules (e.g., 8.3% and 7.6%, respectively, in 2011). Given that funds using
Hybrid rules need to produce more of the institution’s total budget, it is not surprising to see
that these endowments also tend to have special appropriation frequencies that are among the
highest for any rule class (e.g., 25.9% and 31.9% in 2011 and 2010, respectively).
   These summary statistics also contain an indication that an endowment’s spending rule and
its investment performance may be connected, albeit it in a surprising fashion. From the mean
policy volatility statistics reported for each of the spending rule categories in the nine annual
cross sections, it is apparent that endowment funds seem to target similar levels of benchmark
risk exposure regardless of what other differences they might have. This fact, which was first
noted by Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu (2010), can best be seen by the remarkably narrow ranges
for the volatility measures in any given year (e.g., 9.3% to 9.9% in 2010, 9.6% to 10.1% in 2008).
On the other hand, while these comparable “risk budgets” sometimes lead to a similarly narrow
range of realized investment returns (e.g., mean annual returns of 11.5% to 12.5% in 2010), the
dispersion in actual investment performance often varied far more widely across spending rule
groups than differences in the policy risk levels would imply (e.g., -5.0% to -1.0% in 2008).
   Given the relative importance of the Moving Average spending rule in practice, Table 4
provides an additional breakdown of this classification by the various valuation frequencies and
time horizons that define it. The display lists summaries for fiscal years 2009, 2010, and 2011, the
three annual samples for which Commonfund collected this more detailed data in the NACUBO
surveys. The three frequency columns show that the vast majority of Moving Average rules
in use are based on either quarterly or annual measures of past AUM values. Further, these
two measurement frequencies are used in roughly comparable amounts, although there appears
to have been a slight shift toward the quarterly averaging process (i.e., 33.5% to 39.9% useage
from 2009 to 2011) and away from annual averaging. Beyond that, as indicated by the four time
horizon columns, averaging the AUM base over a period between three to five years is easily
the most popular single choice in all three cross sections, despite the fact that five-to-seven year
averaging became more prevalent over the period (i.e., 11.9% useage in 2009, 18.8% in 2011).
   Finally, as with the asset allocation patterns discussed above, endowment size is also appar-
ently a factor in determining the spending rule that is selected. For example, from Table 3, the
mean AUM for funds in the Hybrid rule category in 2011 is $1,143.3 million, compared to $756.9
million and $326.8 million mean portfolio values in the Decide Annually and Moving Average
categories, respectively. To get a better sense of these size dynamics, we also calculated spending
rule frequencies by fund size quartile, from the smallest (Q1) to the largest (Q4), for each of the
                                                                                                               20


nine annual samples. Panel A of Figure 3 illustrates these inter-quartile distributions at the two
yearly end points of the sample while Panel B shows the rules used in quartiles Q4 and Q4 for
three different years. In 2003, it is apparent that the smallest endowments used Moving Average
rules to a lesser extent than larger funds, in favor of a relatively bigger use of Decide Annually
and Percentage of AUM rules. However, by 2011, use of a pure Moving Average policy in the
Q4 quartile had declined dramatically to the point that those funds had the lowest comparative
frequency, with an increased use of Hybrid rules providing the offset. On the other hand, the
use of Moving Average rules by Q1 funds remained much steadier over the same time frame.
Thus, as with asset allocation changes over time, variations in spending rule use also appear to
be driven primarily by the largest endowments in the sample, a topic we explore in more detail
in the analysis that comes next.


4         The Evolution of Spending Policies Over Time

Having just established some important cross-sectional differences in spending rule adoption
practices, it is also useful to consider the issue of how a given endowment fund’s spending policy
has changed (if at all) over time. In one sense, this is a more interesting question to address
since, given the prediction of Merton (1993) in the context of the relatively static nature of the
investment problem that most educational institutions face, it is not clear that there is any reason
to expect an endowment to modify the fundamental way in which it views its spending mandate
from one year to the next. On the other hand, recent research suggests that endowments do face
changing circumstances in the form of unexpectedly adverse economic conditions (see Brown,
Dimmock, Kang, and Weisbenner (2010)) or competition for resources with peer institutions (see
Goetzmann and Oster (2012) and Lerner, Schoar, and Wang (2008)) that necessitate changing
their spending policies on an occasional basis. However, there appears to be little in the way of
a priori justification for a widespread frequency of changes to the nature of these statements.23
         To analyze this issue, we examine how all of the endowment funds in the NACUBO sample
specified their spending policies during every year between 2003 and 2011. Formally, for each
Endowment E, we examine its spending policy (i.e., both spending rule and policy rate) for
every Year T that it reported survey data and characterize its spending rule according to the
taxonomy described earlier. Endowment E is considered to have changed its spending policy
    23
    In this discussion, it is important to keep in mind the distinction between permanent spending needs, as
defined by Tobin (1974), and temporary needs that might be driven by changing macroeconomic or institution-
specific factors. As documented in Table 3, roughly one in three endowments exercised its capacity to make special
appropriations as necessary, which mitigates the need to change their formal spending policies to accommodate
temporary changes in circumstances.
                                                                                                               21


if at least one of two conditions occur: (i) the spending rule it uses in Year T+1 falls into a
different category than its spending rule in Year T (e.g., a switch from a Decide Annually rule
in 2009 to a Hybrid rule in 2010); or (ii) a change from Year T to Year T+1 in the designated
policy payout rate specified within the same spending rule (e.g., a switch from a commitment to
spend 4.0% of a 12-quarter Moving Average of past portfolio values in 2005 to 5.0% of a similar
Moving Average calculation in 2006). Notice that while an adjustment in either the spending
rule or the designated rate applied within that rule is regarded as policy change, a modification
in the former is considered to be a more extreme alteration of the way in which the endowment’s
investment problem is viewed.24


4.1    Tabulating Spending Policy Changes on a Yearly Basis

Table 5 documents at a broad level the extent to which endowments alter their spending policies
from one year to the next. Panel A summarizes the frequency of change to any aspect of the
spending policy (i.e., rule or rate) while Panel B isolates just those endowments that altered
the nature of the spending rule to the extent that it switched categories in consecutive years.
To interpret the exhibit, for the fiscal year 2009, there were 842 endowments that reported
information about their spending policy in the annual survey. Of those, 749 also reported the
details of their spending policy in the 2010 NACUBO survey, meaning that 93 endowments that
reported spending data in 2009 did not report in the following year.25 Of those 749 endowments
from the 2009 survey that also reported in the 2010 survey, 463 maintained their spending
policies from one year to the next whereas 286 of those funds altered either their spending
rule or their policy rate (Panel A). Consistent with our convention of treating non-reporting
endowments as ones that did not modify their policies, we list the frequency of spending policy
change as 33.97% (= 286/842). Panel B then shows that of the 286 endowments that changed
some aspect of their spending policies from 2009 to 2010, 131 of them actually altered their
spending rule in a way that caused a change in classification. This is represented in the last
column as a rule frequency change of 15.56% (= 131/842).26
  24
     With this definition, an endowment that altered its spending rule from a three-year moving average based on
an annual observation frequency to a five-year Moving Average based on a quarterly observation frequency would
not be viewed as having made a policy change, assuming it also kept its designated payout rate the same. In this
regard, the procedure we use for identifying spending policy changes that occurred in the sample is conservatively
biased.
  25
     An endowment might be listed at ”Not Reported at T+1” either because it chose not to report data for that
particular item (but otherwise participated in the survey) or because it dropped out of the survey altogether. To
be conservative, in our calculations of the frequency of endowments that change their spending policy, we treat a
non-reporting fund as one that did not change any aspect of its previous policy.
  26
     Of course, both of these change frequencies would be larger if based on just those funds from the 2009
survey that also reported data in 2010; 38.18% (= 286/749) and 17.49% (= 131/749) for policy and rule changes,
respectively.
                                                                                                             22


    The clear and surprising implication from the findings in Table 5 is that endowment funds
adjust their spending policies far more often than might be reasonably expected given the long-
term nature of their investment mandates. Specifically, the data in Panel A show that annual
frequencies with which either spending rules or policy payout rates (or both) are changed range
from 8.95% (2006) to 36.43% (2005). The weighted mean (as a percentage of reporting funds)
for these annual change frequencies is 24.62%, meaning that, on average, one in four of the
endowments in the sample altered its spending policy each year. Further, as summarized by
Panel B, the percentage of endowments changing their actual spending rule—the most extreme
policy adjustment they could make—in a given year ranged from 3.80% to 36.43%, with a
weighted mean annual change frequency of 18.35%.27
    Although theory (i.e., Merton (1993), Woglom (2003)) predicts that the expected number of
spending policy changes in a given survey year is zero, it is difficult to say whether these change
frequency patterns can be considered extremely abnormal absent more information of the how
the investment problem faced by the sponsoring institutions might have changed. Nevertheless,
testing the observed frequencies against two different prospective null hypotheses is instructive.
First, assuming that 5.0% of the endowments will modify their spending mandates in a given year
(i.e., a 1-in-20 event), the Pearson chi-squared statistics testing the goodness of fit between the
observed and forecasted distributions for the spending policy and spending rule change samples
are 6,350.46 and 3,843.25, respectively. Both of these statistics are statistically significant with
p-values of less than 0.0001, indicating that endowments make adjustments far more frequently
than might occur on a random basis if the true proportion of expected changes was zero. Beyond
that, the respective chi-squared statistics testing whether the observed annual change frequencies
equal the weighted mean frequencies (i.e., 24.62% for spending policy, 18.35% for spending rules
only) are 269.45 and 413.38, which are also statistically reliable at better than a 0.0001 level.
Thus, it is also the case that the spending policy changes shown in Table 5 vary significantly
from one another on a year-to-year basis.
    Finally, as a supplement to this analysis of how frequently spending policies changed on
annually, it is also useful to consider the total number of times during the 2003-2011 sample
period that each endowment altered its stated spending rule. To tabulate this information,
we focused on the 628 funds that reported their rules continuously over the entire set of nine
surveys for which spending data was collected. As before, a fund was considered to have made
a modification if the spending rules it reported in Year T and Year T+1 fall into different
  27
     Prior to the 2006 survey, NACUBO did not report separate data for policy payout rates. So, for 2003-2005,
the change frequencies for the total spending policy are based solely on changes to the reported spending rules.
                                                                                                             23


categories, so that the maximum number of changes that could be observed for any Endowment
E is eight. Figure 4 presents a histogram of these statistics. Exactly half (i.e., 314 of 628) of
the funds did not adjust their spending rule at all during this interval, meaning that exactly
half of the funds did make at least one formal adjustment. In fact, more endowments made two
changes to their stated rule (129) than those that made only one modification (101). Further,
13.38% (84 of 628) changed this aspect of their spending policy three or more times and one
endowment altered its spending rule in every one of the available surveys!


4.2      Spending Rule Migration Patterns

Given this unexpectedly large number of annual spending policy changes, a natural question
to ask is which mandates are most likely to be abandoned and which are most likely to be
subsequently adopted? Table 6 addresses this issue by focusing on the more narrow topic of
spending rule migration trends. Specifically, for every Endowment E, we observed the spending
rule it adopted for both Year T as well as in the following Year T+1. Then, for each Year T
spending rule classification, we tabulated which of the seven categories the same fund fit into in
the next year. Notice that by this sorting process, we account for all possible outcomes for how
a given Endowment E can modify its spending rule, including the fact that it might not change
it at all.
       Panel A reports these annual transition frequencies for all of the sample funds over the
entire 2003-2001 time horizon. The first column lists the seven spending rule categories that
endowments adopted in Year T. The remaining seven columns then summarize the spending
rule category a given Endowment E fit into in Year T+1. The data in the table have been scaled
by dividing the number of raw observations in a particular cell by the total number of original
Year T observations in that particular row. Thus, all of the entries represent the percentage of
the funds using a certain rule at Year T that now fall under the respective Year T+1 rule. For
example, the first row of Panel A in Table 6 corresponds to those endowments that adopted the
Decide Annually rule in Year T. Of those, 47.72% remained in the Decide Annually rule (i.e.,
did not change) during the following year, while 39.82% of those endowments switched their
spending policy to a Moving Average rule. By construction, each of the rows in the display
sums to 100.00%.28
  28
    Notice also that this exhibit is constructed so that each endowment is likely to appear multiple times since
a comparison of rules in place for Year T and Year T+1 produces up to eight observations per fund over the
nine-year time frame for which spending rule data was available. Of course, any fund that changed spending
policies will see its data represented in different rows.
                                                                                                               24


    Arguably the most interesting aspect of the reported findings is that the various spending
rules have dramatically different likelihoods of being retained from one survey year to the next.
The diagonal elements of the matrix (starting from the top left cell) indicate the percentage
of a particular spending rule category that did not change (i.e., was retained) in the following
period. Clearly, with 88.12% and 79.85% retention, respectively, the Moving Average and Hybrid
rule categories are the only ones that have a better than three-in-four chance of remaining
in place in consecutive years and are therefore the only rules whose adoption appears to be
stable. Conversely, the retention rate for Percentage of Yield rules is just 35.74%, meaning that
approximately two out of three funds that adopted that mandate in Year T formally altered
their spending policies within the next twelve months.
    It is also useful to consider which spending rules are the most likely to be adopted, once an
endowment decides to modify its current policy. This information can be inferred by looking
down the last seven columns displayed in Panel A. Given the previous findings, it is not surprising
that Moving Average rules appear to be the most popular destination to which the other six
spending rules migrate; for instance, in addition to the 39.82% change from Decide Annually
rules noted above, Moving Average rules are also adopted by 36.55% of funds changing from
Percentage of Yield rules, by 35.25% of funds altering Other rules, and by 34.29% of funds
altering Percentage of AUM rules. By inspection, no other single rule category even comes close
to matching this migration pattern. In contrast, Hybrid rules, which was the only category
besides Moving Average rules that was able to retain more than three-quarters of its adopters
in a given year, was not able to attract as much of 4.00% of the annual migration from the
other spending rules. This suggests that Hybrid rules represent a highly fund-specific form of
spending policy that is likely to be stable once adopted, but unlikely to be the destination for
the typical endowment seeking to alter its payout rules.
    The last two panels in Table 6 extend this analysis by focusing on the behavior in different
sub-divisions of the sample. Panel B reproduces the spending rule migration patterns just
described for two different sample periods straddling the global economic downturn that began
in the fall of 2008: (i) 2003-2008, and (ii) 2009-2011.29 Panel C then reproduces these findings
over the entire sample period for funds in the largest (Q4) and smallest (Q1) AUM quartiles as
of a particular Year T. The most striking feature of these transition matrices before and after the
2008 financial market downturn is the marked increase in the probability that endowments retain
  29
     Recall the convention in the educational endowment industry to designate fiscal years that end on June 30.
Thus, the 2009 fiscal year began on July 1, 2008 (i.e., before the putative start of the crisis) and ended on June
30, 2009.
                                                                                               25


their previous spending rules. As shown in diagonal entries in the upper and lower portions of
Panel B, all seven of the rule categories show higher retention frequencies in the 2009-2011 sub-
period than they did in 2003-2008 time frame. For some of these rule classes (e.g., Increase by
Percentage: 48.39% to 80.85%, Percentage of Yield: 30.35% to 58.33%), the change in retention
frequency is quite dramatic. On the surface, this appears to be a curious outcome; the findings of
Brown, Dimmock, Kang, and Weisbenner (2010), in fact, would suggest that adverse economic
environments might induce more policy adjustments than fewer. However, one explanation for
this increased reluctance for endowments to alter their spending rules in the two years following
the market downturn is that, as a result of steep declines in AUM, the gap between the required
spending dollars and projected dollars using any rule was so extreme that any adjustment to
the permanent policy guidelines would not have solved the problem. Instead, many endowments
relied on temporary measures to close this spending gap; for instance, the summary statistics
in Table 3 show that about one out of every three endowments invoked special appropriations
in the 2009, 2010 and 2011 fiscal years. Thus, consistent with the notion that the spending
rule policy statement represents a vision of the long-term investment problem faced by the
institution, Boards tend to respond to extreme events of a temporary nature with solutions that
are similarly short-lived.
   The transition matrices for the largest and smallest fund size quartiles shown in Panel C
of Table 6 also indicate significant cross-sectional differences in the way endowments with dis-
parate AUM levels alter their spending policies. While the values reported for the various cells
appear to be more erratic than those shown in Panel B, due to the small frequencies associated
the sample quartiles, they nevertheless indicate some similarities and disparities. First, the re-
tention rate for Moving Average rules was extremely high for both large (87.06%) and small
(91.22%) endowments and the migration into this rule category (i.e., the data in the respective
M ovingAverageT +1 columns) occurred for both size quartiles with about the same frequency.
Conversely, the retention rate in the large funds for Hybrid rules was virtually 100.00%, indicat-
ing that the biggest endowments adopting this spending policy category essentially never change.
For small endowments, however, the loyalty to Hybrid rules was far more suspect (47.83% re-
tention), meaning that more Q1 endowments switched away from Hybrid rules than kept them
from one year to the next. For these funds, it was almost as probable (39.13%) that they would
modify the spending rule by changing to a simpler Moving Average formula—which is likely to
have been one of the rule categories combined in the Hybrid approach—than retain the previous
combination rule. Finally, notice that no small funds switched to an Increase by Percentage
                                                                                                26


rule—and only 50.00% of previous adopters retained that policy—over the entire sample period
and that no large funds retained an exclusive reliance on a Percentage of Yield rule.


5     The Determinants of Spending Rule Changes

The preceding results leave little doubt that, collectively, university endowment funds alter their
formal spending policies far more frequently than might be expected. However, beyond some
suggestions from the reported data that patterns in these rule and payout rate changes are
linked to some cross-sectional and temporal differences in the sample, it is not clear what the
determinants of spending policy modifications actually are. In this section, we address that
question by examining the formal links between a measure summarizing these changes and
several variables observable in advance of a period in which an endowment either did or did not
adjust its spending rules.


5.1   Defining Potential Determinants

In the statistical analysis that follows, we begin by defining the dependent variable (P OLCHGT +1 )
as an indicator variable assuming the value of 1 if Endowment E changed its stated spending
rule between the survey years T and T+1, and 0 otherwise. Accordingly, each of the potential
explanatory factors that we consider are observable as of Year T. The following discussion de-
scribes these regressors, including how each of them is defined as well as the direction of the
predicted influence they have on P OLCHG.
    The findings discussed in Section 3.4 revealed a potential connection between an endowment’s
spending policy decision the nature of the returns produced by its investment portfolio. Although
the ranges in the mean levels of portfolio return and policy volatility reported in Table 3 for
the seven spending rule categories were fairly narrow, it is nevertheless a reasonable conjecture
that both the amount and stability of the change in the fund’s market value could influence the
institution’s decision to alter its payout formula. We therefore define as potential determinants
the endowment portfolio’s Year T investment return (RETT ) and policy portfolio volatility level
(V OLT ), as described earlier. The relationship between P OLCHG and V OL should be positive:
the less predictable the portfolio’s asset value is, the more likely the endowment might have to
alter its spending plan. Conversely, positive investment returns in a given fiscal year should
                                                                                                              27


make it less likely that the endowment will need to adjust its long-term policy, leading to a
negative predicted relationship between RET and P LCHG.30
    Two other variables that were shown earlier to be connected to an endowment’s choice of
spending policy are the level of its actual payout and the size of its investment portfolio. The
Year T values of these factors—which we label as P AY OU TT and LOGAU MT , respectively—
are also included as potential determinants in the analysis reported below. As shown in Table 3,
funds with higher (lower) payout rates were more likely to use Increase by Percentage or Hybrid
(Percentage of Yield) rules over the sample period. Thus, the relationship between P AY OU T
and P OLCHG is likely to be negative in that funds with higher required payouts are likely
to have already adopted the rules that best serve that purpose. On the other hand, it is not
clear what impact the market value of the endowment portfolio, which for scaling purposes is
expressed here as the natural logarithm of the fund’s AUM, might have on P OLCHG. The
data summarized in Figure 2 shows that the largest funds have been far more willing and
able to adjust their asset allocations than smaller endowments, which might suggest that they
are also less likely to need to adjust their spending policy definition in changing economic
environments, implying a negative relationship. However, as indicated by Figure 3, it is also
the case that large endowments appear to change their spending rules more frequently, perhaps
because their organizational mobility permits making quick adjustments to all of their various
operating policies.
    It is possible that spending rule changes are also linked to the specific nature of an endow-
ment’s asset allocation decision. In particular, it was also shown in Section 3.3 that endowments
vary considerably in the use of alternative assets and these investments are especially critical
to determining both the absolute and risk-adjusted returns that an institutionally managed
portfolio produces (see Lerner, Schoar, and Wongsunwai (2007) and Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu
(2010)). Thus, as described earlier, we define ALT IN VT as the percentage of an endowment’s
Year T portfolio that is invested in the hedge fund, private equity, real estate, and natural re-
sources asset classes. The effect of ALT IN V on P OLCHG could go in either direction; the fact
that larger allocations to alternatives might produce higher returns could generate the negative
correlation hypothesized above for RET , but the greater degree of illiquidity associated with
the alternative asset classes could create less investment policy flexibility, which in turn could
lead to a higher likelihood of modifications to the spending policy.
   30
      The negative forecasted connection between RET and P OLCHG might be better seen from the other direc-
tion. That is, negative portfolio returns might cause a spending policy change—perhaps in addition to the special
appropriations discussed earlier—because the income generated by the portfolio, as well as the fund’s reduced
AUM level, is not sufficient to generate the required expenditures under the old policy.
                                                                                                 28


   Returns to the investment portfolio are not the only way that an endowment can fund its
spending needs. Educational institutions routinely receive donations from a variety of public
and private supporters that can either be used to increase the size of the current portfolio or
be earmarked for direct expenditure (see Brown, Dimmock, and Weisbenner (2012)). In either
case, we posit that larger levels of these supplemental contributions would make it less likely that
an endowment would have to modify its spending rule to meet its budgetary needs, implying a
negative relationship between Year T donations (labeled as DON AT ET ) and future P OLCHG.
The NACUBO database does not contain observations on donations directly, but these contri-
butions can be inferred for a given fund by taking the difference between the portfolio’s value
at the end and beginning of the period, adjusted for the returns earned during the period, plus
the payout amount. That is, expressed as a percentage of assets, we have

           DON AT ET = [AU MT +1 − AU MT X(1 + RETT )]/AU MT + P AY OU TT ,                     (1)

where the AUM levels are expressed as beginning-of-period asset values.
   Finally, the descriptive data in Table 3 also strongly indicated that both the percentage of
the institution’s overall budget that the endowment was responsible for delivering as well as its
ability to make special payout appropriations were linked to the choice of permanent spending
rule. We therefore allow for the possibility that the Year T value of the budget variable (defined
earlier as the actual payout in Year T divided by the school’s budget over the same period and
labeled here as P CT BDGTT ) and a variable indicating whether a special appropriation was
made in Year T (labeled as AP P ROPT ) help to explain future P OLCHG. We posit a positive
relationship between P CT BDGT and P OLCHG if, ceteris paribus, a fund obligated to deliver
a bigger proportion of the university’s spending needs must stand ready to alter its payout rules
to do so in changing economic conditions. Conversely, consistent with the results in Table 6, the
use of temporary appropriations should make formal spending rule changes less likely, leading
to a negative relationship between AP P ROP and P OLCHG. A challenge to testing either of
these hypotheses, however, is that NACUBO only reports data for P CT BDGT and AP P ROP
beginning with their 2009 survey, leaving only three yearly observations.


5.2   Statistical Analysis

Given the dichotomous nature of our spending rule change dependent variable, we examined
the statistical relationship between P OLCHG and the various prospective determinants using
                                                                                                                 29


a series of probit regression models that represent variations of the following functional form:

    ZT +1 = f (RETT , P AY OU TT , LOGAU MT , ALT IN VT , DON AT ET , V OLT ) + T +1 ,                         (2)

where ZT +1 represents an unobservable, continuously distributed index variable related to
P OLCHGT +1 . Because of the well-known statistical challenges inherent in working with panel
data (e.g., a time series of cross-sectional observations), we estimate (2) as a linear model using
three different approaches: (i) a full panel data regression with Year fixed effects only; (ii) a full
panel data regression with both Year and Fund fixed effects; and (iii) the multi-stage approach of
Fama and MacBeth (1973) wherein separate cross-sectional versions of (2) are estimated for each
of the survey years and then the estimated coefficients from each of the annual cross sections are
averaged for all of the relevant explanatory variables. Further, we also include in the estimation
process various additional terms to account for the interaction between regressors (e.g., RETT x
P AY OU TT ) and indicator variables to assess behavior in the post-economic crash environment
(e.g., RETT x DT , where DT equals 1 if T = 2009, 2010, or 2011 and 0 otherwise).
    Table 7 lists the calculated coefficients for each of the hypothesized determinants for en-
dowment spending rule changes, along with the associated t-statistics in parentheses, and the
R-squared values for each regression. To begin with, Panel A reports findings for the three
forms of the probit model using all of the available data (i.e., an unconditional specification of
P OLCHG where each endowment from every annual survey is included whether the spending
policy was changed or not and without any additional restrictions). Panel B then presents a
modified analysis by focusing on just those rule changes that subsequently resulted in a larger
payout from the endowment portfolio. Panel C re-estimates the unrestricted model from Panel
A for two non-overlapping subsets of the endowment fund sample determined by the relative
amount an institution’s budget that the payout represented over the 2009-2011 fiscal years.
Specifically, Panel C reports separate sets of estimated coefficients from (2) for funds that fall
in the highest and lowest P CT BDGT quartiles in the sample.31 Finally, Panel D reports re-
gression estimates for two non-overlapping subsets of the endowment fund sample according to
whether the sponsoring institution either did or did not invoke a special spending appropriation
in Year T.
    Looking first at the two fixed effects (FE) panel data regressions for the entire sample (Panel
A), the most statistically meaningful determinants of spending rule changes are LOGAU M ,
  31
     As discussed earlier, data for the percentage of an institution’s budget supplied by the annual payout from its
endowment portfolio has only been available since the 2009 survey year. We make the implicit assumption with
our analysis in Panel C that the P CT BDGT variable for a given fund is stable across time on a relative basis,
meaning that the set of endowments with the greatest (least) budget responsibility does not change in a material
way from one year to another.
                                                                                                                      30


P AY OU T , and RET . In particular, the strong positive relationship between fund size and
P OLCHG suggests that it is the largest endowments that are the most likely to alter their
spending policies, a finding consistent with the notion that the greater degree of organizational
flexibility that they possess permits a greater ability to make adjustments to all aspects of their
operations. The t-statistics for the reported coefficients (i.e., 4.78 for the Year FE parame-
ter of 0.08, 4.24 for the Year/Fund FE parameter of 0.07) indicate that this relationship is
highly tractable even after controlling for the possibility of variables omitted from the analysis,
both across time and between endowments. Beyond that, the Fama-MacBeth coefficient for
LOGAU M is also statistically reliable, which is especially notable given that this t-statistic
(i.e., 5.79) is based on averaging parameter estimates from eight annual cross sections.32
       The two other significant relationships documented in Panel A involve the level of the en-
dowment’s actual payout and the return to its investment portfolio. As predicted in Section 5.1,
the coefficients for both the P AY OU T and RET variables are negative, implying that fund’s
that have produced smaller past payout levels and generated smaller investment returns are
more likely to adjust the spending rules in the future. The coefficients for P AY OU T from the
two FE models are particularly strong (e.g., a t-statistic of 5.51 for the Year FE parameter of
-8.74), but the statistical significance of this variable is attenuated somewhat in the more severe
conditions of the Fama-MacBeth model although the sign of the coefficient does not change.
The same pattern holds for the relationship between P OLCHG and RET as well, with the ad-
ditional observation that the negative effect becomes even stronger starting with the 2009 fiscal
year (RET2009−2011 ), emphasizing the effect that the financial market crisis had on running a
university endowment fund. It is also interesting to note that the interaction between return and
payout variables (RETT x P AY OU TT ) is also a significant determinant of P OLCHG, but in
a way that mitigates the two separate effects just described. Specifically, funds with lower past
returns and lower past payouts are less likely to change their spending rules more frequently, a
finding that is difficult to explain beyond the possibility that these funds may also face more
organizational barriers to affecting operating changes of any kind.
       There are two other findings in involving these probit regressions for the entire unrestricted
sample worth noting. First, endowment funds with a larger allocation to alternative assets tend
to be less likely to modify their spending policies, as indicated by the consistently negative
  32
     Since the specification in (2) is a probit equation, it is also useful to provide an economic interpretation for the
estimated coefficients. For instance, the LOGAU M parameter of 0.07 for the Year/Fund FE model corresponds
to an increase in the probability of altering the spending policy of 0.15% for each incremental $10 million in the
size of the endowment’s portfolio. For perspective, recall from the sample overview in Table 1 that the AUM for
the average endowment in 2011 was $508.09 million.
                                                                                                               31


parameter values on ALT IN V . Surprisingly, this relationship becomes more significant in the
Fama-MacBeth regression than in either of the FE specifications. Since, as noted before, funds
with larger alternative asset investments often produce higher risk-adjusted returns, this out-
come suggests that there may be additional aspects of investment performance beyond nominal
portfolios returns (i.e., RET ) that are important in explaining the tendency to adjust formal
spending mandates. Second, the effects that both the benchmark-level risk of the fund (V OL)
or its external contributions from donors (DON AT E) had on P OLCHG were negligible. The
former is not necessarily unexpected given the finding of Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu (2010) that
endowments tend to target similar policy volatilities. However, it is surprising that the impact
that supplemental contributions to the fund has on the decision to adjust spending policy is
extremely unreliable as well as of the wrong sign.
    Panel B of of Table 7 re-examines these relationships after altering the P OLCHG variable by
assigning a value of 1 only to those observations for which (i) the spending rule was changed at
Year T+1, and (ii) P AY OU TT +1 exceeds P AY OU TT .33 Presumably, this modification allows
us to focus on those endowments whose express intention in changing their long-term spending
mandate was to increase the future payout level of the fund. While the main findings from
Panel A continue to hold (e.g., large endowments with smaller past payout levels and lower
past returns are more likely to change their rules), these new findings indicate some interesting
differences. Most notably, the relationship between P AY OU T and P OLCHG becomes much
more strongly negative than before, even becoming statistically significant in the Fama-MacBeth
specification. This does indeed suggest that the experience of low past payout rates is a major
factor driving an institution to seek a more accommodating set of rules. Further, there is
also evidence that, for these specific funds, investing to a greater extent in alternative assets
makes changing their policies more likely, which is consistent with the argument that increased
illiquidity in the investment portfolio makes that dimension of the Board’s decision-making less
flexible. Interestingly, it is also the case that the portfolio’s volatility level now matters, with
the significant positive coefficient for V OL predicted in Section 5.1 obtaining. Finally, the
interaction term between P AY OU T and RET and the indicator variable highlighting returns
in the post-crisis period are no longer statistically reliable.
    The results contained in Panel C restore the original definition of P OLCHG (i.e., assigns
a value of 1 for any spending rule adjustment), but divides the endowment sample into two
  33
     By this construction, spending rule changes that did not result in an increased payout level are assigned a
value of 0, so that the total number of observations in the sample does not change, but the number of observations
for which P OLCHG takes the value of 1 is reduced. These frequencies are listed in the exhibit for each set of
regression output.
                                                                                                              32


sub-groups representing the largest and smallest quartiles ranked by the average value of the
P CT BDGT variable over the 2009-2001 period. The display lists a full set of probit regression
findings for each of these sample divisions.34 The surprising result from a comparison of Panel
C1 (High P CT BDGT ) and Panel C2 (Low P CT BDGT ) is that this variable appears to make
virtually no difference to the fundamental relationships between P OLCHG and its underlying
determinants. For both sample divisions, the only variable that shows both the predicted sign
and consistent statistical significance is P AY OU T , although LOGAU M does appear to be a
stronger explanatory factor in the High P CT BDGT subsample. Portfolio returns in Year T are
not statistically reliable for either budget quartile, whether viewed over the entire sample period
or just in the post-crisis years.
         One possible explanation for P CT BDGT ’s lack of influence is that, if an educational in-
stitution has the ability to extract incremental payouts from its endowment portfolio on a
temporary basis, it may not need to change its permanent spending rules with any greater or
lesser frequency regardless of how much of the budget the fund must cover. Thus, it could be
the case that the presence of special appropriation measures mitigate the influence of budget
percentage constraints. The final panel of Table 7 reports spending rule determinant regression
output for those funds that either did not (Panel D1) or did (Panel D2) make use of a special
payout appropriation during the last three years of the sample period for which this data was
reported. The results support the notion that it is the set of endowments that do not—perhaps
cannot—use temporary appropriations that changes its permanent spending rules in a more
predictable manner, as indicated by the sign and statistical reliability of the P AY OU T and
LOGAU M determinants. Neither these variables are statistically significant for the “Uses Ap-
propriations” subsample in Panel D2, an outcome consistent with the spending rule transition
results in Section 4.2 that showed endowments using special payouts were more likely to retain
their permanent policies from one year to the next.


6         The Interaction Between Spending Policy, Asset Allocation,
          and Investment Performance

The findings reported so far support three stylized conclusions. First, the governing authorities
of university endowment funds have changed both their spending policies and investment strate-
gies (i.e., asset allocation weights) quite often over the past several years. Second, at least with
    34
    To get a better sense of the range across the entire sample in the percentage of an institution’s budget that
the endowment fund is responsible for producing, the values of the three-year average P CT BDGT variable falling
at the 75th and 25th percentiles are 13.2% and 1.0%, respectively.
                                                                                               33


respect to spending policy changes, these modifications appear to occur too frequently to be
consistent with hypothesized behavior given the relatively invariant nature of the institution’s
long-term investment problem. Third, patterns in spending rule changes are significantly related
to certain characteristics of the endowment’s operations and the investment performance of the
portfolio. In this section, we address two additional questions that involve the interaction be-
tween the endowment’s spending policy decision and both its ex ante investment policy decision
and the ex post policy-adjusted portfolio performance.


6.1   The Relationship Between Changes in Spending Rules and Investment
      Policy

As the introductory discussion in Section 1 suggests, a strong argument (e.g., Litvack, Malkiel,
and Quandt (1974)) can be made that the most compelling way to organize an investment
management operation begins with a clear definition of the institution’s investment problem
and then designs a portfolio strategy that represents the “optimal” solution. In the context of
university endowments, such a sequence of events clearly implies that the development of the
endowment’s spending policy should both precede and inform the development of its invest-
ment policy. However, it is also plausible (e.g., Dybvig (1999)) that spending and investment
policies are best determined simultaneously. From the preceding analysis on the frequency and
determinants of spending policy adjustments, it is not altogether clear which (if either) of these
predictions is true.
   To establish more precisely the nature of the interaction between spending rule changes and
asset allocation changes for our endowment fund sample, we begin by defining a measure that
captures the essence of how Endowment E’s investment strategy evolves from Year T-1 to Year
T. Specifically, for each fund, we create an index of the change in the allocation weights (i.e.,
AACHGE
     T ) by summing the absolute values of the differences in the actual investment levels

for each of the ten asset classes representing the investable universe for the NACUBO sample
during consecutive years:
                                               10
                                               X
                                AACHGE
                                     T     =           E
                                                     |wi,T    E
                                                           − wi,T −1 |.                       (3)
                                               i=1
                                                                                                               34


Notice that, by construction, higher levels of AACHG indicate a greater adjustment in the
endowment’s asset class investment strategy, due to either a change in its policy-level strategic
allocation weights or a tactical rotation permitted within the existing policy.35
       To see whether spending rule changes are more likely to precede or follow asset allocation
changes, we use a vector autoregression (VAR) process to estimate the structural relationship
between the two variables. Specifically, we estimate the VAR(1) model using: (i) P OLCHGT +1
and AACHGT ; and (ii) P OLCHGT and AACHGT +1 . Our null hypothesis is that the second
form of the model (i.e., spending changes leading asset allocation changes) should provide the
stronger results. The specific forms of the two panel data regression equations comprising the
VAR system are:

              P OLCHG(T + 1) = a1 + b11 P OLCHG(T ) + b12 AACHG(T )

                                          +c11 LOGAU M (T ) + c12 P AY OU T (T ) + e1,T +1 ,                  (4)

and:

               AACHG(T + 1) = a2 + b21 P OLCHG(T ) + b22 AACHG(T )

                                         +c21 LOGAU M (T ) + c22 P AY OU T (T ) + e2,T +1 .                   (5)

Given their significance in earlier findings, we include LOGAU M and P AY OU T as control
variables in the estimation of (4) and (5).
       Table 8 tabulates these results, which contain two substantive findings. First, from (4),
it is apparent that P OLCHGT +1 is significantly and positively related to P OLCHGT (i.e.,
estimated coefficient of 0.2550 with a t-statistic of 23.93) but its relationship with AACHGT is
not statistically reliable (i.e., t-statistic of -0.65). This supports the conclusion that spending
rule changes are indeed persistent over time, at least for the half of the endowment sample that
altered their policies at all. Further, it also highlights the fact that institutions are not adjusting
their spending rules in response to previous changes in asset allocation strategies that may have
produced less-than-desirable portfolio performance. This is consistent with a hypothesized view
of the investment management process holding that the statement of the investment problem
should not be determined by the myriad aspects of the investment decision-making process.
       The second main finding in Table 8 involves the estimated coefficients for (5), which indicate
that the relationship between AACHGT +1 and AACHGT is also statistically significant (i.e.,
  35
    The measure in (3) is a straightforward variation of the class of statistical distance measures used elsewhere
in the financial economic literature; see, for instance, Hansen and Jagannathan (1997).
                                                                                                               35


estimated coefficient of 0.2815 with a t-statistic of 13.72). This means that the typical endow-
ment adjusts its asset allocation weights in a persistent manner over time, which can in turn
be interpreted as suggesting that this dimension of its investment policy is not static. Further,
AACHGT +1 is positively correlated with P OLCHGT , although at a marginal level of statisti-
cal significance (i.e., estimated coefficient of 0.0165 with a t-statistic of 1.54). The implication
of this finding is that future asset allocation changes are tied to past adjustments in spending
rules, albeit with an attenuated level of strength. Specifically, an endowment that altered its
payout rule in one year is more likely to modify its asset class-level investment strategy in the
next year. This outcome implies that whatever it was that caused the fund to change its payout
policy in the first place does indeed lead to a subsequent allocation adjustment in its portfolio
construction.

6.2    Spending Rule Changes and Endowment Investment Performance

The findings in Table 7 provide compelling evidence that the nominal level of an endowment
fund’s investment performance helps influence the institution’s future spending policy decisions.
It is not clear, though, whether endowments that change their spending rules perform appre-
ciably better or worse than those that maintain stable payout mandates. A complication in
addressing this issue is that a simple comparison of total portfolio returns between the two
groups is not sufficient since we know that there is considerable variation in the asset alloca-
tion patterns—particularly for the alternative asset classes—across the sample and that these
allocation differences are alone sufficient to produce substantial variation in measured returns.
Therefore, we proxy Endowment E’s active return in Year T (ALP HAE
                                                                 T ) as the difference be-

tween its actual total return (RTE ) and its associated policy benchmark return (RTB ):

                                                                    10
                                                                    X
                              ALP HAE    E    B    E
                                    T = RT − RT = RT −
                                                                           E
                                                                          wi,T  B
                                                                               Ri,T ,                         (6)
                                                                    i=1


where wiE is the fund’s allocation weight for the i-th asset class and and RiB is the nominal
return to the benchmark index representing the the i-th asset class.36 As in Brown and Tiu
(2010), in the computation of (6) we use the following benchmark index definitions for each asset
  36
     Strictly speaking, the calculation in (6) measures the portion of the endowment’s active return that is asso-
ciated with the endowment portfolio manager’s security selection skills. For ALP HA to include the contribution
of both sources of active management skills (i.e., security selection and market timing), this calculation would
need to be amended to include the set of strategic allocation weights from the endowment’s investment policy
statement (i.e., [wiB ]). Unfortunately, the NACUBO/Commonfund database does not report these [wiB ] for many
funds in any given annual survey or for any fund over the entire sample period. However, as Brown, Garlappi,
and Tiu (2010) show, the portion of the endowment’s true ALP HA generated by the manager’s market timing
skills is, on average, fairly negligible.
                                                                                                36


class: U.S. Public Equity (CRSP Value Weighted), Non-U.S. Public Equity (MSCI World-Ex
U.S.), Fixed-Income (Barclays Global Aggregate), Real Estate (NCREIF), Hedge Funds (HFRI
Composite), Venture Capital (Cambridge Associates VC), Private Equity (Cambridge Associates
PE), Natural Resources (GSCI), Cash (30-day U.S. T-bill), and Other Assets (not applicable).
   We divide the overall endowment sample into two sub-groups according to whether a fund
did not or did alter its spending rules at least once during the 2003-2011 period. (Recall from
Figure 4 that each of these groups represent half of the overall sample.) Labeling these sub-
samples as the “No Change” and “Change” groups, respectively, we form both equal-weighted
and market value-weighted portfolios of the endowments contained in each for the purpose of
assessing investment performance. For the portfolios in each sub-group, we calculate the (i)
average actual total return, (ii) the average policy benchmark return associated with each fund,
and (iii) the average ALP HA statistic, as measured in (6). The focus of the analysis is then
to see whether the difference in average benchmark-adjusted returns for the No Change and
Change portfolios (i.e., [AvgALP HAN C - AvgALP HAC ] is equal to zero).
   Table 9 lists the average ALP HA and policy benchmark (i.e., RB ) returns to the equal-
weighted and value-weighted portfolios for both endowment sub-samples, along with the dif-
ference in the AvgALP HA calculations for each portfolio formation category. There are two
primary conclusions to be drawn from these data. First, regardless of the institution’s spending
policy revision strategy, it appears that endowment fund managers are good investors. The re-
ported average benchmark-adjusted returns are uniformly positive and, at about 100 basis points
per annum, relatively large (e.g., 0.90% for the equal-weighted No Change portfolio, 1.22% for
the value-weighted Change portfolio). While the high level of cross-sectional performance volatil-
ity within the sub-samples renders these performance measures statistically insignificant (e.g.,
t-statistics of 0.59 and 0.81 for the two portfolios mentioned above), it nevertheless is the case
that the average fund manager in each sub-group produced returns at least as good as his or
her policy benchmark.
   The second notable finding from the exhibit is that there is virtually no difference in the
risk-adjusted investment performance statistics between those endowments that changed their
spending policies with some frequency or those that maintained a single set of rules throughout
the sample period. The reported values for [AvgALP HAN C - AvgALP HAC ]—which is shown
as “Diff” in the next-to-last row—are just -0.04% (EW) and 0.14% (VW), with respective t-
statistics of -0.32 and 0.27. Interestingly, there is a marginally significant difference in policy
benchmark returns between the two categories (i.e., -0.12% (EW) and -0.39% (VW), which
                                                                                               37


suggests that they may face slightly different initial risk budgets. However, once any such risk
differentials are accounted for (even implicitly in the benchmark adjustment process), there is
no indication that the frequency with which an institution revises its spending policy has any
impact—either adverse or positive—on the returns its endowment portfolio produces.


7    Concluding Comments

The sponsors and asset managers associated with an endowment fund face an interesting inter-
generational investment problem with at least two conflicting goals: they need to produce steady
increases in the portfolio’s market value to insure the security and long-term viability of the
institution and future beneficiaries, but they also need to produce sufficient current income to
sustain existing operations. The endowment’s spending policy statement is the document in
which the governing authority of the institution expresses its intentions as to how this tension
should be resolved. Once the permanent spending policy is set, prudent decisions can then be
made concerning the investment policies and strategies that should be followed. While there
is growing body of research focusing on endowment investment practices (e.g., Acharya and
Dimson (2007), Brown, Garlappi, and Tiu (2010), Dimmock (2012)), there is a general dearth
of analysis concerning the salient aspects of the spending policy decision, which is curious given
its central role in the endowment management process.
    In this study, we have addressed this perceived need by providing a comprehensive examina-
tion of the spending policy decisions made by over 800 university endowment funds during the
period from 2003 to 2011. For each fund during every year, we categorized the specific spending
rule and policy payout rate it used and documented how frequently and why the sponsoring
institution was motivated to change those mandates over time. While there is a considerable
degree of variation within the sample, we showed that a sizeable majority of endowments adopt
a payout formula based on a percentage of a moving average of the portfolio’s past values.
However, the most surprising result in our analysis is that endowments altered their permanent
spending policies far more often than what theory would predict given the nature of the in-
vestment problem they face; on average, 25% of the funds adjusted their policies in any given
year and half of the funds surveyed amended their stated rules at least once during the sample
period. We also demonstrated that large endowments that had produced lower past returns and
had lower actual payout levels were more likely to alter their long-term spending policies, but
that funds with the ability to use special appropriations on a temporary basis were less likely
to adjust their permanent rules, a tendency that became more pronounced in the aftermath of
                                                                                                38


the global economic crisis of 2008. Further, we showed that payout rule changes are more likely
to precede adjustments to the fund’s asset allocation strategy than the other way around and
that the tendency for institutions to alter both types of policy is strongly persistent over time.
Finally, despite their disparate characteristic profiles, we found no difference in the benchmark-
adjusted investment performance for portfolios of endowments that either did or did not alter
their spending policies during the sample period.
   The intriguing questions that remain to be addressed are whether changing the permanent
spending policy too frequently represents sub-optimal behavior on the part of the endowment’s
decision makers and, if so, what the economic cost of such actions might be? Those may well be
questions that are not easily answered, particularly in the absence of specific information about
the investment problem an institution faces and whether sufficient changes in its underlying
circumstances took place to warrant a revision of its previous rules. From our analysis, we do
know that any expenses associated frequent payout policy revisions is not borne at the portfolio
investment level. However, a diminution in risk-adjusted return performance is not the only
possible cost that a fund might bear as a result of these changes—use of Board and Staff time,
misaligned objectives for the institution, loss of confidence among sponsors and donors, for
example—and, while challenging, quantifying these values might tell a very different story. An
equally challenging effort would involve trying to define and measure the incremental benefits
that accrue to institutions that make frequent changes to their permanent policy; if such revisions
to the formal statement of its investment problem do not lead to asset allocation solutions that
generate superior returns, what might the benefits of those changes be? Certainly, considering
these issues is fruitful ground for future research.
                                                                                              39


Appendix: A Taxonomy of Spending Policy Rules

The statistical summary presented in Table 3 classifies the spending rules used by our sample
of college and university endowment funds into seven separate categories. Further, several of
the seven broad categories can be meaningfully split into two or more sub-divisions. These
classifications are based on those used in practice as defined and collected by the National
Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO) and the Commonfund; see
Mehrling, Goldstein, and Sedlacek (2005), Sedlacek and Jarvis (2010) and Murray (2011) for
more details.
   Listed below are spending rule categories and sub-categories used in this study, along with
descriptions and, where applicable, the formulas used for determining endowment payouts.


1. Decide on an Appropriate Rate Annually: Gives the governing authority complete discretion
to determine the spending rate it deems appropriate on a yearly basis.


2. Increase Prior Year’s Spending by a Percentage: Adjusts spending upwards each year, using
either a simple formula or one based on the inflation rate.
(i) Increase Prior Year’s Spending by a Pre-Specified Percentage: Determines the annual payout
as the previous year’s payout adjusted upwards by a pre-specified rate.
(ii) Increase Prior Year’s Spending by the Inflation Rate: Determines the annual payout as
the previous year’s payout adjusted for a pre-specified inflation rate (I); i.e., (P ayout)t =
(P ayout)t−1 x (1 + I).
(iii) Increase Prior Year’s Spending by a Collared Inflation Rate: Determines the annual payout
as the previous year’s payout adjusted for the actual inflation rate (e.g., CPI, HEPI) during the
investment period, subject to pre-specified minimum and maximum rate levels.


3. Spend a Percentage of a Moving Average of Market Values: Determines annual payout
as a percentage (P%, which can be either fixed or variable) of an average of beginning-of-
period market values over a pre-specified series of past periods; i.e., P% x Average(AU M0 ,
AU M−1 ,...,AU M−N ), where AU M−t represents the fund’s assets under management t periods
in the past.
(i) Spend a Pre-Specified Percentage of Moving 12-Quarter Average of Market Values: Uses a
quarterly frequency over three years to calculate the moving average of fund AUM.
                                                                                            40


(ii) Spend a Pre-Specified Percentage of Moving 3-Year Average of Market Values: Uses an an-
nual frequency over three years to calculate the moving average of fund AUM.
(iii) Spend a Pre-Specified Percentage of Moving 20-Quarter Average of Market Values: Uses a
quarterly frequency over five years to calculate the moving average of fund AUM.
(ii) Spend a Pre-Specified Percentage of Moving 5-Year Average of Market Values: Uses an an-
nual frequency over five years to calculate the moving average of fund AUM.
(v) Spend a Percentage of Moving Average of Market Values, Other Than 12 Quarters/3 Years
or 20 Quarters/5 Years: Uses a percentage-of-moving-average approach based on a different fre-
quency (e.g., semi-annual), number of periods (e.g., seven years), or percentage determination
method (e.g., variable inflation rate) than those listed above.


4. Spend a Percentage of Current Yield : Spend a percentage (Y%, which can be either fixed or
variable) of current income generated during the investment period; i.e., Y% x Income.
(i) Spend a Pre-Specified Percentage of Current Yield : Spend a pre-determined percentage (less
than 100 percent) of current income generated during the investment period.
(ii) Spend All Current Yield : Spend all current income generated during the investment period
(Y% = 100%).
(iii) Spend All Dividends or Earnings: Spend all income generated during the investment period
specifically through dividend payments or earnings.
(iv) Spend a Percentage of Current Yield Determined Annually: Spend a pre-determined per-
centage (possibly 100 percent) of current income generated during the investment period, where
the percentage spent is determining on a yearly basis.


5. Spend a Percentage of Assets Under Management (AUM): Determines annual payout as
a percentage P% of the beginning-of-period fund AUM for the current period; i.e., P% x AU M0 .
(i) Spend a Pre-Specified Percentage of Beginning-of-Period AUM : Specify a pre-determine level
for P%.
(ii) Does Not Spend At All : The endowment does not make distributions in current year; this
can be interpreted as setting a pre-specified percentage spending rate of zero.


6. Hybrid Rules: Uses a simple formula to combine two or more payout categories into a
single spending rule.
(i) Yale Rule: A weighted average calculated as X percent of prior year’s spending, adjusted
                                                                                               41


for inflation, and (1-X) percent of a pre-specified payout rate multiplied by beginning-of-period
endowment AUM (i.e., combination of Categories 2 and 5). The value for X was fixed at 80
percent throughout the sample period.
(ii) Stanford Rule: A variation of the Harvard Rule based on a different smoothing proportion
using X = 60 percent.
(iii) Other Combinations: Combines two or more payout categories other than those listed above.


7. Other Payout Rules:
(i) Rules Not Otherwise Classified : Uses a formula or approach that differs from those listed
above (e.g., increases spending by a pre-specified fixed percentage unless a political or economic
contingency event occurs, in which case the governing authority uses its discretion in setting the
payout amount.)
(ii) Insufficient Information: Endowment did not provide a complete set of information that
allowed for the classification of its spending policy.
                                                                                            42


                                       References
Acharya, Shanta, and Elroy Dimson, 2007, Endowment Asset Management (New York: Oxford
    University Press).
Black, Fischer, 1976, The investment policy spectrum: Individuals, endowment funds, and
    pension funds, Financial Analysts Journal 32, 23–31.
Blume, Marshall E., 2010, Endowment spending in volatile markets: What should fiduciaries
    do?, Review of Quantiative Finance and Accounting 35, 163–178.
Bodily, Samuel L., and Chelsea C. White, 1982, Optimal consumption and portfolio strategies
    in a discrete-time model with summary-dependent preferences, Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis 17, 1–14.
Brinson, Gary P., L. Randolph Hood, and Gilbert L. Beebower, 1986, Determinants of portfolio
    performance, Financial Analysts Journal 42, 39–48.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Stephen G. Dimmock, Jun-Koo Kang, and Scott Weisbenner, 2010, How
    university endowments respond to financial market shocks: Evidence and implications,
    Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Stephen G. Dimmock, and Scott Weisbenner, 2012, The supply and demand
    for charitable donations to higher education, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic
    Research.
Brown, Keith C., Lorenzo Garlappi, and Cristian Tiu, 2010, Asset allocation and portfolio
    performance: Evidence from university endowment funds, Journal of Financial Markets
    13, 268–294.
Brown, Keith C., and Cristian Tiu, 2010, Do endowment funds select the optimal mix of active
    and passive risks?, Journal of Financial Markets 8, 62–86.
Brown, Stephen J., William Goetzmann, Roger G. Ibbotson, and Steven A. Ross, 1992, Sur-
    vivorship bias in performance studies, Review of Financial Studies 5, 553–580.
Cain, J. Harvey, 1960, Recent trends in endowment, Review of Economics and Statistics 42,
    242–244.
Cejnek, Georg, Richard Franz, Otto Randl, and Neal Stoughton, 2012, A survey of university
    endowment management research, Research Institute for Capital Markets, Vienna Austria.
Dimmock, Stephen G., 2012, Portfolio choice, background risk, and university endowment funds,
   Review of Economics and Statistics forthcoming.
Dybvig, Philip H., 1999, Using asset allocation to protect spending, Financial Analysts Journal
   55, 49–62.
Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
   Journal of Political Economy 81, 606–636.
Garland, James P., 2005, Long-duration trusts and endowments, Journal of Portfolio Manage-
    ment 31, 44–54.
Gilbert, Thomas, and Christopher Hrdlicka, 2012, Fairness and risk-sharing across generations:
    An application to university and non-profit endowments, Working Paper, University of
    Washington.
                                                                                          43


Goetzmann, William N., and Sharon Oster, 2012, Competition among university endowments,
    Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan, 1997, Assessing specification errors in stochastic
   discount factor models, Journal of Finance 52, 557–590.
Hansmann, Henry, 1990, Why do universities have endowments?, Journal of Legal Studies 19,
   3–42.
Hill, Joanne M., 2006, Alpha as a net zero-sum game, Journal of Portfolio Management 32,
     24–32.
Hoxby, Caroline M., 2012, Financial rules for universities based on their objectives and con-
   straints, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ibbotson, Roger G., and Paul D. Kaplan, 2000, Does asset allocation policy explain 40, 90, or
    100 percent of performance?, Financial Analysts Journal 56, 26–33.
Kochard, Lawrence E., and Cathleen M. Rittereiser, 2008, Foundation & Endowment Investing
   (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons).
Lapovsky, Lucie, 2009, Endowment spending: External perceptions and internal practices, Com-
    monfund Institute, Wilton CT.
Leibowitz, Martin L., 2005, Alpha hunters and beta grazers, Financial Analysts Journal 61,
    32–39.
       , Anthony Bova, and P. Brett Hammond, 2010, The Endowment Model of Investing:
    Return, Risk, and Diversification (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons).
Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Jialan Wang, 2008, Secrets of the academy: The drivers
    of university endowment success, Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, 207–222.
Lerner, Josh, A. Schoar, and W. Wongsunwai, 2007, Smart institutions, foolish choices: The
    limited partner performance puzzle, Journal of Finance 42, 731–764.
Litvack, James M., Burton G. Malkiel, and Richard E. Quandt, 1974, A plan for the definition
    of endowment income, American Economic Review 64, 433–437.
Mehrling, Perry, Paul Goldstein, and Verne Sedlacek, 2005, Endowment spending: Goals, rates,
   and rules, in Forum for the Future of Higher Education (Washington D.C.: Educause).
Merton, Robert C., 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model,
    Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373–413.
       , 1993, Optimal investment strategies for university endowment funds, in Charles T.
    Clotfelter, and Michael Rothschild, ed.: Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education
    (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press).
       , 2003, Thoughts on the future: Theory and practice in investment management, Finan-
    cial Analysts Journal 59, 17–23.
Murray, Steve, 2011, Non-profit spending rules, Working Paper, Russell Investments.
Nettleton, Minot B., 1987, The impact of spending rules on endowments, in Cathryn E. Kittell,
    ed.: The Challenges of Investing for Endowment Funds (Institute of Chartered Financial
    Analysts and Dow Jones-Irwin).
                                                                                       44


Samuelson, Paul A., 1969, Lifetime portfolio selection by dynamic stochastic programming,
   Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 239–246.
Sedlacek, Verne O., and William F. Jarvis, 2010, Endowment spending: Building a stronger
    policy framework, Commonfund Institute Wilton CT.
Swensen, David F., 2009, Pioneering Portfolio Management: An Unconventional Approach to
    Institutional Investment (New York: Free Press) 2nd edn.
Thaler, Richard H., and J. Peter Williamson, 1994, College and university endowment funds,
    Journal of Portfolio Management 21, 27–37.
Tobin, James, 1974, What is permanent endowment income?, American Economic Review 64,
    427–432.
Walda, John D., and John S. Griswold, 2011, Nacubo-commonfund study of endowments, Na-
   tional Association of College and University Business Officers Washington DC.
Woglom, Geoffrey, 2003, Endowment spending rates, intergenerational equity and the sources
   of capital gains, Economics of Education Review 22, 591–601.
                 Table 1: Summary Statistics of the NACUBO/Commonfund Endowment Fund Universe
                The exhibit presents annual data summarizing various aspects of the college and university endowment funds contained in the
                NACUBO/Commonfund sample over the period from July 1, 1983 to June 30, 2011. In addition to listing the number of funds in-
                cluded in each yearly survey and the aggregate market value of those portfolios, the display reports cross-sectional mean, median
                standard deviation, minimum and maximum statistics for (i) the fiscal-year end market value for the endowment portfolio (Assets Under
                Management, or AUM); (ii) net-of-expense portfolio return (Return), expressed as a percentage of beginning-of-period AUM; and (iii)
                the actual payout for the endowment fund to the sponsoring institution (Payout), expressed as a percentage of beginning-of-period AUM.
                Data is available for AUM and Return for the 1994-2011 fiscal years; Payout data is reported for the 1994-2011 fiscal years.


                                           AUM ($ mill.)                                             Return                                      Payout
year   N. obs            Total    Mean     Median        Std   Min        Max     Mean     Median       Std     Min     Max     Mean    Median      Std   Min    Max



2011     803         407,997.44   508.09    91.70   1,902.36   0.57   31,728.08    18.58     19.70     5.44    -4.19    31.75    4.49     4.68     3.31   0.00   85.00
2010     821         346,140.68   421.61    74.14   1,596.50   0.43   27,223.22    11.53     12.00     3.86    -5.76    36.20    4.43     4.86     2.05   0.00   16.60
2009     817         306,403.51   375.03    68.18   1,455.25   0.60   25,662.06   -17.79    -18.80     6.60   -39.96    15.90    4.23     4.50     1.98   0.00   25.20
2008     698         303,705.38   447.94    93.20   1,823.32   0.60   36,556.28    -3.08     -3.35     3.97   -22.60    12.10    4.59     4.50     2.34   0.00   45.60
2007     678         304,482.12   463.44    97.65   1,784.91   0.57   34,634.91    17.38     17.60     3.58     2.90    62.20    4.59     4.50     1.92   0.00   36.90
2006     731         283,020.67   387.17    79.80   1,451.24   0.49   28,915.71    10.61     10.80     3.38    -0.20    20.50    4.66     4.60     1.32   0.00   15.50
2005     711         249,275.94   351.59    75.41   1,291.35   1.26   25,473.72     9.16      9.00     3.29   -11.40    22.20    4.79     4.85     1.40   0.24   17.10
2004     707         228,466.66   323.61    69.75   1,136.52   1.92   22,143.65    15.02     15.70     4.41    -0.60    32.10    4.89     5.00     1.62   0.00   18.40
2003     667         196,111.70   294.02    71.65   1,001.70   0.32   18,849.49     2.70      2.60     3.68   -14.70    28.10    5.22     5.00     1.50   0.10   22.00
2002     534         176,545.39   337.56    91.25   1,053.05   0.16   17,169.76    -5.96     -6.20     4.23   -19.80    10.10    5.21     5.00     1.53   0.30   22.00
2001     572         218,185.98   390.31   105.65   1,167.41   1.15   17,950.84    -3.26     -3.60     6.30   -26.90    24.80    5.17     5.00     1.43   0.30   14.20
2000     507         222,928.50   461.55   119.96   1,371.55   6.19   18,844.34    12.69     10.70    10.10   -12.20    58.80    4.97     5.00     1.40   0.10   13.30
1999     468         181,781.61   409.42   130.24   1,083.10   7.19   14,256.00    10.90     10.50     5.25   -15.80    60.95    4.83     5.00     1.24   0.10   13.00
1998     445         159,620.93   371.21   113.08     991.42   5.17   13,019.74    18.05     18.00     3.97     3.70    31.80    4.69     4.70     1.21   0.30   14.70
1997     456         145,122.97   328.33    98.37     858.05   5.78   10,919.67    20.10     19.90     4.44     6.80    46.90    4.80     4.60     1.77   0.30   24.00
1996     406         112,603.94   281.51    81.15     737.70   3.65    8,811.78    17.26     17.20     4.02     0.80    39.00    4.84     4.80     1.29   0.10   12.80
1995     423          99,416.70   235.58    71.59     600.03   0.07    7,045.86    15.08     14.80     4.16     0.50    37.90    4.95     5.00     1.47   0.10   15.00
1994     375          70,354.31   189.12    61.23     406.58   0.47    3,529.00     3.29      3.20     4.27   -13.00    43.00    5.24     5.00     1.75   1.80   18.20
1993     393          76,838.21   196.52    60.51     469.59   1.46    5,778.26    13.13     13.30     4.30    -2.80    36.30    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1992     317          62,236.12   196.95    54.22     534.68   1.73    5,315.47    13.40     13.00     8.82     1.10   143.00    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1991     326          56,023.55   172.91    52.03     439.20   3.39    5,118.12     7.24      7.10     4.90   -14.40    53.00    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1990     298          51,420.16   174.31    58.89     410.97   2.01    4,653.23    10.02      9.55     6.01   -10.30    75.00    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1989     279          45,481.16   165.39    56.74     392.35   1.87    4,478.98    14.64     13.40    13.46    -6.20   163.00    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1988     262          49,467.06   157.04    47.64     381.40   1.65    4,155.78     1.26      0.70     4.78   -14.70    17.40    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1987     276          45,222.98   152.78    46.38     360.68   1.54    4,018.27    13.63     13.82     5.69    -6.88    31.89    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1986     258          39,317.86   150.64    46.29     354.88   1.10    3,435.01    27.17     27.16     6.72     5.24    52.46    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1985     280          31,511.82   112.54    31.19     295.30   1.02    2,927.20    25.61     25.95     6.96     1.25    52.12    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
1984     200          25,399.06   127.00    40.12     289.12   0.97    2,486.30    -1.40     -2.24    15.12   -17.00   209.00    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.
                                                                                                                                                                         45
Table 2: Asset Allocation Statistics for the NACUBO/Commonfund Endowment Fund Universe
  The table reports annual means of the actual asset allocations maintained by the university endowment funds contained in the
  NACUBO/Commonfund database over the period from July 1, 1988 to June 30, 2011. Cross-sectional mean allocation levels (ex-
  pressed as a percentage of beginning-of-period AUM) are listed for the following asset class definitions: U.S. Public Equity (U.S. Eq.),
  Non-U.S. Public Equity (Non-U.S. Eq.), Fixed-Income, Real Estate, Cash, Other Assets (Other), Hedge Funds, Venture Capital (VC),
  Private Equity (PE), and Natural Resources (Nat. Res.). The last two columns report the cross-sectional mean AUM and number of
  endowments contained in each yearly survey, respectively.

                          U.S.   Non-U.S.   Fixed    Real                     Hedge   VC    PE    Nat.   AUM        No. of
                          Eq.    Eq.        Income   Estate   Cash    Other   Funds               Res.   ($ mil.)   Obs.

                   2011   31.7       17.0     19.3      3.4     3.6     2.3    12.6   1.3   5.3    3.5     508.1      803
                   2010   31.7       15.3     22.0      3.2     3.9     2.2    12.5   1.1   5.0    3.0     421.6      821
                   2009   32.9       14.7     21.9      3.6     5.7     1.8    11.6   1.2   4.3    2.3     375.0      817
                   2008   34.5       17.1     18.9      4.3     3.7     1.5    13.3   1.1   3.4    2.3     447.9      698
                   2007   40.0       17.4     17.9      3.5     3.5     1.4    11.2   1.0   2.4    1.6     463.4      678
                   2006   42.3       15.3     20.0      3.5     3.4     1.4     9.7   0.9   2.0    1.5     387.2      731
                   2005   45.7       12.7     21.4      3.2     3.4     1.4     8.9   0.8   1.6    1.0     351.6      711
                   2004   48.7       11.0     21.9      2.8     3.6     1.6     7.5   0.8   1.4    0.6     323.6      707
                   2003   47.4        9.7     25.7      2.8     3.9     1.6     6.3   0.8   1.4    0.4     294.0      667
                   2002   46.4       10.1     27.0      2.6     4.0     1.6     5.6   1.0   1.2    0.4     337.6      534
                   2001   49.5       10.0     25.0      2.1     4.0     5.9     0.6   1.5   1.0    0.4     390.3      572
                   2000   50.7       11.6     23.3      2.0     4.0     4.0     0.7   2.4   1.0    0.3     461.5      507
                   1999   53.9       10.6     23.8      1.9     3.9     0.6     3.1   1.3   0.7    0.2     409.4      468
                   1998   53.1       10.9     25.5      3.4     2.3     0.6     1.6   0.9   0.5    1.2     371.2      445
                   1997   52.5       11.1     25.7      2.0     4.6     0.5     2.2   0.8   0.3    0.2     328.3      456
                   1996   51.8        9.4     27.7      2.0     5.4     0.7     1.9   0.8   0.3    0.2     281.5      406
                   1995   47.0        7.9     29.9      2.1     6.5     3.9     1.6   0.7   0.2    0.3     235.6      423
                   1994   46.3        7.4     31.8      1.9     7.3     2.8     1.5   0.7   0.2    0.3     189.1      375
                   1993   48.3        4.2     34.8      1.6     7.3     2.0     0.7   0.2   0.6    0.3     196.5      393
                   1992   48.1        3.0     35.8      2.4     9.4     0.0     0.4   0.6   0.2    0.2     196.9      317
                   1991   47.6        2.3     35.8      2.8    10.2     0.0     0.3   0.6   0.2    0.2     172.9      326
                   1990   47.5        2.3     35.6      2.9    10.3     0.0     0.3   0.6   0.2    0.2     174.3      298
                   1989   47.0        1.7     31.7      3.0    12.8     2.9     0.0   0.6   0.2    0.1     165.4      279
                                                                                                                                             46
            Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for Endowment Fund Spending Policy Rules
This exhibit summarizes several characteristics of the university endowment sample by the spending rule the fund employs. Fiscal year
data are reported for the period July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2011 for the following spending rule categories, as defined in the Appendix:
Decide Annually, Increase by Percentage, Moving Average, Percentage of Yield, Percentage of AUM, Hybrid Rule, Other Rule. Cross-
sectional mean (median) statistics are reported for: (i) Frequency of Rule Use (Use), as a percentage of total endowments reporting
in a given survey year; (ii) actual payout (Payout), as a percentage of beginning-of-period AUM; (iii) beginning-of-period AUM (Size);
(iv) annual investment return (Ret.), as a percentage of beginning-of-period AUM; (v) cross-sectional standard deviation of the policy
(i.e., benchmark) portfolio for the rule category (Vol.). Data is also reported for the period from July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2011 for
three additional variables: (vi) the percentage of the sponsoring institution’s annual budget that the actual endowment payout represents
(Budget); (vii) the percentage of funds in a rule category that employ special spending appropriations (Appropriations); and (viii) the
percentage of funds in a rule category that have current AUM less than initial AUM (Underwater ).

                                                                                                                          Continued on the next page . . .
                                                                                                                                                             47
                           Table 3 (cont.): Descriptive Statistics for Endowment Fund Spending Policy Rules

                                  Decide             Increase              Moving              Pct. of             Pct. of             Hybrid              Other
                                Annually              by Pct.              Average              Yield               AUM                  Rule               Rule

2011               Use (%)          10.6                 4.7                  66.0                3.5                 3.4                 6.2                5.7
n=804          Payout (%)            4.2    (4.5)        5.2      (5.1)        4.5    (4.6)       4.2     (4.3)       4.1     (4.1)       4.8     (5.0)      4.0     (4.5)
              Size ($ mil.)        756.9   (75.5)     1750.8    (514.7)      326.8   (80.2)     268.1    (69.9)     642.3    (68.1)    1143.3   (186.7)    984.5    (79.4)
                 Ret. (%)           18.3   (20.0)       19.4     (19.6)       18.6   (19.7)      18.1    (19.9)      16.2    (18.3)      19.8    (19.6)     19.6    (20.5)
                  Vol. (%)           9.9    (9.7)       10.0      (9.9)        9.8    (9.8)       9.9    (10.3)       9.3     (9.2)      10.4    (10.1)     10.2    (10.2)
               Budget (%)           13.4    (6.6)       17.0     (12.3)        8.3    (3.0)       7.6     (2.4)       2.8     (0.9)      18.2     (9.4)     11.1     (3.1)
        Appropriations (%)          20.4                24.4                  17.6               18.8                13.3                25.9               29.4
          Under water (%)            5.5                 6.1                   4.9                6.3                 5.2                 4.5                5.3

2010               Use (%)           9.4                 3.7                  65.4                3.3                 3.5                 5.4                9.4
n=822          Payout (%)            4.2    (4.0)        5.1      (5.4)        4.5    (4.9)       3.7     (3.8)       3.4     (3.4)       4.9     (5.0)      4.0     (4.5)
              Size ($ mil.)        546.7   (60.5)     1270.2    (346.6)      269.5   (67.9)     161.1    (29.3)      80.3    (32.7)    1005.7   (200.0)    804.1    (78.7)
                 Ret. (%)           11.7   (11.9)       11.6     (12.1)       11.5   (12.0)      11.5    (12.4)      11.6    (12.0)      12.5    (12.6)     11.9    (12.1)
                  Vol. (%)           9.3    (9.3)        9.5      (9.9)        9.4    (9.4)       9.4     (9.7)       9.4     (9.5)       9.9     (9.7)      9.4     (9.4)
               Budget (%)           12.1    (2.9)       18.4     (14.1)        9.1    (3.2)       4.2     (0.7)      11.4     (1.0)      24.2    (16.2)     13.7     (4.7)
        Appropriations (%)          24.1                17.6                  19.1                6.7                15.6                31.9               22.6
          Under water (%)           16.3                13.1                  13.3               12.9                14.7                15.9               13.0

2009               Use (%)           8.4                 3.5                  66.7                3.8                  3.7                5.6                8.2
n=818          Payout (%)            4.1     (4.0)       4.6      (4.7)        4.3     (4.5)      4.1      (4.2)       4.2     (4.8)      4.6     (4.5)      4.0     (4.6)
              Size ($ mil.)        574.1    (36.0)    1282.2    (448.0)      263.9    (63.9)    203.5     (58.0)      86.7    (44.3)    866.7   (140.8)    819.9    (92.0)
                 Ret. (%)          -16.5   (-17.6)     -19.9    (-20.1)      -18.0   (-19.0)    -16.4    (-17.3)     -16.3   (-17.8)    -18.7   (-18.8)    -17.7   (-18.3)
                  Vol. (%)           9.3     (9.8)       9.8      (9.7)        9.4     (9.5)      9.1      (9.5)       9.5     (9.6)      9.9     (9.9)      9.2     (9.5)
               Budget (%)           14.6     (2.4)      20.1     (14.8)       11.6     (4.3)     10.2      (3.0)      11.0     (0.8)     24.2    (13.2)     14.7     (6.0)
        Appropriations (%)          28.2                34.5                  18.1               21.2                  3.0               27.7               19.7
          Under water (%)           36.1                12.1                  22.1               28.1                 20.4               22.5               21.5

2008               Use    (%)        4.9                 3.2                  75.6                1.8                 3.9                 8.8                1.9
n=775           Payout    (%)        5.0    (4.1)        4.5       (4.3)       4.6    (4.5)       2.8     (3.1)       4.3     (5.0)       5.1      (4.5)     3.9      (4.0)
          Size ($ mil.)   (%)     1726.0   (46.8)      615.7    (398.7)      322.7   (85.9)      61.1    (18.8)      69.1    (36.6)     957.1   (190.3)    320.5   (186.3)
                  Ret.    (%)       -3.1   (-3.5)       -1.0      (-0.9)      -3.3   (-3.5)      -5.0    (-4.8)      -2.7    (-3.9)      -1.6     (-1.7)    -2.6     (-5.0)
                  Vol.    (%)       10.0    (9.8)        9.7       (9.9)       9.9   (10.0)      10.1     (9.6)       9.6     (9.6)       9.8      (9.8)     9.7      (9.6)

2007               Use    (%)        5.1                 3.3                  73.2                2.7                 5.1                 4.7                6.0
n=747           Payout    (%)        4.5    (4.3)        4.6      (4.6)        4.6    (4.5)       4.1     (4.3)       4.3     (4.5)       4.9     (4.5)      4.1     (4.3)
          Size ($ mil.)   (%)     1977.3   (70.1)      920.0    (544.6)      341.8   (91.7)     175.3    (28.5)     432.0    (55.8)    1659.8   (409.3)    301.8   (191.4)
                  Ret.    (%)       18.3   (17.7)       20.0     (19.3)       17.3   (17.5)      15.8    (17.4)      16.3    (17.0)      19.6    (19.3)     17.5    (17.1)
                  Vol.    (%)       10.2   (10.4)       10.3     (10.0)       10.5   (10.5)      11.0    (10.7)      10.2    (10.6)      10.4    (10.4)     10.2    (10.4)

2006               Use    (%)        5.8                 2.8                  71.3                2.7                 5.4                 4.5                7.5
n=746           Payout    (%)        4.8    (4.3)        4.8      (4.9)        4.6    (4.6)       4.3     (4.3)       4.4     (4.5)       5.2     (4.8)      4.3     (4.5)
          Size ($ mil.)   (%)     1364.3   (69.0)      691.7    (463.1)      305.6   (81.2)     196.1    (38.7)     361.0    (51.6)    1287.2   (255.1)    211.9    (88.0)
                  Ret.    (%)       10.1   (10.2)       12.5     (12.2)       10.7   (10.9)       8.8     (9.3)      10.0    (10.4)      12.5    (13.2)     10.3     (9.7)
                  Vol.    (%)       10.2   (10.1)       10.4     (10.4)       10.5   (10.6)       9.4    (10.3)      10.2    (10.3)      10.2    (10.2)     10.4    (10.5)

2005               Use    (%)        9.4                 8.4                  66.8               10.6                 4.4                 0.3                0.1
n=735           Payout    (%)        4.7    (4.8)        4.6      (4.5)        4.8    (5.0)       4.5     (4.7)       4.8     (5.0)       4.8     (4.8)      5.3     (5.3)
          Size ($ mil.)   (%)      370.9   (99.9)      582.6    (156.5)      325.1   (66.1)     558.4    (78.1)     308.8    (93.0)     276.0   (276.0)    189.3   (189.3)
                  Ret.    (%)        9.4    (9.0)       10.0      (9.8)        8.9    (8.8)       9.3     (9.5)      10.3    (10.2)      11.1    (11.1)     14.0    (14.0)
                  Vol.    (%)       10.5   (10.3)       10.6     (10.5)       10.4   (10.5)      10.1    (10.3)      10.7    (10.6)      10.6    (10.6)     11.0    (11.0)

2004               Use    (%)        9.5                 3.6                  70.3                5.5                 5.5                 2.8                2.8
n=710           Payout    (%)        4.9    (5.0)        5.2      (5.3)        5.0    (5.0)       4.6     (4.5)       4.0     (4.3)       5.3     (5.3)      3.9     (4.5)
          Size ($ mil.)   (%)      814.6   (65.0)      440.3    (322.4)      239.6   (62.5)     310.7    (80.1)     253.8    (50.2)    1561.2   (359.7)    228.9   (131.4)
                  Ret.    (%)       14.7   (15.6)       16.2     (16.6)       15.1   (15.7)      14.2    (15.8)      13.4    (13.5)      15.6    (17.0)     14.7    (15.9)
                  Vol.    (%)       10.6   (10.5)       10.5     (10.6)       10.6   (10.7)      10.1    (10.3)      10.0    (10.2)      10.3    (10.2)     10.8    (10.8)

2003               Use    (%)        7.0                 2.2                  74.3                6.6                 6.7                 3.1                0.0
n=676           Payout    (%)        5.6    (5.0)        5.1      (5.0)        5.3    (5.0)       4.6     (4.8)       4.8     (5.0)       5.4     (5.2)
          Size ($ mil.)   (%)      871.6   (39.2)      873.8    (517.0)      236.9   (75.0)     242.5    (58.5)     245.6    (55.7)    1364.4   (423.4)
                                                                                                                                                                          48




                  Ret.    (%)        3.0    (3.2)        2.6      (2.8)        2.5    (2.5)       3.4     (4.0)       3.2     (3.0)       3.2     (3.2)
                  Vol.    (%)        9.7    (9.9)       10.5     (10.5)       10.3   (10.4)      10.0    (10.3)       9.3     (9.5)       9.6     (9.6)
           Table 4: Descriptive Statistics for Endowment Funds Employing a Moving Average Spending Rule
                  This exhibit summarizes several characteristics for university endowment funds that reported using a Moving Average spending rule
                  in a given annual survey. Fiscal year data are reported for the period July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2011 for the following cross-sectional
                  mean (median) statistics: (i) Frequency of Rule Use (Use), as a percentage of total endowments reporting in a given survey year; (ii)
                  actual payout (Payout), as a percentage of beginning-of-period AUM; (iii) beginning-of-period AUM (Size); (iv) annual investment return
                  (Ret.)), as a percentage of beginning-of-period AUM; (v) cross-sectional standard deviation of the policy (i.e., benchmark) portfolio for
                  the rule category (Vol.); (vi) the percentage of the sponsoring institution’s annual budget that the actual endowment payout represents
                  (Budget); (vii) the percentage of funds in a rule category that employ special spending appropriations (Appropriations); and (viii) the
                  percentage of funds in a rule category that have current AUM less than initial AUM (Underwater ).


                                Monthly                Quarterly               Annual                Years T of                Years T                 Years T                 Years T
                                  Freq.                 by Freq.                Freq.                0≤T <3                   3≤T <5                  5≤T <7                7 ≤ T ≤ 10

2011               Use (%)           2.0                    39.9                  34.7                      1.8                    78.3                    18.8                    1.1
n=611          Payout (%)            4.7     (4.7)           4.7    (4.7)          4.3    (4.6)             4.9    (4.6)            4.5    (4.7)            4.5     (4.5)          4.6     (4.1)
              Size ($ mil.)        506.5   (229.5)         306.1   (84.1)        352.7   (77.5)            87.1   (65.0)          296.1   (79.1)          394.4    (94.1)       1723.7   (303.3)
                 Ret. (%)           19.3    (18.6)          18.6   (19.8)         18.5   (19.6)            15.3   (18.4)           18.2   (19.6)           19.8    (20.3)         22.3    (24.0)
                  Vol. (%)          10.0    (10.5)           9.9    (9.8)          9.7    (9.8)            10.0   (10.4)            9.7    (9.7)           10.0    (10.1)         10.7    (10.6)
               Budget (%)            5.8     (3.3)           8.1    (3.7)          7.6    (2.6)            15.0    (2.4)            7.1    (3.0)           12.0     (3.7)          5.4     (4.8)
        Appropriations (%)          12.5                    18.8                  17.0                     18.2                    16.8                    19.8                   50.0
          Under water (%)            4.3                     5.1                   4.3                     13.7                     5.0                     3.5                   16.9

2010               Use (%)           1.3                    36.4                  37.8                      1.9                    82.8                    14.0                    1.3
n=620          Payout (%)            4.9     (4.8)           4.8    (5.0)          4.3    (4.8)             5.4    (5.4)            4.5    (4.9)            4.3     (4.8)          5.6     (5.7)
              Size ($ mil.)        290.0   (168.7)         284.1   (74.1)        260.2   (64.1)           167.6   (67.6)          235.9   (66.8)          392.4   (121.9)       1409.2   (456.3)
                 Ret. (%)           11.2    (12.0)          11.7   (12.3)         11.4   (11.8)            10.9   (11.2)           11.4   (12.0)           12.1    (12.1)         12.8    (12.7)
                  Vol. (%)           9.3     (9.9)           9.5    (9.4)          9.4    (9.4)             8.7    (8.8)            9.4    (9.4)            9.8     (9.6)         11.3    (11.7)
               Budget (%)           13.6     (2.2)           9.3    (4.0)          8.2    (2.3)             5.6    (2.6)            8.7    (3.2)           12.2     (2.6)          4.0     (2.8)
        Appropriations (%)           0.0                    21.8                  17.9                     16.7                    18.1                    21.8                   71.4
          Under water (%)           13.5                    14.2                  12.3                     12.7                    13.3                    13.2                   27.5

2009               Use (%)           2.0                    33.5                  39.2                      2.4                    84.7                    11.9                    1.0
n=610          Payout (%)            4.5     (4.6)           4.5     (4.5)         4.1     (4.4)            5.2     (5.0)           4.3     (4.5)           4.2     (4.4)          4.3     (4.2)
              Size ($ mil.)        625.4   (224.9)         247.4    (71.8)       265.1    (56.6)          486.0    (69.5)         226.6    (62.7)         434.0   (115.7)       1039.4    (54.9)
                 Ret. (%)          -17.6   (-18.3)         -18.5   (-19.1)       -17.6   (-18.9)          -18.2   (-17.9)         -17.7   (-18.9)         -19.3   (-19.5)        -28.2   (-29.7)
                  Vol. (%)           9.4     (9.7)           9.4     (9.5)         9.4     (9.5)            9.7    (10.2)           9.4     (9.4)           9.7     (9.7)         12.4    (12.3)
               Budget (%)           19.0     (6.2)          11.9     (4.8)        11.1     (3.6)           11.7     (9.0)          11.2     (4.0)          15.0     (4.5)          6.2     (3.2)
        Appropriations (%)           6.3                    19.9                  17.2                     26.7                    17.2                    25.4                    0.0
          Under water (%)           33.5                    22.4                  21.2                     32.0                    22.5                    16.7                   56.1
                                                                                                                                                                                 49
                                                                                                                         50




  Table 5: Changes in Endowment Spending Policy and Spending Rule Adoption
This exhibit reports statistics summarizing how university endowment funds altered their spending policies (i.e., spending rule or stated
policy payout rate, in Panel A) or just their spending rules (in Panel B) over the period July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2011. Listed for each
fiscal year T are: (i) the number of reporting funds in Year T; (ii) the number of those funds also reporting in Year T+1; (ii) the number
of Year T+1 reporting funds that maintained their Year T spending mandate; (iv) the number of Year T+1 reporting funds that changed
their Year T spending mandate; (v) the number of Year T funds not reporting in Year T+1; and (vi) the ratio of funds that changed
their Year T spending mandate in Year T+1 and the total number of Year T funds.



                      Obs.      Reported       Maintained        Changed        Not Reported         Pct.
          Year T      at T      at T + 1       at T + 1          at T + 1       at T + 1             Changing

                                              Panel A: Policy changes

          2010         850             782               519           263                    68           30.94
          2009         842             749               463           286                    93           33.97
          2008         864             675               514           161                   189           18.63
          2007         833             698               545           153                   135           18.37
          2006         816             683               610            73                   133            8.95
          2005         818             680               382           298                   138           36.43
          2004         755             661               392           269                    94           35.63
          2003         744             607               504           103                   137           13.84

                                               Panel B: Rule changes

          2010         850             782               663           119                    68           14.00
          2009         842             749               618           131                    93           15.56
          2008         864             675               514           161                   189           18.63
          2007         833             698               613            85                   135           10.20
          2006         816             683               652            31                   133            3.80
          2005         818             680               382           298                   138           36.43
          2004         755             661               392           269                    94           35.63
          2003         744             607               504           103                   137           13.84
                               Table 6: Endowment Fund Spending Rule Transition Matrices
This table summarizes endowment fund spending rule migration patterns between Year T and Year T+1 over the period July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2011.
For endowments adopting a given spending rule in Year T, each row lists which rule those funds subsequently adopted in Year T+1. The frequencies are
expressed as the percentage of the Year T funds in a given spending rule that fall into each Year T+1 category; by construction, the listed values in each
row sum to 100% and the diagonal elements represent the percentage of funds that maintained their spending rule from one year to the next. Panel A
reports the transition matrix calculated over the entire endowment universe, Panel B separates the sample in the before-economic crisis (2003-2008) and
after-economic crisis (2009-2011) periods, and Panel C presents transition matrices for funds in the largest (Q4) and smallest (Q1) AUM size quartiles over
the entire sample period.


                                                                   Panel A: Entire Sample

                                     Decide         Increase          Moving            Pct. of         Pct. of          Hybrid             Other
                                   Annually          by Pct.         Average           of Yield           AUM               Rule             Rule
                                   at T + 1         at T + 1         at T + 1          at T + 1        at T + 1         at T + 1         at T + 1

      Decide Annually at T            47.72             1.82            39.82                1.82          5.17             0.30             3.34
      Increase by Pct. at T            3.96            55.94            30.69                1.98          1.98             1.49             3.96
      Moving Average at T              2.55             1.43            88.12                2.24          1.68             1.09             2.89
      Pct. of Yield at T               8.43             3.61            36.55               35.74          4.02             2.01             9.64
      Pct. of AUM at T                 4.90             2.45            34.29                2.86         48.98             1.22             5.31
      Hybrid Rule at T                 2.24             0.75             8.21                5.97          0.00            79.85             2.99
      Other at T                       2.30             2.68            35.25                4.21          3.07             3.83            48.66


                                                                                                                                   Continued on the next page . . .
                                                                                                                                                                      51
                        Table 6 (cont.): Endowment Fund Spending Rule Transition Matrices

                                             Panel B: Before and After the Economic Crisis

                                                      Rule changes, 2009 - 2011

                               Decide   Increase           Moving             Pct. of         Pct. of    Hybrid             Other
                             Annually    by Pct.          Average            of Yield           AUM         Rule             Rule
                             at T + 1   at T + 1          at T + 1           at T + 1        at T + 1   at T + 1         at T + 1

Decide Annually at T            58.33       1.67             25.00                 0.00          8.33       0.00             6.67
Increase by Pct. at T            4.26      80.85              6.38                 0.00          0.00       2.13             6.38
Moving Average at T              1.02       0.47             91.81                 1.49          0.37       1.02             3.81
Pct. of Yield at T               0.00       0.00             29.17                58.33          2.08       0.00            10.42
Pct. of AUM at T                 0.00       1.89             13.21                 1.89         64.15       3.77            15.09
Hybrid Rule at T                 3.33       1.11              5.56                 0.00          0.00      85.56             4.44
Other at T                       3.16       3.80             29.11                 3.16          3.16       5.06            52.53

                                                      Rule changes, 2003 - 2008
                               Decide   Increase           Moving             Pct. of         Pct. of    Hybrid             Other
                             Annually    by Pct.          Average            of Yield           AUM         Rule             Rule
                             at T + 1   at T + 1         at T + 1            at T + 1        at T + 1   at T + 1         at T + 1

Decide Annually at T            45.35       1.86             43.12                 2.23          4.46       0.37             2.60
Increase by Pct. at T            3.87      48.39             38.06                 2.58          2.58       1.29             3.23
Moving Average at T              3.09       1.78             86.81                 2.50          2.14       1.12             2.57
Pct. of Yield at T              10.45       4.48             38.31                30.35          4.48       2.49             9.45
Pct. of AUM at T                 6.25       2.60             40.10                 3.13         44.79       0.52             2.60
Hybrid Rule at T                 0.00       0.00             13.64                18.18          0.00      68.18             0.00
Other at T                       0.97       0.97             44.66                 5.83          2.91       1.94            42.72




                                                                                                                   Continued on the next page . . .
                                                                                                                                                      52
                        Table 6 (cont.): Endowment Fund Spending Rule Transition Matrices

                                          Panel C: Large (Q4) versus Small (Q1) Endowments

                                                      Large funds - q4 of AUM
                               Decide   Increase          Moving             Pct. of          Pct. of    Hybrid       Other
                             Annually    by Pct.          Average           of Yield            AUM         Rule       Rule
                             at T + 1   at T + 1         at T + 1           at T + 1         at T + 1   at T + 1   at T + 1

Decide Annually at T            78.57       0.00            14.29               0.00             0.00       0.00       7.14
Increase by Pct. at T            3.23      51.08            34.95               2.15             2.69       2.15       3.76
Moving Average at T              2.99       1.78            87.06               2.70             2.42       0.71       2.35
Pct. of Yield at T               0.00       0.00            80.00               0.00             0.00       0.00      20.00
Pct. of AUM at T                 0.00      20.00            20.00               0.00            40.00      20.00       0.00
Hybrid Rule at T                 0.00       0.00             0.00               0.00             0.00      97.62       2.38
Other at T                       1.89       7.55            28.30               0.00             0.00       3.77      58.49

                                                      Small funds - q1 of AUM
                               Decide   Increase          Moving             Pct. of          Pct. of    Hybrid       Other
                             Annually    by Pct.         Average            of Yield            AUM         Rule       Rule
                             at T + 1   at T + 1        at T + 1            at T + 1         at T + 1   at T + 1   at T + 1

Decide Annually at T            50.00       0.00            25.00               0.00            15.00       0.00      10.00
Increase by Pct. at T           50.00      50.00             0.00               0.00             0.00       0.00       0.00
Moving Average at T              1.24       0.00            91.32               1.65             0.83       1.24       3.72
Pct. of Yield at T               0.00       0.00            23.53              52.94             5.88       0.00      17.65
Pct. of AUM at T                 0.00       0.00             5.00               0.00            70.00       5.00      20.00
Hybrid Rule at T                 8.70       0.00            39.13               0.00             0.00      47.83       4.35
Other at T                       2.38       0.00            30.95               9.52             4.76       2.38      50.00
                                                                                                                              53
                                                                                                                             54




                     Table 7: The Determinants of Spending Rule Changes
This table reports regression results examining the determinants of endowment spending rule changes over the period July 1, 2002 to
June 30, 2011. The primary dependent variable (P OLCHG) is an indicator variable assuming a value of 1 if an endowment changed its
spending rule in Year T+1, 0 otherwise. The base set of potential explanatory factors (observable at Year T) includes portfolio net-of-fee
return (RET ), actual percentage payout (P AY OU T ), logarithm of fund size (LOGAU M ), percentage of portfolio invested in alternative
assets (ALT IN V ), external contributions to the endowment (DON AT E), and risk level of the policy-level investment portfolio (V OL).
Three different forms of the probit regression in (2) are specified: (i) panel data with Year fixed effects, (ii) panel data with Year and Fund
fixed effects, and (iii) Fama-MacBeth. Panel A lists findings for the full sample using all rule changes. Panel B modifies the spending
rule change definition to focus on just those changes that also resulted in a higher subsequent payout. Panel C reports results for the
endowment sample quartiles with the highest (C1) and lowest (C2) average payout-as-percentage-of budget (P CT BDGT ) statistics.
Panel D reports results for endowment sub-samples that either did not (D1) or did (D2) use special payout appropriation measures.
t-statistics are listed parenthetically next to the respective coefficient estimates.



                                     Panel, Year Fixed Effects     Panel, Year/Fund Fixed Effects       Fama-MacBeth


                                                    Panel A: All Rule Changes


          Constant                   229.78            (10.71)     228.86                   (10.65)     -1.85   (-4.08)
          RET                         -1.32            (-2.12)      -1.31                   (-2.10)     -1.18   (-0.30)
          PAYOUT                      -8.74            (-5.51)      -8.73                   (-5.50)     -4.57   (-0.79)
          LOGAUM                       0.08             (4.78)       0.07                    (4.24)      0.10    (5.79)
          ALTINV                      -0.19            (-1.31)      -0.17                   (-1.19)     -0.40   (-2.77)
          DONATE                       0.06             (0.93)       0.06                    (0.98)      0.04    (0.16)
          VOL                         -0.55            (-0.44)      -0.56                   (-0.44)      0.15    (0.10)
          RET x PAYOUT                31.09             (2.67)      31.14                    (2.67)     56.61    (0.79)
          RET x D(2009-11)            -1.01            (-2.42)      -1.03                   (-2.46)
          Total Obs.                                     5,627                                5,627              5,627
          Obs. (POLCHG = 1)                                948                                  948                948
          R-squared                                     5.42%                                5.54%              2.67%


                                        Panel B: Rule Changes Resulting in Higher Payouts

          Constant                   197.80             (6.63)     197.14                    (6.60)     -2.06   (-2.67)
          RET                         -1.32            (-1.69)      -1.31                   (-1.68)      0.55    (0.17)
          PAYOUT                     -20.01            (-9.40)     -20.04                   (-9.41)    -21.85   (-2.77)
          LOGAUM                       0.05             (2.15)       0.05                    (1.97)      0.06    (1.62)
          ALTINV                       0.60             (3.06)       0.61                    (3.10)      0.24    (0.75)
          DONATE                       0.10             (1.34)       0.10                    (1.36)     -0.39   (-1.39)
          VOL                          3.81             (2.09)       3.80                    (2.08)      3.52    (1.73)
          RET x PAYOUT                -7.08            (-0.48)      -7.10                   (-0.48)     24.30    (0.33)
          RET x D(2009-11)             0.40             (0.70)       0.39                    (0.68)
          Total Obs..                                    5,627                                5,627              5,627
          Obs. (POLCHG = 1)                                317                                  317                317
          R-squared                                     3.28%                                3.30%              4.13%



                                                                                               Continued on the next page . . .
                                                                                                            55




     Table 7 (cont.): The Determinants of Spending Rule Changes

                         Panel, Year Fixed Effects      Panel, Year/Fund Fixed Effects   Fama-MacBeth


                      Panel C1: Rule Change By Budget Contribution: Highest Quartile

Constant                 163.58             (4.07)      167.50                  (4.15)    -2.35   (-2.01)
RET                       -1.30            (-1.03)       -1.17                 (-0.93)    -6.26   (-0.82)
PAYOUT                    -7.40            (-2.42)       -7.27                 (-2.37)   -13.94   (-0.78)
LOGAUM                     0.07             (2.00)        0.06                  (1.58)     0.12    (2.51)
ALTINV                    -0.37            (-1.38)       -0.26                 (-0.98)    -0.37   (-1.43)
DONATE                    -0.18            (-0.77)       -0.17                 (-0.72)    -0.62   (-0.65)
VOL                        2.61             (0.96)        2.33                  (0.86)     6.62    (1.52)
RET x PAYOUT              25.65             (1.11)       23.57                  (1.02)   165.64    (1.16)
RET x D(2009-11)          -0.88            (-1.16)       -0.90                 (-1.20)
Total Obs.                                   1,425                               1,425              1,425
Obs. (POLCHG = 1)                              294                                 294                294
R-squared                                   4.40%                               4.81%              6.74%

                      Panel C2: Rule Change By Budget Contribution: Lowest Quartile

Constant                 272.04             (5.28)      272.12                  (5.27)    -2.32   (-2.24)
RET                        0.36             (0.29)        0.38                  (0.31)   -13.12   (-0.53)
PAYOUT                    -8.05            (-2.67)       -8.14                 (-2.71)   -18.06   (-0.46)
LOGAUM                     0.05             (1.12)        0.04                  (0.88)     0.22    (1.59)
ALTINV                    -0.14            (-0.32)       -0.14                 (-0.33)     1.09    (1.00)
DONATE                     0.27             (0.98)        0.27                  (1.00)     1.86    (0.92)
VOL                       -3.82            (-1.59)       -3.85                 (-1.61)   -21.25   (-1.10)
RET x PAYOUT              -0.16            (-0.01)       -0.26                 (-0.01)   405.98    (0.53)
RET x D(2009-11)          -2.06            (-1.94)       -2.08                 (-1.95)
Total Obs.                                     985                                 985                985
Obs. (POLCHG = 1)                              192                                 192                192
R-squared                                   8.56%                               8.64%             12.29%


                              Panel D1: All Rule Changes, No Appropriations

Constant                 254.74             (9.13)      254.69                  (9.12)    -1.71   (-2.85)
RET                       -0.85            (-1.02)       -0.84                 (-1.02)    -3.60   (-0.51)
PAYOUT                    -8.23            (-3.76)       -8.23                 (-3.75)    -0.31   (-0.04)
LOGAUM                     0.07             (3.12)        0.07                  (3.04)     0.11    (4.12)
ALTINV                    -0.14            (-0.74)       -0.14                 (-0.73)    -0.39   (-1.12)
DONATE                     0.08             (1.08)        0.08                  (1.08)     0.01    (0.02)
VOL                       -3.35            (-2.07)       -3.34                 (-2.07)    -2.44   (-1.03)
RET x PAYOUT              26.24             (1.68)       26.22                  (1.67)   102.36    (0.86)
RET x D(2009-11)          -1.07            (-1.98)       -1.08                 (-1.98)
Total Obs.                                   3,434                               3,434              3,434
Obs. (POLCHG = 1)                              559                                 559                559
R-squared                                   5.91%                               5.91%              3.96%

                             Panel D2: All Rule Changes, Uses Appropriations

Constant                 305.67             (3.67)      311.83                  (3.72)     0.33    (0.27)
RET                       -0.65            (-0.24)       -0.44                 (-0.16)   -29.97   (-0.82)
PAYOUT T : (T + 11)       -9.63            (-1.40)       -9.77                 (-1.40)   -14.81   (-0.77)
LOGAUM                     0.05             (0.66)        0.05                  (0.62)     0.07    (0.82)
ALTINV                    -0.34            (-0.62)       -0.32                 (-0.57)    -0.53   (-0.74)
DONATE                    -0.89            (-0.78)       -0.94                 (-0.82)    -3.08   (-1.06)
VOL                       -5.82            (-1.13)       -4.57                 (-0.87)   -12.24   (-2.60)
RET x PAYOUT              25.53             (0.51)       20.03                  (0.40)   448.52    (0.78)
RET x D(2009-11)          -0.81            (-0.52)       -0.68                 (-0.43)
Total Obs.                                     380                                 380                380
Obs. (POLCHG = 1)                               70                                  70                 70
R-squared                                   8.53%                               9.28%             12.27%
                                         Table 8: Spending Rule Changes and Asset Allocation Changes
         This table reports estimates of a panel data vector autoregression (VAR(1)) model for the relationship between changes in spending rules (P OLCHG) and
         changes in asset allocation (AACHG) in the NACUBO/Commonfund, endowment fund sample over the period from July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2011. The
         model, which includes controls for endowment fund size (LOGAU M ) and past payout rate (P AY OU T ), is estimated according to (4) and (5) as:

                              P OLCHG(T + 1)        = a1 + b11 P OLCHG(T ) + b12 AACHG(T ) + c11 LOGAU M (T ) + c12 P AY OU T (T ) + e1,T +1
                                AACHG(T + 1)        = a2 + b21 P OLCHG(T ) + b22 AACHG(T ) + c21 LOGAU M (T ) + c22 P AY OU T (T ) + e2,T +1 .

         t-statistics are listed parenthetically beneath the respective estimated coefficients.


                                              POLCHG(T + 1)                                                                         AACHG (T + 1)

               Const      POLCHG(T )          AACHG(T )         LOGAUM(T )          PAYOUT(T )         Const     POLCHG(T )        AACHG(T )      LOGAUM(T )       PAYOUT(T )

Coef.         -0.0330              0.2550           -0.0134              0.0119             -0.3121    0.1928            0.0165          0.2815         -0.0031         0.2325
t-stat         (-0.91)            (23.93)            (-0.65)             (3.95)              (-1.45)   (5.32)            (1.54)         (13.72)          (-1.02)        (1.08)

Obs.            4,101
                                                                                                                                                                          56
                                                                                                                    57




            Table 9: Spending Rule Changes and Investment Performance
The table reports investment performance statistics for two non-overlapping sub-samples of the
NACUBO/Commonfund endowment sample over the period from July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2011, according
to whether an institution either (i) did not change its spending rules (No Change), or (ii) did change its spending
rules at least one time (Change). The display shows for each division of the sample average annual returns to the
policy benchmark portfolio (RB ) and the benchmark-adjusted performance measure (ALP HA, as calculated by the
formula in (6). Differences in these return measures for the No Change and Change subgroups are listed, along with
the associated t-statistics. Separate sets of statistics are reported for equal-weighted (EW) and value-weighted (VW)
portfolios of the respective endowment sub-samples.


                                             EW                           VW
                                         ALPHA             RB         ALPHA             RB

                        No change          0.90%       7.48%            1.35%       8.21%
                        t-stat             (0.59)          —            (0.80)          —
                        Change             0.94%       7.60%            1.22%       8.60%
                        t-stat             (0.73)          —            (0.81)          —

                        Diff              -0.04%      -0.12%            0.14%      -0.39%
                        t-stat            (-0.32)     (-1.67)           (0.27)     (-1.67)
                          Figure 1: Typical Endowment Fund Organizational Structure
This exhibit illustrates the organizational structure of the typical educational endowment fund. The respective responsibilities of the univer-
sity/endowment board (e.g., setting spending and investment policy, monitoring investment performance) and the staff of the investment commit-
tee/firm (e.g., designing portfolio strategy, selecting external investment managers) are highlighted.
                                                                                                                                                  58
                                                                                                                      59


Figure 2: Comparative Asset Allocation Patterns Over Time and Endowment Fund
Size

This figure illustrates how mean asset class allocation percentages for the endowment fund sample have changed over time
and for portfolios of different size. The ten asset classes reported in the NACUBO/Commonfund surveys are aggregated into
the following four categories: Public Equity (U.S. and Non-U.S.), Fixed Income, Alternatives (Hedge Funds, Venture Capital,
Private Equity, Real Estate, and Natural Resources), and Cash and Other Assets. Panel A lists asset allocation statistics for
funds in different AUM quartiles (largest (Q4) to smallest (Q1)) for two different years (1989 vs. 2011). Panel B lists asset
allocation statistics across time (1989, 2003, and 2011) for two different fund size quartiles (Q4 vs. Q1).

            Panel A: Comparison Across AUM Quartiles for Two Years (1989 vs. 2011)




 Panel B: Comparison Across Time for Two AUM Quartiles (Q4 (Largest) vs. Q1 (Smallest))
                                                                                                                           60


Figure 3: Comparative Spending Rule Patterns Over Time and Endowment Fund
Size

This figure illustrates how spending rule adoption frequencies for the endowment fund sample have changed over time and for
portfolios of different size. Using the seven categories defined in the Appendix, Panel A lists spending rule frequencies for funds
in different AUM quartiles (largest (Q4) to smallest (Q1)) for two different years (2003 vs. 2011). Panel B lists spending rule
frequencies across time (2003, 2007, and 2011) for two different fund size quartiles (Q4 vs. Q1).

            Panel A: Comparison Across AUM Quartiles for Two Years (2003 vs. 2011)




 Panel B: Comparison Across Time for Two AUM Quartiles (Q4 (Largest) vs. Q1 (Smallest))
                                                                                                                    61


                                           Figure 4: Frequency of Spending Rule Changes
This figure shows the frequency of spending rule changes for the endowments in the NACUBO/Commonfund sample over
the period June 30, 2002 to July 1, 2011. For each endowment that reports sufficient spending policy data for at least
two consecutive annual surveys, we calculate the number of times the endowment changes the spending rules it adopted
for each fiscal year from 2003 and 2010. The figure depicts the histogram of the number of rule changes.



                                         350


                                         300


                                         250
                  Number of endowments




                                         200


                                         150


                                         100


                                          50


                                           0
                                               0    1   2      3     4      5      6   7   8
                                                            Frequency of changes
