NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DIGITIZATION AND THE CONTRACT LABOR MARKET:
A RESEARCH AGENDA
Ajay Agrawal
John Horton
Nicola Lacetera
Elizabeth Lyons
Working Paper 19525
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19525
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

This research was funded by the Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at the Rotman School
of Management and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. We thank Shane
Greenstein, Catherine Tucker, Avi Goldfarb, and participants at the NBER pre-conference and conference
meetings for valuable feedback. Errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19525.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ajay Agrawal, John Horton, Nicola Lacetera, and Elizabeth Lyons. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Digitization and the Contract Labor Market: A Research Agenda
Ajay Agrawal, John Horton, Nicola Lacetera, and Elizabeth Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 19525
October 2013
JEL No. J24,J61,O15,O33
ABSTRACT
Online contract labor globalizes traditionally local labor markets, with platforms that enable employers,
most of whom are in high-income countries, to more easily outsource tasks to contractors, primarily
located in low-income countries. This market is growing rapidly; we provide descriptive statistics
from one of the leading platforms where the number of hours worked increased 55% from 2011 to
2012, with the 2012 total wage bill just over $360 million. We outline three lines of inquiry in this
market setting that are central to the broader digitization research agenda: 1) How will the digitization
of this market influence the distribution of economic activity (geographic distribution of work, income
distribution, distribution of work across firm boundaries)?; 2) What is the magnitude and nature
of information frictions in these digital market settings as reflected by user responses to market
design features (allocation of visibility, investments in human capital acquisition, machine-aided
recommendations)?; 3) How will the digitization of this market affect social welfare (increased
efficiency in matching, production?)? We draw upon economic theory as well as evidence from
empirical research on online contract labor markets and other related settings to motivate and
contextualize this research agenda.
Ajay Agrawal
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
ajay.agrawal@rotman.utoronto.ca
John Horton
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West Fourth Street, 8-81
New York, NY 10012
john.horton@stern.nyu.edu

Nicola Lacetera
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 2E9
Canada
and NBER
nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca
Elizabeth Lyons
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
liz.lyons09@rotman.utoronto.ca

1

Introduction

We motivate this chapter on the digitization of the market for contract labor with three observations. First,
this market is growing rapidly in terms of the number and variety of participants and transactions. Second,
in contrast to the highly localized exchange of services typical in the traditional offline market for contract
work, the online market is dominated by long distance North-South (as defined below) trade. Third, the
online platforms that facilitate trade in this market introduce seemingly small informational frictions that
have significant effects on outcomes. We describe each of these market features in turn.
The growth of online markets for contract labor has been fast and steady. According to Horton (2010),
workers in this market earned about $700 million by 2009, and the Financial Times (2012) estimated this
market to be worth $1 billion annually by the end of 2012. Additional details from oDesk, the largest online
marketplace for contract labor in terms of earnings, provide further insight into the growth of this market.
The number of employers billing on the site per quarter increased by over 800% between 2009 and 2013
(Figure 1), and the number of working contractors per quarter increased by approximately 1,000% over the
same period (Figure 3). In pecuniary terms, the quarterly wage bill on oDesk increased by approximately
900%, from $10,000,000 to almost $100,000,000 over the same four-year period (Figure 2).
North-South exchange dominates the pattern of trade in these markets (e.g., relative to North-North,
South-South, and South-North). In other words, employers are predominantly from high-income countries1
and contractors are mainly from lower-income countries. We classify countries as “high-income” using the
2012 World Bank list of high-income countries. We classify the remaining countries as “lower-income.” In
Figure 1 we illustrate that not only are there more employers on oDesk from high- compared to lower-income
countries, but the number from high-income countries is also growing at a faster rate. Similarly, the wage bill
per quarter is significantly greater and growing faster for employers from high- versus lower-income countries
(Figure 2). While the contrast is not quite as extreme on the contractor side of the market (a significant
number of contractors are from high-income countries), there were approximately three times as many lower
versus high-income contractors in 2009 and that difference increased to five times by 2013 (Figure 3). This
does not simply reflect a growing volume of small jobs performed by contractors from lower-income countries.
In Figure 4 we illustrate that the wage bill reflects a similar pattern in terms of contractors from high- versus
lower-income countries.
A number of studies examine how seemingly small information frictions may significantly influence match1 We define high-income countries according to the World Bank classification available at http://data.worldbank.org/incomelevel/HIC.

1

ing outcomes in online markets for contract labor. Perhaps the most dramatic finding is the one reported by
Pallais (2012). In this study, Pallais conducts a field experiment where she “treats” 952 randomly selected
contractors by hiring them and then providing feedback on their performance. Then she compares the subsequent employment performance of these treated contractors with a set of 2,815 other contractors (“controls”)
who applied for her posted jobs but whom she did not hire and therefore did not post information on. She
reports that, for those with no prior work experience on oDesk, the subsequent income of treated contractors
almost triples relative to the income of control contractors over the following two-month period. She then
takes a number of steps to provide further evidence that the observed increase in employment performance
is due to the information she posted to the platform about the contractor (i.e., rating and feedback), rather
than due to other explanations such as human capital accumulation by the contractor due to the experience
of doing the job. The reason this result is so dramatic is because the treatment is so small: the job is only
a 10-hour data entry task, the rating is only a single score out of five, and the feedback is only a single
sentence: “It was a pleasure working with [x].” In fact, for inexperienced workers, the marginal effect of a
more detailed comment that specifies data entry speed, accuracy, following of directions, and timely task
completion is not statistically distinct from zero. In other words, the trebling of income is caused by minimal information provided by the employer based on a remarkably small job. Although the observed effect
is based on low-wage data-entry specialists who propose wages of $3 per hour or less, the effect of such a
seemingly small amount of information is striking. It points to an important market friction present in this
online setting. The author draws a welfare implication from her finding: “Under plausible assumptions, the
experiment’s market-level benefits exceeded its cost, suggesting that some experimental workers had been
inefficiently unemployed.”
Similar information frictions are reported in other studies in this market setting. Stanton and Thomas
(2012) estimate the effect of information from intermediaries on contractor employment. They find that
inexperienced contractors affiliated with an intermediary have substantially higher job-finding probabilities
(almost double) and wages (15%) at the beginning of their careers on oDesk. Agrawal et al. (2013) examine
the relative role of information about experience on oDesk for contractors from high- versus low income
countries. They find that information about platform-based work experience disproportionately benefits
contractors from low-income countries (approximately 40% premium). In a related study, Mill (2011) finds
that once an employer on Freelancer has a good experience with a contractor from a particular country,
then the employer is more likely to hire someone else from that country. Also related, Ghani et al. (2012)
report that members of the Indian diaspora hiring on oDesk are more likely to hire workers in India than are

2

other employers. Finally, Horton (2012) finds that recommendations increase the likelihood of a hire in job
categories with fewer qualified candidates. In each of these cases, seemingly small amounts of information
have significant effects on employment outcomes, suggesting that information frictions play an important
role in the matching process online.
With these three market features in mind - rapid growth, North-South trade, and sensitivity to informationbased frictions - we turn to analyzing the basic economics of online markets for contract labor in Section 2.
In doing so, we consider the characteristics of both the demand and supply sides, stressing the incentives
that lead employers as well as contractors to utilize this channel. The main trade-off that we consider is
between the reduction in search, communication, monitoring, and transportation costs on the one hand and
the potential for new sources of information-related frictions to arise on the other. We then describe the
role that online contract labor platforms play in facilitating matches between demand and supply and in
addressing some of these trade-offs. Again, we use evidence from oDesk to provide an in-depth illustration.
Drawing on these insights regarding the basic economic properties of online markets for contract labor,
we outline a research agenda predicated on three lines of inquiry. These include: 1) distributional effects, 2)
market design, and 3) welfare. We describe each in turn.
In Section 3, we ask: How will the digitization of this market influence the distribution of economic
activity? We consider distribution along three dimensions. First, we contemplate the distribution of work
across geographies. Will digitization shift the distribution of contract work towards lower-income countries? Second, we question the distribution of income within and across countries. Will digitization further
accentuate income inequality by amplifying superstar-type distributions whereby only a small fraction of
contractors capture a large fraction of rents (although some of these individuals may be in lower-income
countries)? Finally, we raise the question of outsourcing. Will digitization lead to a shift in the distribution
of work across firm boundaries, constricting the boundary of the firm due to a lowering cost of contracting
out discrete jobs? The answers to these lines of inquiry regarding distribution-related effects of digitization
will have important implications for understanding the effect of digitization on the overall organization of
work and thus implications for social welfare.
Next, in Section 4, we raise this question: How might market design features influence matching in the
digital setting? We describe above the impact of ratings and feedback, a market design feature common
across most platforms. In the digital setting, platforms can add or change market features at reasonably low
cost. However, the ease with which they can be added, deleted, or changed belies the influence they may
have on matching outcomes. While contracting platforms employ many interesting market design features,

3

we focus our discussion on five: 1) performance feedback (e.g., ratings), 2) machine-aided recommendations
(for employers and contractors), 3) the allocation of visibility, 4) pricing to reduce congestion, and 5) job
category specification. Although platforms in the online contract labor market do not have the match-setting
power that is typically analyzed in the market design literature (i.e., directly matching trading partners in
settings such as kidney exchanges and medical student-hospital matching), they do influence which matches
are ultimately formed and under what terms. Thus, as market design features evolve, so will the types of
matches they facilitate.
Finally, in Section 5, we ask: How will the digitization of this market affect social welfare? In particular,
we specify two channels through which digitization may generate efficiency gains: 1) better matching, and 2)
better production. With regards to matching, the shift from local to global search along with the utilization
of market design features enabled by the digitization of relevant information may lead to efficiency gains.
With regards to production, a reduction in coordination costs that enables more flexibility in terms of the
location and timing (asynchronous) of work as well as a finer division of labor due to the feasibility of
contracting out smaller jobs, which enables more specialization, may lead to efficiency gains. At the same
time, however, new frictions may lead to new forms of welfare losses.
We conclude by outlining three primary challenges to this research agenda. First, offline data for this
sector is costly to obtain but is required to estimate the causal effect of digitization on changes in distributional properties (geography, income, firm boundaries) and welfare effects. Second, the economic salience of
particular market design features may be fleeting since the market is evolving quickly and subject to rapid
technological change. Finally, data ownership is concentrated among a few platforms that seem interested in
engaging with the research community but have interests that are not fully aligned. Despite these challenges,
this research agenda identifies opportunities to shed light on questions that are of first-order importance from
both a scholarly and economic relevancy perspective.

2

The economics of online contract labor markets

Like other digitized markets, the most salient features of online labor markets are the potential for a large
number of transactions and services to be provided by suppliers who may be geographically distant from
buyers. What are the implications for the demand and supply of services in this context? Who supplies labor
online? What entities search for online services, and what are the trade-offs they face? What institutions
contribute to clearing these markets? To address these questions, we begin by discussing how oDesk works.

4

This will frame the ensuing discussion on labor supply, labor demand, and market-making platforms.

2.1

Work Process on oDesk

To post jobs on oDesk, employers have to register on the site by giving their contact details and information
on their company, including name, owner, and location. Once registered, employers are free to post as many
jobs as they like. Job postings include a description of the task, the location of the employer, and the type of
contract being offered. oDesk supports two contract types—hourly wage and fixed price. Beyond the different
payment structures, the contracts have different implications for monitoring and duration specifications.
Specifically, when posting an hourly-wage job, employers have to specify the expected number of hours per
week and the number of weeks required to complete the job. They stipulate a limit on the number of hours
per week a contractor can work. When posting a fixed-price job, employers have to specify the budget and
deadline. Employers can make job postings public (so that any contractor can apply to them) or private (so
that only contractors they invite can apply to them).
To be hired on oDesk, workers similarly must register on the site by giving their contact details, name,
and location as well as by setting up a profile page. Profile pages are meant to advertise contractors to
potential employers and can include a description of skills, education, work experience outside of oDesk,
oDesk-administered test scores, certifications, whether or not they belong to an agency, and oDesk-specific
work histories and feedback scores. Once they have set up their profile pages, contractors can apply to jobs
by submitting cover letters and bids to job postings. A bid indicates the amount a contractor is willing to
be paid to work on a job.
Employers have the option to interview and negotiate over bids with applicants before hiring and to hire
as many contractors as they like. Once hired, contractors complete tasks remotely. Contractors submit their
work to employers online and are paid via oDesk. Employers have the option to give contractors bonuses
and can also reimburse expenses through oDesk.
After each job, employers give contractors a rating out of five based on six criteria: skills, quality,
availability, deadlines, communication, and cooperation. Each contractor also has an overall feedback score,
which is a job-size-weighted average of the individual scores. Contractors can provide their employers
feedback scores based on the same criteria; employers have a similarly constructed overall score. oDesk
provides this service in exchange for 10% of every transaction made on the site.
In addition to oDesk, Elance, Freelancer, and Guru are among the largest online contract labor markets.
Elance and Guru were both launched in 1999, followed by oDesk in 2005 and Freelancer in 2009. These sites

5

are similar in that they allow employers to find and hire short-term workers by registering on the platform
and posting jobs to attract applicants. Similarly, they all allow registered contract workers from around the
world to apply for jobs posted on the sites by bidding on them and to advertise themselves to employers
with profile pages. These platforms earn revenue by charging a percentage of each transaction or member
fees to workers and, in some cases, both. In addition to providing a (virtual) place for demand and supply
to meet and for the market to clear, these platforms have evolved over time toward addressing some of the
key challenges of labor markets in general and online labor markets in particular.
While the other major platforms in the industry share several features with oDesk, they differ on certain dimensions. The primary variations lie in the services they provide participants. For instance, some
support contractor employment agencies while others do not, some offer guaranteed payment for hourly
wage contracts while others do not, and at least one of the major platforms does not have a virtual office
application. Perhaps the most significant difference concerns Freelancer, which supports both traditional
hiring and crowdsourcing. Given that crowdsourcing has different implications for matching and production,
findings from research based on traditional hiring may not generalize to crowdsourcing settings.

2.2

Labor supply

What are the incentives for individuals to supply labor online? One of the most important benefits to having
access to online contract labor markets, especially for individuals participating from lower-income countries
who are more constrained in terms of opportunities, is that these marketplaces dramatically increase the
pool of available jobs. In addition to increasing the number of opportunities, they also increase the likelihood
that contractors will find suitable matches for their skills and preferences.
Contractors also benefit from an increase in flexibility in this market setting. For the most part, these
transactions are contract-based: workers are not employees and therefore have more control over their
schedules and how they allocate time between the provision of these services and other activities (e.g.,
another job, family, leisure, etc. (The Economist, 2010)). In a survey of workers on oDesk, more than 80%
state that the flexibility and freedom associated with working on the site is a major benefit of online work.
Evidence also shows that the flexibility provided by telecommunication contributes to a significant increase
in female labor force participation (Dettling, 2012). Thus, these online marketplaces may induce women
previously out of the labor market to enter. Especially for contractors in the developing world, who make
up the vast majority of workers, easier access to job opportunities from entities in higher-income countries
might also imply higher earnings.

6

Some of the characteristics leading to benefits in participating in these markets may also be sources of
costs and risks for contractors. In particular, the contractual nature of these labor relations might lead
to more uncertainty about the duration and conditions of a work relationship. The dramatic increase in
participation in these markets and the typical profile of participants as relatively highly educated suggest
that on balance these markets represent viable and appealing opportunities for a large set of individuals.

2.3

Demand for contract labor

The online market for contract labor offers several benefits to employers relative to traditional offline markets.
It lowers the cost of search, communication, and transportation, which benefits trade in various services,
such as data entry, translation, and software development. This also enables access to a broader pool
of prospective workers with potentially more suitable skills and possibly at more competitive wage rates.
Although oDesk has a range of organization types and sizes that use the platform, the access to a large and
diverse pool of contract workers provided by these platforms is particularly unique for small, entrepreneurial
ventures. For instance, in a survey of employers using oDesk, more than half consider themselves start-ups.
However, the relative lack of face-to-face interactions might make it difficult for employers to extract
high-bandwidth information (Autor, 2001). Furthermore, the increased heterogeneity of applicants make
comparisons among them more challenging; for instance, comparing seemingly similar school degrees or job
experiences of applicants from different countries may be problematic, particularly for novice recruiters. In
addition to hidden-quality problems, an obvious issue for prospective employers is the difficulty in monitoring
and verifying effort from a distance and through an Internet-mediated transaction.

2.4

Market-making platforms

Consistent with other two-sided markets, intermediaries in online markets take actions to ensure the participation of both suppliers and buyers (Armstrong, 2006; Rysman, 2009). As mentioned above, a key challenge
in online contract labor transactions arises from the limited access to high-bandwidth information about
both applicants and employers (Autor, 2001). Online contract labor platforms are increasingly providing
features that attempt to solve these information problems.2 First, platforms provide a verification and
standardization device for some of this information; for example, although offline work experiences and educational attainments cannot be easily compared across individuals, especially if they come from very different
institutional and cultural contexts, employers can more easily compare work experience accumulated by con2 Dellarocas

(2006) provides a review of reputation systems designed to solve information problems in online markets.

7

tractors on the platform (i.e., the number of jobs, duration, types, as well as performance as expressed by the
rating given by the employers and workers). This information is available in online contract labor markets
on contractor profiles, and platforms generally do not allow contractors to delete or block this information
from their profiles, thus reducing selectivity issues and increasing the reliability of these signals. Platforms
also offer the possibility for applicants to perform standardized tests that offer some easy-to-assess quality
measures for prospective employers. Moreover, some platforms support contractor agencies or companies.
Contractors in an agency can cooperate to apply for and complete jobs on the site. Some evidence illustrates
that agencies help reduce information asymmetries (Stanton and Thomas, 2012).
In addition to providing quality information, online contract labor platforms also help solve challenges
relative to the observability and verifiability of effort, on both the worker’s and employer’s sides, through
various mechanisms. Direct monitoring is available on some platforms through virtual office applications3 .
Contractors who perform their work while logged into these virtual offices are monitored through regular
screen shots and activity logs. To provide incentives for contractors to accept this degree of monitoring, some
platforms guarantee contractor payment for hourly wage work only if it is performed while logged into the
virtual office. Along with direct monitoring, workers’ ratings represent a potentially powerful reputational
mechanism for aligning their objectives with employer objectives.
Likewise and as in other online markets, moral hazard issues can arise on the part of employers (see,
for instance, Resnick and Zeckhauser (2002) and Cabral and Hortacsu (2010) for a discussion of moral
hazard in online markets). For example, employers could refuse to pay for work performed outside virtual
offices or to reimburse expenses. However, contract workers can rate their experience with an employer on
most platforms, thus reducing concerns about the risk of exploitative behavior and reneging on previous
agreements. Furthermore, both employers and contractors can file disputes if they feel they’ve been unjustly
charged or underpaid. Platforms act as mediators in these disputes and ultimately decide how they should
be resolved.
3 Evidence shows that strict monitoring is important for the success of working from home. Bloom et al. (2013) study a
Chinese travel agency that decided to try having some employees work from home. The study finds significant gains from
working from home in terms of worker productivity and satisfaction. This may be partially a result of the firm’s careful
monitoring of telecommuting workers. Dutcher and Jabs Saral (2012) highlight the difficulties that may arise if telecommuting
workers are not properly monitored by showing experimental evidence that non-telecommuting workers perceive that their
telecommuting counterparts are shirkers.

8

3

Digitization and the distribution of work

Keeping in mind the incentives and frictions facing employers and contractors that we described above,
we turn to contemplating how the digitization of this market may influence the distribution of work. We
consider and describe in turn distributional effects along three dimensions: geography, contractor income,
and firm boundaries.

3.1

Geographic distribution

The reduction in search, communication, and monitoring costs brought by the digitization of contract labor
markets raises the possibility of improving employer-contractor matching and thus enhancing gains from
trade. A consequence of this is a potential impact on the geographic distribution of work. Perhaps the most
immediate and dramatic gains are those based on cross-region wage variation. Indeed, the dramatic growth
in activity on oDesk seems to be primarily of this nature. Specifically, employers in high-income countries
hire contractors from low-income countries, even for small jobs that were previously infeasible offline due
to transaction costs. As reported in Figure 1, not only were there more than 10 times as many employers
from high compared to lower-income countries by late 2012, but the growth rate of employers from highincome countries was much higher than that from lower-income countries. The gap was even greater when
expressed in terms of the wage bill rather than the number of employees (Figure 2). Conversely, by 2013,
approximately 4.5 times as many contractors were from lower- compared to high-income countries (Figure 3).
The trends so far suggest that the spread will continue to increase over time since the number of contractors
from lower-income countries is growing at a faster rate. Figure 4 confirms this trend also exists in terms of
the total monthly wage bill, not just the number of contractors, despite the fact that, as one might expect,
wages are higher for contractors in more developed countries.
Although access to lower-cost labor is one reason for recruiting distant contractors, employers report other
reasons as well. In a survey of its users conducted by oDesk, 76% indicated that “remote is less expensive”
was a primary reason they were interested in using the platform. However, 46% selected “can get work done
faster remotely,” 31% selected “difficult to find local talent,” and 21% selected “no room/equipment.” Thus,
in addition to the reduced cost of accessing lower-wage workers, enhanced matching seems to benefit from
gains on multiple dimensions.
Countries vary in terms of their level of participation in online contract labor markets. For example, on
oDesk approximately 10 times as many contractors are from the Ukraine as from Spain, even though the

9

two countries are similar in size (populations in 2013: Ukraine 45m; Spain 47m; however, Spain’s economy is
approximately 10 times larger: 1.4 trillion USD compared to 0.165 trillion USD for the Ukraine). We illustrate
this in Figure 5, where we plot the number of contractors on oDesk per country against population. Nations
such as Mexico, Brazil, and China appear to be under-users (participation below what their population
would predict), whereas the Philippines, Bangladesh, and India appear to be over-users.
The variation in usage of this digital marketplace may simply reflect offline employment opportunities.
oDesk contractors from Bangladesh and the Philippines, for example, earn significantly more than local
minimum wages, perhaps partly explaining their disproportionate use of the platform. However, contractors
from China also earn significantly above the local minimum wage on average yet under-use the platform
relative to other nations. Furthermore, contractors from several countries, like Australia, earn only slightly
more than the local minimum wage, on average, and yet seem to be over-users. This variation reflects the
relative benefits and costs, including opportunity costs, faced by the labor force in each country. Factors such
as proficiency in English (the language used on the site), Internet access, and education levels all affect the
returns to engaging with a digitized labor market platform such as this. As these online markets grow, they
will provide researchers with useful data to better understand offline employment opportunities (particularly
where reliable government data is sparse) and the relative returns to different forms of education in a global
work environment. In addition, they will provide a setting for further analysis on the extent to which
geographic, language, cultural, and other forms of distance influence flows of trade in labor.
The different composition of online contract workers across countries may also explain the unexpectedly
high average wages received by contractors in certain countries, such as China, Poland, and Russia, as
reported in Figure 7. Contractors from these three countries in particular are primarily concentrated in
software development, information systems, and web development, which offer higher wages on average
than most other types of work on oDesk: by 2013, the average wage in software development ($16) was
approximately double that of writing and translation ($8) and more than triple that of administrative
support ($4) as well as customer support ($5) and sales and marketing ($5) (Figure 8). Furthermore, the
quarterly spend in software development and web development is significantly greater than in any other
category (Figure 9). We plot the concentration of total contractor wage bill by country over time in Figure
10. Russia and Ukraine stand out as especially concentrated in only a few sectors (software development in
particular)4 . In contrast, contractors from the US and the Philippines do work across many categories. This
variation in the geographic distribution of work by category likely reflects language, education, and offline
4 This is consistent with the geographic distribution of work on Kaggle, an online data science competition platform, where
software programmers are disproportionately located in Eastern Europe.

10

work opportunities. That said, Figure 11 indicates that software is one of the least concentrated sectors in
terms of the distribution of total wages across countries.

3.2

Income distribution

The digitization of contract labor markets may affect the distribution of income across workers. However,
the direction of this effect is ambiguous. On the one hand, digitization could amplify income inequality
by way of the superstar effect (Rosen, 1981), whereby the shift to lower search costs enables employers to
identify and contract for the best workers (or workers supplying the best value) in a global rather than local
context such that the distribution of the total wage bill skews further towards a minority of contractors.
On the other hand, digitization could reduce inequality due to more information leading to less mainstream
skills in the “long tail” being more efficiently matched (Anderson, 2006).
Researchers report evidence of both types of effects resulting from digitization. For example, Tucker and
Zhang (2007) find that when consumers on a wedding vendor website are able to see the popularity of a given
vendor, sales concentrate around the more popular vendors. This suggests that online feedback systems have
the potential to increase skewness. Elberse and Oberholzer-Gee (2008) find similar support for video sales.
In other cases, the reverse is true. Zentner et al. (2012) show that online video rentals are less concentrated
around blockbusters than physical rentals, Peltier and Moreau (2012) show that online book sales in France
are less concentrated around superstars than offline, and Brynjolffson et al. (2011) find that Internet sales for
women’s clothing are less concentrated than catalog sales. All of these papers identify search cost differences
as a core explanation for the results.
Superstar and long tail effects are not necessarily mutually exclusive, and both in fact may be at work
in the context of online markets for contract labor. This is because they are influenced by related but
distinct characteristics of the services traded in this market. Vertical differentiation (quality) drives the
superstar effect, whereas horizontal differentiation (variety) drives the long tail effect (Bar-Isaac et al., 2012).
Therefore, subject to demand constraints, they may coexist. The superstar effect will result in increased
income inequality as employers tend towards the highest quality (or best value) contractors based on a global
rather than local search. Thus, income will shift from contractors supplying the best value locally to those
supplying the best value globally. Increased demand will drive up the wages of the highest-quality workers,
mainly in cases where the spread is greatest between local and global wages (i.e., low-income countries). The
superstar effect may be exacerbated due to information asymmetries and features of the market.
At the same time, horizontally differentiated contractors (e.g., those who specialize in less common areas)

11

whose offline wages are lower due to limited local demand for their expertise may particularly benefit from
digitization since the shift from local to global matching may disproportionately increase the demand for their
skills relative to the supply. For example, a software developer in Malaysia who learns to program in a new
cutting-edge language (e.g., django) may benefit from digitization since by connecting to the global market
that contractor will likely face a greater increase in demand for that skill than an increase in competition
for supplying that skill.
In summary, digitization may shift the income distribution in a manner that benefits contractors with
skills that are vertically differentiated (i.e., higher quality), horizontally differentiated (i.e., scarce), or lower
cost (due to fewer local offline opportunities) at the expense of those with skills that are neither differentiated
nor low cost (i.e., mediocre quality, common skills, in high- or middle-income countries). The net effect of
such a shift is ambiguous, both at the country level and the individual level. At the country level, although
the immediate effect of digitization may be to decrease income inequality as the total wage bill shifts from
high- to low-income countries due to expanded search for skills and lower wage rates in low-income countries,
the resulting increase in productivity of firms in high-income countries may further increase offline wages
there, offsetting the effect of offshoring. At the individual level, while digitization will favor the highly
skilled relative to the less-skilled, particularly in high-income countries the services provided by a contractor
have increasing marginal costs, unlike products with low marginal costs such as music, books, and software.
Therefore, enhanced matching and constrained supply may at least partially offset increased competition and
thus temper the extent to which digitization amplifies the skewness of income distribution at the individual
level.
Information asymmetries may also affect income distribution. The available evidence shows that even
small amounts of (employer- or platform-provided) information have a large effect on future employment
prospects (Pallais, 2012; Agrawal et al., 2013). On the one hand, this may increase the skewness of income
distribution because contractors who obtain a small lead early on, in terms of online work experience with
a positive public employer review, may experience subsequent gains and benefit from increasing returns (at
least in the short term). On the other hand, to the extent that online markets facilitate low-cost trials for
employers to test working with novice contractors and then publicize their quality, the digitization of this
market may decrease skew through the increased public revelation of contractor quality. The fact that a
small amount of verified work experience online is associated with a disproportionate increase in winning
subsequent jobs for contractors in low-income countries (Agrawal et al., 2013) seems consistent with this
latter view.

12

3.3

Boundaries of the firm

How will the digitization of this marketplace influence the boundary of the firm? Economic theory suggests
that because digitization lowers transaction costs (search, communication, and monitoring), the returns to
contracting in the market increase relative to performing these services in-house. For example, Grossman and
Rossi-Hansberg (2008) model the tension between the benefits (lower cost of labor) and costs (coordination
and monitoring) of offshoring to examine precisely the effects of a decline in the cost of offshoring, focusing
on the productivity effect of increased offshoring. Similarly, Antras and Helpman (2004) present a model
of North-South trade where final-goods firms choose whether to vertically integrate into the production of
intermediate goods or to outsource them. Their model offers an explanation for variation in firm boundary
decisions (in equilibrium, some firms outsource while others do not, and those that do vary in their outsourcing location choice) based on the variation in firms’ productivity levels. Although the authors do not
focus on the effect of falling transaction costs associated with outsourcing per se, the influence of this on
firm boundaries is a natural implication of their model.
Several studies report empirical evidence that digitization is associated with a contraction in the boundary
of the firm. For example, Abramovsky and Griffith (2006) report that more ICT-intensive firms purchase a
greater amount of services on the market (rather than vertically integrating) and are more likely to purchase
offshore, Brynjolffson et al. (1994) report that investment in IT is correlated with a subsequent decrease in
firm size, and Hitt (1999) shows that an increase in IT use is correlated with a decrease in vertical integration.
A recent survey conducted by oDesk of its users sheds further light on the relationship between digitization
and firm boundary decisions. Two of the survey questions offer insight on how employers perceive the online
platform relative to alternatives for performing contracted work. One of the survey questions asks: “If there
had not been an appropriate oDesk contractor available for this project, then what would you most likely have
done?” Of the 6,912 respondents, only 15% indicated they would have turned to a local hire, whereas 22%
replied they would have worked extra hours, 9% replied they would have delayed or canceled the project, and
50% indicated that they would have used some other remote source. Although there is room for alternative
interpretations of these responses (for example, “other remote sources” could refer to other online contract
labor platforms such that the results under-represent the fraction who would hire locally in the absence of any
online platforms), one possible explanation is that the digitization of this marketplace directly affected the
boundary of the firm in only a minority (15%) of the cases. A second oDesk survey question asks: “Thinking
about the last time that you hired a contractor through oDesk, what alternatives did you consider?” In this
case, respondents were able to select more than one option. Again, only 15% selected “hiring an employee,”
13

whereas 58% selected “doing it myself.” Shifting from local to distant contractors appears to be a more
significant economic effect from the digitization of this market than contraction in the boundary of the firm.
Indeed, 40% of respondents indicated that a “local contractor” was an alternative they considered when they
last hired a contractor through oDesk.
It is important to note that the majority of oDesk users are small businesses (90% of 7,098 survey
respondents indicated that their business had 10 employees or less, with an overall average firm size of 2.6
employees). This raises the question of how the effect of digitizing this marketplace may vary across firm size.
For example, do small firms benefit disproportionately from digitization? We cannot draw this conclusion
simply from observing a high fraction of small-firm users. First, the 90% small-firm user population may just
reflect the distribution of firm sizes in the economy (interestingly, respondents reveal that 68% are part-time
businesses, 69% are home-based businesses, and the average firm age is 2.7 years). Second, the survey sample
distribution may not reflect the population distribution. Perhaps small firms are more likely to respond to
the survey. Still, one might conjecture that small firms are more likely to hire contract workers since large
firms are better able to aggregate tasks into full-time jobs and thus avoid the contracting and discontinuity
costs associated with task-based hiring.

4

Market design

Platforms in online contract labor markets do not have the match-setting power typical in other contexts
that the market design literature has considered (e.g. Roth and Peranson, 1999; Roth, 2002; Milgrom, 2011)
because, unlike kidney exchanges and medical student-hospital matching systems, they are not centralized.
However, an inability to set matches explicitly does not imply an inability to influence which matches are
ultimately formed and under what terms. The position of the platform vis-a-vis the marketplace is more like
that of a government that sets policies to encourage efficient market outcomes without dictating trades. The
platform decides how often and in what context participants are exposed to each other, what information
is collected by parties, and how this information is displayed. Platforms also set policies about what trades
are permissible, how entry is gained, what contracts and prices are allowed, and so on. The platform may
also make recommendations and set defaults. A few market-design decisions in this softer match-making
environment are worth considering to explore how these features affect matching.
First, platforms are in the position to provide standardized and verified information. For example,
because oDesk does not permit contractors to delete ratings or comments provided by employers after a job

14

is completed, this information is possibly distinct from what contractors might include in their resumes and
thus valuable to potential future employers. In the introduction above, we describe two studies that report
findings indicating that online work history information has a significant influence on subsequent matching
outcomes (Pallais, 2012; Agrawal et al., 2013). Furthermore, platforms can provide additional tools for
contractors and employers to reveal standardized and verified information about themselves. For example,
oDesk provides a series of standardized tests that contractors are able to take so that they may post their
scores in order to communicate their proficiency in a specific domain.
Given that wading through too much information is costly for a potential employer, does a simple overall
performance score convey an optimal amount of information? Would a more detailed scoring system enhance
matching? Pallais (2012) reports that detailed feedback had no effect on subsequent outcomes, relative to
simple feedback, for inexperienced contractors. However, for experienced contractors, the extra detail did
make a difference. Furthermore, the Pallais result may underestimate the effect of a more detailed rating
system since her feedback was conveyed via text rather than, for example, a simple ranking on five dimensions.
Given the apparently high sensitivity to ratings and feedback, further research into market design features
that address this particular type of information friction seems a fruitful direction for future research.
Second, because contractors have many decisions to make (such as what jobs to apply for, what wage to
bid, what skills to learn), as do employers (who to hire, whether to use a fixed or variable fee contract, when
to offer a bonus and how much), the digitized nature of these platforms, just like in other online markets, will
likely lead to the development of algorithmic assistance with decision-making. These recommendation systems will augment human decision-making by, for example, reducing the search costs of market participants.
One potential problem with recommending applicants is crowd-out. Recommending one worker presumably
puts another worker at a disadvantage. However, Horton (2012) shows that the quantity and quality of
matches can be improved via algorithmic recommendations to employers about candidates to recruit for
their openings, without significant crowd-out effects.
Aside from the obvious recommendations about who to trade with and at what terms, the platform can
also make other kinds of recommendations. It can, for example, advise parties of best practices in how to
manage a working relationship, such as suggesting more communication, periodic raises, and performance
evaluations. One interesting challenge of recommender systems is the trade-off between learning and recommending; recommender systems rely on natural decision-making to explore the space of alternatives to
train models, but sufficiently good recommender systems that save their users substantial costs are likely to
displace natural decision-making. So, maintaining some natural decision-making will eventually be costly,

15

at least to some users.
Another area where algorithmic recommendations might particularly influence matching is in helping
individuals make good decisions about the accumulation of human capital, particularly around which skills
to learn. Traditionally, such decisions are made a small number of times by relatively uninformed individuals
who receive one-time feedback about their choices. In offline markets, decisions about human capital investments are difficult to observe. Online, these choices are more visible and measurable. On platforms like
oDesk, an enormous amount of information illustrates which combination of skills command higher wages in
any particular domain. This enables recommender systems to distill which skills are most valuable to learn
given a contractor’s existing capabilities; the system further learns by observing how contractors perform
via experimentation.
Third, how should contract labor sites allocate visibility? Which applicants should be listed at the top
versus the bottom on an employer’s screen? The large size and value of the search engine optimization (SEO)
market provides some indication of the importance of visibility. Should allocation preserve assortativity (e.g.,
contractors with higher feedback ratings or hours worked are given more visibility)? Should each worker be
given at least some visibility? If visibility is auctioned off, what would be the efficiency and distributional
properties of such an allocation? While this topic has received much attention from researchers in the
private sector at companies like Google and eBay concerning other markets, it remains an open question
in the context of the market for contract labor. Yet, this issue is important. Market design decisions
concerning the allocation of visibility will surely influence matching outcomes, which in turn will influence
both distribution and welfare effects. Moreover visibility relates to congestion, which we discuss next.
Fourth, platforms may need to control congestion due to the fact that posting (and applying for) a job
is almost costless. The low cost of applications may lead to an everyone-applies-to-everything equilibrium in
which each application also carries virtually no signal value. This was partly the motivation for introducing
the AEA signalling mechanism (Coles et al., 2010), in which job-market participants are given two (and
only two) signals to send to schools. The school’s knowledge of the scarcity of signals makes those signals
informative. Accordingly, platforms may consider job application quotas. However, as described above, this
strategy might penalize new entrants with low probabilities of being hired (Pallais, 2012). It also ignores
employer heterogeneity, with some employers preferring many applicants and others few. Another potentially
interesting approach is to allow the employer to decide the cost of applying. These are additional areas for
research that reflect the peculiarities of this market.
A fifth interesting market-design feature is the creation of submarkets and categories that are often defined

16

through some combination of geography and time to coordinate activities and thus create a sufficiently
thick market (e.g., the creation of industrial districts for specific sectors). The platform must attempt to
define at some level of detail the various services being supplied and then organize the market accordingly.
In the language of machine learning, there is both a clustering task (finding the meaningful groups of
jobs/contractors based on historical data) and a labeling task (being able to assign a new job to one of the
identified clusters based on that job’s attributes).
The five market features we describe above represent only a fraction of those that may be important for
influencing the matching of employers and contractors as well as the way in which work is managed and
produced online. The unique feature of this line of inquiry, relative to the one described above concerning
distribution and the one below concerning social welfare, is that this research can be performed without offline
data. That is because online features can be compared against each other with respect to the behaviour they
elicit from users. So-called ”A/B testing,” which refers to controlled randomized experiments that allow for
identifying causal relationships between variations in market design features and subsequent user behaviour,
has already become a standard industry practise for determining the relative performance of competing
market design features. That is likely the reason that the majority of research concerning online markets for
contract labor relate to this line of inquiry whereas there is very little so far on the other topics.

5

Social Welfare

Two immediate consequences of digitization in this market may have important welfare implications. First,
digitization may lead to better matching because the pool of prospective workers and employers increases
dramatically due to the decline in costs associated with distance. Second, digitization may lead to efficiency
gains from production due to lower coordination costs. We discuss both lines of inquiry below.

5.1

Matching made easier?

The ease of access to online contract labor markets, due to the development of platforms such as oDesk,
Freelancer, Elance, and Guru, has the potential to considerably increase the pool of both job seekers and
employers and to reduce search costs. Matching models, particularly as applied to labor markets, predict that
this will lead to efficiency gains due to lower search costs and a lower likelihood of mismatches (Petrongolo
and Pissarides, 2001; Wheeler, 2001).
However, opposite forces are also at play. While information technologies reduce the role of distance for

17

search and execution of work, they also lead to a more heterogeneous pool of both workers and employers.
In addition, the absence of personal interactions typical of offline and more localized labor markets precludes
access to soft or high-bandwidth information about both job seekers and prospective employers (Autor,
2001). This introduces uncertainty that in turn may lead to an overall reduction in the quality of workers
(Akerlof, 1970) and/or to search frictions (Stigler, 1962). These search frictions could be exacerbated if
quality is difficult to determine (Wilde, 1981), which is quite possible because of the diverse labor pool.
Although theories of search and matching specific to online labor markets have not yet been developed,
a growing body of evidence, described above, points to the presence of these informational problems and the
ways in which they are addressed in online contract labor platforms, (Horton, 2012; Pallais, 2012; Stanton
and Thomas, 2012). A common pattern to a number of these studies is to look at the presence of preferences
for certain geographic locations of workers as a way to alleviate uncertainty about workers’ quality (Mill,
2011; Ghani et al., 2012; Agrawal et al., 2013). An implication here is that online contract labor platforms
contribute to the alleviation of informational asymmetries by providing verifiable, standardized information
(such as previous experience on the same platform) for all workers, regardless of their origin.
The broadening of the pool of workers and employers and, at least potentially, the increased likelihood
of good matches, is also likely to have implications for wages and income distribution. The fact that
in online contract labor markets the number of workers outweighs the number of employers in every job
category suggests that while many workers may be left unemployed, employers have a relatively good chance
of finding a worker who meets their criteria, with wages driven down (Petrongolo and Pissarides, 2006).
However, because worker backgrounds may vary more than in traditional labor markets, a relatively small
number of workers may meet the job requirements. As a result, wage offers could be higher than expected.
This suggests that in job categories with many qualified workers, the wages will be lower than in those with
few qualified workers relative to the number of job postings. As the market evolves, wage differences between
job types should begin to disappear.

5.2

Efficiency gains from production?

Digitization may lead to efficiency gains in production due to lower coordination costs that enhance, for
example, contractor flexibility, discretization of work into smaller jobs enabling more specialization, and
remote team work. For instance, Dettling (2012) reports that flexibility provided by IT contributes to an
increase in the female labor force participation. More broadly, digitization may enable efficiency gains in
production through lowering the cost of outsourcing.

18

Of course, outsourcing and offshoring predates the development of online contract labor markets. Of
particular relevance here are theories of service outsourcing and offshoring (e.g. Bhagwati et al., 2004; Francois
and Hoekman, 2010). Combined, these theories predict that the gains to service outsourcing are potentially
significant. However, they focus on relatively long arm’s-length contracts between relatively large firms
rather than on the short contracts between small organizations and individuals, typical of online markets.
Outsourcing services to online contract labor markets is also likely to lead to geographically dispersed
production, even within narrowly defined tasks. For example, work teams may be composed of individuals
who are not necessarily co-located. Lazear (1999) argues that cultural diversity in work teams is costly and
should only occur when skill complementarities exist between teammates to offset these costs. It may be
harder to meet these conditions in very diverse online labor markets than it is in more traditional labor
markets. Two recent studies based on online labor markets focus on task completion and the effects of team
organization, communication structure, incentives, and motivation on performance. Lyons (2013) provides
field experimental evidence on how nationally diverse communication impacts online team production and
finds that nationally homogeneous teams benefit from working together but that diverse teams perform better
when members work independently of one another. Related to the topic of online labor market partnerships,
Horton (2011) uses survey data from the crowdsourcing site Mechanical Turk to show that workers believe
employers on the site are more fair and honest than offline employers.

6

Conclusion

We identify three broad lines of inquiry as central to the digitization research agenda. All three focus on the
effect of digitizing the market for contract labor. The first concerns welfare effects, the second distribution
effects, and the third user behavior effects. All three are set in the context of the market for contract labor
but have broader implications for digitization in other settings.
Access to data will pose a challenge to fully addressing these questions. In contrast to data from online
platforms that collect information on hiring (as well as pre- and post-hiring) transactions at a granular level
and at low cost, it is costly to obtain even a basic level of offline contracting data. Yet, to fully address the first
and third lines of inquiry outlined above, offline data is required to estimate the causal effect of digitization
on changes in distributional properties (geography, income, firm boundaries) and welfare. This is likely why
most of the first wave of studies concerning the digitization of this market focuses on market design-related
subjects (e.g., experience, agencies, ratings) since these questions only require observing within-platform

19

variation in user behavior and do not require linking these data to non-platform-participants.
While the second line of inquiry concerning market design, information frictions, and user behavior is
largely spared from the requirement to link with offline data, the greatest challenge to this research in the
short and medium term will likely be the rapid evolution of the industry. As illustrated above, the industry
is growing rapidly. In addition, complementary technologies, such as those associated with mobile and social,
are changing rapidly. As such, market design features that seem salient today may be less relevant relative
to other features in the future. For example, monitoring technologies such as work rooms with screen shots
were only recently introduced and are already standard practice across many platforms. Furthermore, they
are likely to be replaced soon with better technology such as streaming screen video. While the ultimate goal
of research of this type is obtaining a deeper understanding of human behavior rather than of a particular
market design feature, the economic salience of the feature is often important for generalizability and yet may
be fleeting due to the rapid pace of change in this setting. Still, insight into user response to informational
frictions is an important contribution.
Whereas the distribution and welfare lines of inquiry are most likely to be led by scholars and policy
makers, the market design-related research will almost surely include important contributions from industry
since this issue is of first-order importance for product development and competition. This has already
been the case with oDesk (Horton, 2010, 2012) as well as with other market design issues on platforms
such as Google (Varian, 2007; Choi and Varian, 2012), eBay (Blake et al., 2013), and Yahoo (Ghosh and
McAfee, 2011; Lewis and Reiley, 2011). Industry interest coupled with their access to high-quality data may
significantly accelerate progress on this research frontier. At the same time, the competitive implications of
market design insights may inhibit the dissemination of this type of research, and thus the overall impact of
industry interest in this subject on the rate and direction of progress on this part of the agenda is ambiguous.
Given the role that platforms play as the central collectors of data in these markets, they will influence the
direction of research on all three lines if inquiry through their decisions regarding providing researchers with
access to their data. Early signs are promising for the research community since many of the most prominent
platforms have established Chief Economists or similar types of research-friendly leadership positions and
encourage employees to participate in the academic community by publishing their research and participating
at conferences and other scholarly events.
Given the rapid growth rate of the online market for contract labor, this research agenda is economically
important. The welfare-related line of inquiry will help us better understand the potential private and
social benefits due to the digitization of this sector of the economy. The distribution-related line of inquiry

20

will shed light on how the benefits of digitization may be allocated across countries and individuals as well
as its impact on the structure of the firm. Finally, the market design-related line of inquiry will provide
further insight into the importance of particular information frictions and human behavior in the digital
world as we explore user reactions to platform features, many of which are common across sectors outside of
contract employment. Overall, these insights will be of great interest to scholars, policymakers, and industry
participants alike.

21

References
Abramovsky, Laura and Rachel Griffith, “Outsourcing and Offshoring of Business Services: How
Important is ICT?,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2006, 4 (2-3), 594–601.
Agrawal, Ajay, Nicola Lacetera, and Elizabeth Lyons, “Does Information Help or Hinder Job Applicants from Less Developed Countries in Online Markets?,” 2013.
Akerlof, George A, “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84 (3), 488–500.
Anderson, Chris, “The Long Tail: How Endless Choice Is Creating Unlimited Demand,” 2006.
Antras, Pol and Elhanan Helpman, “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (3),
552–580.
Armstrong, Mark, “Competition in two-sided markets,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 2006, 37 (3),
668–691.
Autor, David H., “Wiring the Labor Market,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2001, 15 (1), 25–40.
Bar-Isaac, Heski, Guillermo Caruana, and Vicente Cuñat, “Information Gathering Externalities for
a Multi-Attribute Good,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 2012, 60 (1), 162–185.
Bhagwati, Jagdish, Arvind Panagariya, and T. N. Srinivasan, “The Muddles over Outsourcing,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2004, 18 (4), 93–114.
Blake, Thomas, Chris Nosko, and Steven Tadelis, “Consumer Heterogeneity and Paid Search Effectiveness: A Large Scale Field Experiment,” 2013.
Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying, “Does Working from
Home Work? Evidence from a Chinese Experiment,” 2013.
Brynjolffson, Eric, Thomas W. Malone, Vijay Gurbaxani, and Ajit Kambi, “Does Information
Technology Lead to Smaller Firms?,” Management Science, 1994, 40 (12), 1628–1644.
, Yu Hu, and Duncan Simester, “Goodbye Pareto Principle, Hello Long Tail: The Effect of Search
Costs on the Concentration of Product Sales,” Management Science, 2011, 57 (8), 1373–1386.
Cabral, Luis and Ali Hortacsu, “The dynamics of seller reputation: Evidence from ebay,” The Journal
of Industrial Economics, 2010, 58 (1), 54–78.
Choi, Hyunyoung and Hal Varian, “Predicting the Present with Google Trends,” Economic Record,
2012, 88 (s1), 2–9.
Coles, Peter, John Cawley, Phillip B. Levine, Muriel Niederle, Alvin E. Roth, and John J.
Siegfried, “The Job Market for New Economists: A Market Design Perspective,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (4), 187–206.
Dellarocas, Chrysanthos, “Reputation mechanisms,” Handbook on Economics and Information Systems,
2006, pp. 629–660.
Dettling, Lisa J., “Opting Back In: Home Internet Use and Female Labor Supply,” 2012.
Dutcher, E. Glenn and Krista Jabs Saral, “Does Team Telecommuting Affect Productivity? An
Experiment,” 2012.
Elberse, Anita and Felix Oberholzer-Gee, “Superstars and Underdogs: An Examination of the LongTail Phenomenon in Video Sales,” 2008.
Financial Times, “Virtual Working Takes off in EMs,” 2012.
Francois, Joseph and Bernard Hoekman, “Services Trade and Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature,
2010, 48 (3), 642–692.
Ghani, Ejaz, William R. Kerr, and Christopher T. Stanton, “Diasporas and Outsourcing: Evidence
from oDesk and India,” 2012.
Ghosh, Arpita and Preston McAfee, “Incentivizing High-Quality User-Generated Content,” Proceedings
of the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web, 2011, pp. 137–146.
Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,”

22

American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1978–1997.
Hitt, Lorin M., “Information Technology and Firm Boundaries: Evidence from Panel Data,” Information
Systems Research, 1999, 10 (2), 134–149.
Horton, John J., “Online Labor Markets,” Internet and Network Economics, 2010, 6484, 515–522.
, “The condition of the Turking class: Are online employers fair and honest?,” Economic Letters, 2011,
111 (1), 10–12.
, “Computer-Mediated Matchmaking: Facilitating Employer Search and Screening,” 2012.
Lazear, Edward P., “Globalisation and the Market for Team-Mates,” The Economic Journal, 1999, 109
(454), 15–40.
Lewis, Randall A. and David Reiley, “Does Retail Advertising Work? Measuring the Effects of Advertising on Sales via a Controlled Experiment on Yahoo!,” 2011.
Lyons, Elizabeth, “Team Production in International Labor Markets: Experimental Evidence from the
Field,” 2013.
Milgrom, Paul, “Critical Issues in the Practice of Market Design,” Economic Inquiry, 2011, 49 (2), 311–320.
Mill, Roy, “Hiring and Learning in Online Global Labor Markets,” 2011.
Pallais, Amanda, “Inefficient Hiring in Entry-Level Labor Markets,” 2012.
Peltier, Stephanie and Francois Moreau, “Internet and the “Long Tail versus superstar effect” debate:
Evidence from the French book market,” Applied Economics Letters, 2012, 19 (8), 711–715.
Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of the
Matching Function,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2001, 39 (2), 390–431.
and , “Scale Effects in Markets with Search,” The Economic Journal, 2006, 116 (508), 21–44.
Resnick, Paul and Richard Zeckhauser, “Trust among strangers in Internet transactions: Empirical
analysis of eBay’s reputation system,” Advances in Applied Microeconomics, 2002, 11, 127–157.
Rosen, Sherwin, “The economics of superstars,” American Economic Review, 1981, 71 (5), 845–858.
Roth, Alvin E., “The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimentation, and Computation as Tools
for Design Economics,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (4), 1341–1378.
and Elliott Peranson, “The Redesign of the Matching Market for American Physicians: Some Engineering Aspects of Economic Design,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 748–780.
Rysman, Marc, “The economics of two-sided markets,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2009, 23
(3), 125–143.
Stanton, Christopher T. and Catherine Thomas, “Landing the First Job: The Value of Intermediaries
in Online Hiring,” 2012.
Stigler, George J., “Information in the Labor Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 1962, 70 (5), 94–105.
The Economist, “Work in the Digital Age: A Clouded Future,” 2010.
Tucker, Catherine and Juanjuan Zhang, “Long Tail or Steep Tail? A Field Investigation into How
Online Popularity Information Affects the Distribution of Customer Choices,” 2007.
Varian, Hal R., “Position Auctions,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 2007, 25 (6), 1163–
1178.
Wheeler, Christopher H., “Search, Sorting, and Urban Agglomeration,” Journal of Labor Economics,
2001, 19 (4), 879–899.
Wilde, Louis L., “Information Costs, Duration of Search, and Turnover: Theory and Applications,” Journal
of Political Economy, 1981, 89 (6), 1122–1141.
Zentner, Alejandro, Michael D. Smith, and Cuneyd Kaya, “How Video Rental Patterns Change as
Consumers Move Online,” 2012.

23

7

Figures
Figure 1: Number of billing employers per quarter on oDesk, relative to total number of
employers in first quarter of 2009, by employer country income level

Number of distinct employers billing that quarter,relative to first quarter, 2009

9
●

●

8
●

Employer country type

7

●

High Income Country
Non High Income Country

●

6
●

5

●

●

4
●
●

3
●

●

2

●
●
●

1

0

●

●

2009

●

●

●

●

2010

●

●

●

●

2011

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

2012

Quarters
Notes: This figure uses data collected from oDesk to show the relative number of billing employers per
quarter, by country income status. We use the 2012 World Bank list of high-income countries for our
country classification. The base quarter is the first quarter (i.e., January, February, and March) for 2009.
Although the count looks like it is exactly 1 for HIC in 2009, it is slightly below—there were a small but
non-zero number of employers from lower-income countries during that quarter.

24

Figure 2: Quarterly wage bill on oDesk by employer country income level

●

●

$75,000,000

●

Employer country type
High Income Country
Non High Income Country

●

Wage bill per quarter

●

●

$50,000,000
●

●

●

●

$25,000,000

●
●
●
●
●
●

$0

●

2009

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

2010

●

2011

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

2012

Quarters
Notes: This figure uses data collected from oDesk to show the quarterly wage bill by the employer’s
country’s income status. We use the 2012 World Bank list of high-income countries for our country
classification.

25

Number of distinct contractors billing that quarter,relative to first quarter, 20102009

Figure 3: Number of working contractors per quarter on oDesk, relative to total number of
contractors in first quarter of 2009, by contractor country income level

●

10
●

●

9
Contractor country type
8

●

High Income Country
Non High Income Country
●

7
●

6
●

5

●

4

●

●

3

●

●
●

2

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

1

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

0
2009

2010

2011

2012

Quarters
Notes: This figure uses data collected from oDesk to show the relative number of working contractors
per quarter, by country income status. We use the 2012 World Bank list of high-income countries for our
country classification. The base quarter is the first quarter (i.e., January, February, and March) for 2009.

26

Figure 4: Contractor quarterly earnings on oDesk by contractor country income level

●

●

$60,000,000

●

Contractor country type
High Income Country
Non High Income Country

●

Wage bill per quarter

●

●

$40,000,000
●

●

●
●

●

$20,000,000

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

$0
2009

2010

2011

2012

Quarters
Notes: This figure uses data collected from oDesk to show the quarterly wage bill, by the contractor’s
country’s income status. We use the 2012 World Bank list of high-income countries for our country
classification.

27

Figure 5: Number of contractors per country on oDesk versus country population, on a
log-log scale

Notes: This figure uses data collected from oDesk to show the count of contractors who have ever worked
on oDesk by country, versus the 2012 World Bank estimate of that country’s population. Both axes are
log-log scale. We only include countries with 500 or more ever-active contractors.

28

Figure 6: Contractor mean hourly wage on oDesk by country, relative to that country’s
estimated local minimum wage

US UK

Notes: This figure uses data collected from oDesk to compare the mean hourly wage (log scale). To estimate
hourly wages, we restrict our attention to hourly contracts in the first half of 2013. Harmonized minimum
wage data is difficult to acquire. As a proxy, we use the Wikipedia estimates, as of May 2013.

29

Figure 7: Contractor mean hourly wages on oDesk, by country
China

●

Poland

●

Australia

●

Russia

●

Belarus

●

United States

●

United Kingdom

●

Contractor country

Canada

●

Ukraine

●

Spain

●

Vietnam

●

Romania

●

Bulgaria

●

Serbia

●

India

●

Indonesia

●

Egypt

●

Pakistan

●

Sri Lanka

●

Kenya

●

Bangladesh

●

Philippines

●

$0

$5

$10

$15

$20

Mean wage ($/hour)
Notes: We estimate hourly wages using a sample of all hourly contracts in the first half of 2013. We exclude
observations of less than 10 cents and more than $100, as these observations are more likely to not be true
hourly wages but rather individuals using the time tracking software provided by oDesk or approximating
a fixed price contract of some kind with a high hourly wage. For each wage estimate, we include a 95%
confidence interval. Note that for high population countries like India and Philippines, these confidence
intervals are so narrow that they appear to be point estimates.

30

Figure 8: Average hourly wage on oDesk per quarter, by job category
Administrative
Support

Business
Services

Customer
Service

$15
$10
●

$5

● ● ●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
●

● ●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●

● ● ● ● ● ●

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●
● ● ●

Mean hourly wage (USD)

$0
Networking &
Information
Systems

Design &
Multimedia
$15
$10

●

Sales &
Marketing

● ● ●
● ●
● ● ●
● ● ● ●
● ●

● ●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

$5

● ● ●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

$0
Software
Development
$15

●

●

Web
Development

Writing &
Translation

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ●

●
● ●

● ●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ●

$10
● ● ●
● ●
● ● ● ●
● ●
● ● ● ●

$5
$0
2010

2011

2012

2013

2010

2011

2012

2013

2010

2011

2012

2013

Quarters
Notes: This figure uses oDesk data to show the mean hourly wages per quarter in each of the main oDesk
categories of work.

31

Figure 9: Quarterly wage bill per job category on oDesk (log scale)
Administrative Support

Business Services

Customer Service

Design & Multimedia

Networking & Information Systems

Sales & Marketing

Software Development

Web Development

Writing & Translation

$10,000,000

$1,000,000

Quarterly spend (USD), log scale

$100,000

$10,000,000

$1,000,000

$100,000

$10,000,000

$1,000,000

$100,000

2009 2010 2011 2012

2009 2010 2011 2012

2009 2010 2011 2012

Quarter
Notes: This figure uses oDesk data to show the total quarterly wage bill by job category.

32

Herfindahl index of contractor category concentration (by wage bill)

Figure 10: Contractor job category concentration on oDesk by contractor country, over time

0.20

Russia
Ukraine

0.15

India

0.10

Philippines
0.05

United States
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Quarter
Notes: This figure uses oDesk data to compute a quarterly Herfindahl for a select number of oDesk
contractor countries. We compute the index by treating oDesk job categories as “firms” and contractor
countries as “industries.” To compute this measure, for each quarter, we estimate the share of dollars
earned by contractors from a particular country, in each category. We then report the sum of the square of
these shares. The higher the index, the more concentrated workers from that country. For example, if an
index is near 1, it would mean that nearly all workers from that country work in a single category.

33

Figure 11: Job category concentration on oDesk by contractor, over time

0.125

Administrative Support

Customer Service

Herfindahl index (by wage bill)

0.100

Business Services

0.075

Sales & Marketing
Writing & Translation

0.050
Web Development

Software Development
Design & Multimedia
Networking & Information Systems

0.025
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Quarter
Notes: This figure uses oDesk data to compute a quarterly Herfindahl for each job category, treating each
country as a “firm” and each category as an “industry.” To compute this measure, for each quarter, we
estimate the share of dollars within a category earned by contractors from each country. We then report
the sum of the square these shares. The higher the index, the more that particular category is dominated
by workers from a particular country. For example, if an index is near 1, it would mean that nearly all work
in that category is completed by workers from a single country.

34

