                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   TIME VARIATION IN ASSET PRICE RESPONSES TO MACRO ANNOUNCEMENTS

                                          Linda S. Goldberg
                                           Christian Grisse

                                        Working Paper 19523
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19523


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect
the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, the Swiss National
Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Katrin Assenmacher, Refet Gurkaynak,
Rolf Scheufele, and participants at the SNB's brown bag seminar and the 2012 annual meeting of
the American Economic Association (Chicago) for their comments, and Leslie Shen and Diego Gilsanz
for excellent research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Linda S. Goldberg and Christian Grisse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Time Variation in Asset Price Responses to Macro Announcements
Linda S. Goldberg and Christian Grisse
NBER Working Paper No. 19523
October 2013
JEL No. E43,E44,E52,F31,G12,G14,G15

                                             ABSTRACT

Although the effects of economic news announcements on asset prices are well established, these
relationships are unlikely to be stable. This paper documents the time variation in the responses of
yield curves and exchange rates using high frequency data from January 2000 through August 2011.
Significant time variation in news effects is present for those announcements that have the largest
effects on asset prices. The time variation in effects is explained by economic conditions, including
the level of policy rates at the time of the release, and risk conditions: government bond yields increase
in response to "good news", but less so when risk is elevated. Risk conditions matter since they can
capture the effects of uncertainty on the information content of news announcements, the interaction of
monetary policy and financial stability objectives of central banks, and the effect of news announcements
on the risk premium.


Linda S. Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

Christian Grisse
Swiss National Bank
Borsenstrasse 15
P.O. Box
8022 Zurich
Switzerland
Christian.Grisse@snb.ch
1    Introduction
A rich literature explores the consequences of economic news announcements, such as inflation
releases and employment payrolls reports, for asset prices, risk premia, and exchange rates.
These consequences are measured within windows that cover minutes or hours after the economic
data release, as in Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2003), and sometimes are assessed
in relation to the predictions of basic economic models containing interest parity conditions
and Taylor-rules for monetary policy, as in Gürkaynak, Swanson and Sack (2005) or Faust,
Rogers, Wang, and Wright (2007). When the economic news effects are assessed in light of
these models, they are viewed as informing how market participants view future interest rate
paths conditioned on updated views of trajectories of inflation and the output gap. In the
international setting, the news inform the relative trajectories of yields across countries, as well
as informing exchange rates and risk premia.
    The magnitudes of such effects of economic news are often discussed as if rules-of-thumb
underlie the relationships. Yet, there is little reason to expect that the relationships between
economic news and asset prices should be stable over time. Some studies provide relevant
insights, for example showing that the effects of Federal Reserve policy announcements change
in a zero lower bound environment (as in Kiley (2013) and Swanson and Williams (2013a,
2013b)). Policy regimes also play a role as central banks convince markets of the relative
importance of inflation and output priorities in a policy reaction function, as Goldberg and
Klein (2011) show: variation in economic news effects on European asset prices and on the
euro/dollar exchange rate are indicative of market participants having evolving perceptions of
the relative inflation aversion reflected in ECB policymaking.
    In this paper, we argue that time-variation in the effects of news on bond yields and exchange
rates should be viewed as an empirical regularity. This time variation could have a number
of sources, which we motivate in the context of Taylor-rule type models of policy reaction
functions. We conjecture that time variation arises as the policy outcomes of news change due
to a perceived reweighing of inflation and output preferences within reaction functions, due
to changing implications of a unit of news for forecasts of output or inflation as the state of
the economy shifts closer to or further from targets, due to changing risk preferences in the
economy, or due to the importance of financial stability conditions leading to a (short run) shift
of priorities of central banks. We document the time variation in consequences of US economic
news on the interest rates and exchange rates of the US, UK, Germany, and France using
high frequency data for the period from 2000 to 2011. Using econometric methods developed
by Müller and Petalas (2010) and Elliott and Müller (2006), we show that persistent time
variation is present to differing degrees in the high frequency data. We relate the observed
time-variation patterns to macroeconomic conditions, the level of the Federal Funds rate, and
to measures of risk. The level of interest rates and risk conditions have the greatest explanatory
power for changes observed in asset price responsiveness to news. In particular, while US bond
yields usually increase in response to “positive” US macroeconomic news, the increase is smaller
when policy rates and risk conditions are elevated.


                                                 1
        The role of risk in explaining time variation in economic news effects likely reflects two
possibly complementary channels. First, markets may view the Federal Reserve as less likely
to raise rates in times of increased financial turmoil, perhaps due to a latent financial stability
objective. Second, markets may place less weight on news announcements when the relationship
between these news and the economic outlook is more uncertain. The information content of
the news may be diminished when overall risk is elevated. Quantitatively, we find that the
responses of US 2-year bond yields to a one standard deviation surprise in non-farm payrolls
vary between -2 and +13 basis points (measured over the window including 5 minutes before
and after the release), compared with an average effect of 5 basis points between 2000 and 2011.
The bulk of that variation is explained by the level of the policy rate and the VIX index.
        Section 2 provides a brief review of the related literature. Section 3 describes our data and
empirical methods, and section 4 reports our baseline results for asset price responses to US
data announcements, as well as tests for evidence of gradual time variation in these responses.
Section 5 explores how asset price responses to news announcements vary with changes in
macroeconomic and financial conditions. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of the economic
relevance of time variation and open questions for research.


2        Relationship to the previous literature
A large number of papers has established that asset prices respond to macroeconomic data
announcements, and are thus directly linked to underlying economic fundamentals. Most papers
find that economic news is incorporated quickly (within minutes) into asset prices, with some
measurable persistence of these effects. Some types of news – for example, US non-farm payrolls
announcements – generate larger asset price responses than others. News which are more timely
(in the sense that the announcement date and the reference date are close together), more precise
(in the sense of being subject to smaller revisions on average), and contain more information (in
the sense of being better able to better forecast GDP growth, inflation or central bank policy
decisions) have a larger effect on asset prices (Andersen et al. (2003), Hautsch and Hess (2007),
Gilbert et al. (2010)).
        Several studies have also considered time variation in the effect of a given type of announce-
ment. In an early contribution, Cocco and Fischer (1989) find evidence that the response of US
interest rates to money announcement surprises is stable over time within a linear model where
the news response coefficient is assumed to follow an AR(1) process.1 More recently, a number
of papers have estimated the effect of news separately over different sample periods and tested
for parameter constancy. Using a Nyblom (1989) test, Faust et al. (2007) argue that the effects
of news are mostly stable over time. However, they also find evidence that some news effects
on asset prices have fallen over time in absolute magnitude. Fratzscher (2009) finds that posi-
tive US macro announcements were associated with an appreciation of the US dollar between
1994 and 2008, but with a depreciation of the US dollar between 2008 and 2009. Using rolling
    1
        See also Fischer (1989).



                                                    2
regressions and random effects models applied to data that span the period from 1993 to 2008,
Ehrmann et al. (2011) find that the responses of euro area bond yields to data announcements
became more similar across countries after the introduction of the EMU.
       A number of papers have gone beyond showing that time variation exists and have high-
lighted specific reasons for that variation. Four findings emerge. First, asset price responses to
news often appear to be non-linear: negative surprises have larger absolute effects than positive
surprises, and larger surprises generate a disproportionately larger response (Andersen et al.
(2003), Andersen et al. (2007), Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005), Hautsch and Hess (2007)).
Second, policy reaction functions are constrained by the existence of a zero lower bound on
interest rates (Swanson and Williams (2013a, 2013b) and Kiley (2013)). Third, the reaction
may depend on the state of the economy with news announcements have a larger effects on bond
yields during economic contractions (Andersen et al. (2007). The sign of the response of stock
prices to real announcements (unemployment) also depends on the state of the economy: higher
than expected unemployment increases stock prices in expansions and reduces stock prices in
recessions. This asymmetric response could reflect the effect of news on expected interest rates,
expected cash flows or the risk premium. As argued by Boyd et al. (2005), the discount rate
effect dominates in expansions (higher unemployment implies lower expected interest rates),
while the cash flow effect dominates in contractions (higher unemployment implies lower ex-
pected earnings).2 Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2007) find larger exchange rate responses to news
following weeks of high FX volatility, following a string of news announcements that surprised
markets in the same direction, and following a string of large surprises. They conclude that
uncertainty matters for the news response. Fourth, market participants may change their view
of central bank priorities. Goldberg and Klein (2011) argue that time variation in euro area
bond yield responses to news evolved in the years after the introduction of the euro. The
pattern of evolution was consistent with the markets viewing the ECB as having established
more inflation-fighting credibility after a few years of operation and responses to macroeconomic
conditions.
       Building on these earlier papers, we focus squarely on time variation in the response of cross-
country bond yields and exchange rates to US macroeconomic announcements. Relative to the
previous literature our paper makes three contributions. First, we provide a deeper evaluation
of time variation in the effects of economic news on asset prices, applying the econometric
techniques of Elliott and Müller (2006) and Müller and Petalas (2010). Second, we argue that
time variation should be viewed as the default condition and that asset price responses to news
should change with risk conditions and macroeconomic context, as well as with (likely less
frequent) changes policy reaction functions. Third, we test these propositions using a rich set of
data and over a relevant historic period. The high frequency asset price data covers the period
from 2000 to 2011, which encompasses the global financial crisis and changes in the state of the
macroeconomic and policy environment. The asset prices we examine in depth are bond yields
and exchange rates for the United States, Germany, France, and United Kingdom.
   2
    Conrad et al. (2002) show that the response of stock prices to earnings announcements depends on the level
of the overall stock market.


                                                      3
3        Data and methodology
3.1       Data
The data releases we examine pertain to United States economic activity, including those in-
dicators that have been previously established as important for generating price reactions, and
are those for which market expectations are available.3 We focus on only those data releases
that have announcement times of 8:30am Eastern Standard Time (EST), a restriction that fa-
cilitates our work of collecting high frequency asset price data over an eleven year interval and
still captures the majority of important US announcements. The data releases we include are:
the consumer price index (CPI, total and excluding food and energy), the change in non-farm
payrolls, the unemployment rate, GDP, housing starts, core inflation in personal consumption
expenditures (PCE), personal income and spending, retail sales less autos, and the empire man-
ufacturing survey. Data sources, frequency, and units are provided in Table 1. Most series have
140 observations for the 2000 to 2011 period, given that releases are typically monthly and the
sample spans about eleven years.


                                           [Table 1 about here]


        The economic news that lead to asset price updating are constructed, following the conven-
tion in the literature, as the difference between the actual release value and the markets’ prior
expectation of the contents of the release. The expectations data we use are median responses
from weekly surveys of market participants conducted by Money Market Services, a division of
Standard & Poor’s, for the early part of the sample and more recently from Action Economics
or Bloomberg News.4
        The bond yield and exchange rate series are constructed from high-frequency data drawn
from transaction-level databases from Thomson-Reuters, supplemented by BrokerTec data for
U.S. bond yields (Table 2). We focus mainly on 2, 5, and 10 year bond yields for the United
States, United Kingdom, Germany, and France.5 The exchange rates examined are euros (EUR)
and UK pounds (GBP), measured as US dollars (USD) per foreign currency.

    3
     Some examples are Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Vega (2003), Bartolini, Goldberg, and Sacarny (2008),
Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005), Faust, Rogers, Wang and Wright (2007), Fleming and Remolona (1999), Gold-
berg and Leonard (2003), and Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005).
   4
     Money Market Services were the source of these data through December 2003. Haver Analytics provided
continuous expectations and announcement data through 2005 using data from Action Economics. Gürkaynak
and Wolfers (2007) show that these data have been among the best performing expectations series for important
macroeconomic variables over the sample period that we analyze. Later period data were drawn from Bloomberg.
   5
     The BrokerTec data had the most complete coverage of U.S. 2, 5, and 10 year transactions in Treasuries.
However, these data report price information but not the yield. We compile the coupon rates for the 2-, 5-, 10
year treasury over the time period and use the price, settlement date, and maturity date to compute the yields.
Bond yields are constructed using the formula
                                                                             
                              redemption      rate         par    A      rate
                                  100
                                         + f reqency
                                                       −   100
                                                                + E
                                                                    × f reqency     f requency × E
                Y IELD =                   par     A       rate
                                                                                  ×
                                           100
                                                +  E
                                                      × f reqency
                                                                                         DSR


                                                      4
                                          [Table 2 about here]


    From the transaction-level observations we build observed prices for each date and time
window relevant for our analysis. The windows are chosen to allow for information diffusion
and to generate sufficient transaction observations at each date. The price at a time stamp
such as 8:25am in our analysis is constructed as the average of all transaction prices in the two
minutes on either side of the indicated time (so 8:23-8:27am in this example). In the case of
the spot exchange rate observations, the spot transaction prices are constructed as the average
of bid and ask prices, or just the bid or ask price if information on only one of the two prices is
reported for a transaction.
    Our empirical exposition presents results for asset price responses to news over the windows
from 8:25am to 8:35am, and from 8:25am to 4pm. We also have run all specifications for the
windows: 8-8:35am, 8-9am, 8am-4pm, 8:25-9am, and 8:25am-4pm. The exposition focuses only
on the short window and the long window since these results appropriately reflect the trade-offs
associated with window selection and implicit in prior studies. A tight time frame for market
reactions – as reflected in the 8:35 end time – has the advantage of capturing a spontaneous
market response. Yet the short window could be too abbreviated to capture analysis of news
by market participants and thus may miss the full market reaction. The broader time frame, as
reflected in a 4pm closing time, allows for a more thorough analysis of the information content
of the announcement, but, as stressed in Andersen et al. (2003), introduces the likelihood that
additional information during the longer time frame could bias the coefficients (if correlated
with the announcement surprise included in the regression) or cloud the significance of the
estimated effects.

3.2    Empirical methods
The empirical approach proceeds in three steps. First, the high-frequency asset price responses
to economic data surprises are estimated in a setting where the effects of news surprises are
assumed to be constant over time. This analysis complements earlier studies which have looked
at the same types of effects of news on asset prices but over different sample periods and using
different data sources. The results serve as an analytical benchmark for our subsequent analysis
of time-varying coefficients. In the second step, we employ econometric methods developed by
Elliott and Müller (2006) and Müller and Petalas (2010) to test for time variation in the effects
of data surprises on asset prices, and to estimate the parameter paths of these effects. Third,
we explore the contributions of macroeconomic and financial conditions to the observed time
variation in the effects of economic data surprises on financial markets.
where A denotes the number of days from the beginning of the coupon period to the settlement date (accrued
days); DSR is the number of days from the settlement date to the redemption date; E is the number of days
in the coupon period; and f requency is the number of coupon payments per year. For annual payments,
f requency = 1; for semiannual, f requency = 2; for quarterly, f requency = 4; rate is the security’s annual
coupon rate; redemption is assumed to be $100, for every $100 of the bond; and par is the quoted transaction
price in dollars for every $100 of the bond.



                                                     5
       For the first step we estimate the linear model:

                                                        K
                                                        X
                                         qt+ − qt− =          βk sk,t + εt                                     (1)
                                                        k=1


where qt+ − qt− is the change in asset price q over a time window from t− to t+ around t,
sk,t is the surprise component of the kth data announcement released at time t, and βk are
parameters assumed to be constant.6 US announcements made at t =8.30am Eastern time and
the alternative time windows t+ − t− have t− = {8am, 8:25am} and t+ = {8:35am, 9am, 4pm}.
The asset prices are both exchange rates (US dollar per foreign currency, in logs) and US and
foreign bond yields. The economics news surprises are defined as

                                                     xk,t − E (xk,t )
                                            sk,t =
                                                           σ
                                                           bxk

where E (xk,t ) is the median expectation from the surveys of market participants conducted prior
                                        bxk denotes the standard deviation of xk,t −E (xk,t ). We
to the release of announcement xk,t and σ
refer to “positive” surprises as those that indicate that the US economy is more expansionary
than expected, such as larger than expected payrolls, housing starts, GDP, manufacturing, retail
sales, income, spending, and smaller than expected unemployment. In terms of inflation, we
define positive surprises as higher than expected inflation. Higher inflation could reflect stronger
demand or more adverse productivity, wage, or cost conditions. As such, inflation news may
have less consistent effects on asset prices and exchange rates.
       We conjecture that the standard assumption that the slope coefficient βk in model (1) is
constant over time is likely to be unrealistic. This is especially the case over periods containing
business cycle variation and in periods of economic turmoil such as the recent global financial
crisis. The second step of our analysis tests whether βk is time-varying. If time varying, the
third step examines the economic mechanisms that explain the observed behavior of βk . We
allow βk to change gradually over time, rather than restricting βk to exhibit discrete changes
over a set of break points. Gradual movements in coefficients are economically more plausible
than discrete changes if market participants are learning and updating their expectations over
time. We consider the following specification:

                                                       K
                                                       X
                                         qt+ − qt− =         βk,t sk,t + εt                                    (2)
                                                       k=1

To test whether βk,t indeed varies significantly over time and to compute its path we employ
recently developed methods by Elliott and Müller (2006) and Müller and Petalas (2010). Elliott
and Müller (2006) suggest a quasi-local level test that for a wide range of models is asymptoti-
cally (in large samples) equivalent to the optimal test for a particular process of time variation.7
   6
     In our regressions we have either K = 1 or K = 2. Three pairs of indicators have simultaneous releases:
non-farm payrolls and the unemployment rate, personal spending and personal income, and CPI and CPI ex-food
and energy.
   7
     Elliott and Müller (2006) report simulations that show that using the small-sample efficient test rather than


                                                        6
That is, we do not need to make specific assumptions about the process for βk,t – for example,
assumptions about specific discrete break dates – and then employ a test that is valid and effi-
cient under these assumptions; a single test is sufficient, at least for sufficiently large samples,
to judge whether βk,t exhibits time variation.8 Elliott and Müller (2006) provide critical values
for the test, with the null hypothesis of parameter stability being rejected if the test statistic is
smaller (more negative) than the critical values.
    Müller and Petalas (2010) complement those tests with an algorithm that computes the
asymptotically accurate path for βk,t over time. They also show how to compute the approx-
imate equal-tailed posterior probability interval for the estimated parameter path. Strictly
speaking this is not a confidence interval, but rather an estimate of the interval that minimizes
weighted average risk. Using these methods we present the estimated parameter path for βk,t
in model (2) and report tests for whether the observed time variation is statistically significant.
In Section 5 we turn to sources of time variation.


4     Baseline results
4.1     Asset price responses to macroeconomic data announcements
The first set of results presented replicates the type of evidence in prior studies, and covers
the response of bond yields and exchange rates to US macroeconomic data announcements
using the standard specification of equation (1) with coefficients assumed to be stable over
time. Tables 3 and 4 summarize the results for the 8:25-8:35am and 8:25am-4pm windows.
The reported coefficients correspond to the average change in bond yields or the log return
in exchange rates over the window, expressed in basis points, associated with a one-standard
deviation news surprise. We expect the coefficients for exchange rates to be negative (so that
positive surprises are associated with an appreciation of the foreign currency relative to the
USD), while the corresponding coefficients for bond yields should be positive. The ex ante
sign of the effect of US inflation surprises is ambiguous, although one would expect a negative
coefficient for exchange rates and a positive coefficient for bond yields if central banks raise
interest rates more than one-for-one with inflation, for example as suggested by a Taylor-rule
type principle.

                                              [Table 3 about here]
                                              [Table 4 about here]

    The results are interesting. Consistent with earlier studies, most macroeconomic data an-
nouncements have highly significant effects on US bonds yields, across all maturities. By the far
the asymptotically equivalent quasi-local level test does not result in a significant loss of power in finite samples.
   8
     In the model
                                             yt = β1t x1t + β2t x2t + εt
the Elliott-Müller quasi-local-level test can be used to test whether either (1) β1t is time varying given that
β2t = β2 is constant, (2) β2t is time varying given that β1t = β1 is constant, or (3) β1t and β2t are jointly time
varying. Thus we cannot test time variation of β1t independently of time variation of β2t .


                                                          7
the strongest effects are due to news in non-farm payrolls. Where responses of US bond yields
to real activity announcements are statistically significant, they always have the expected sign:
announcements which show that real economic activity is stronger than expected are associated
with an increase in bond yields. Core inflation announcements have a statistically significant
impact on US bond yields across horizons, while headline CPI news (released in the same re-
port) are mostly not statistically significant and typically negative. Such a pattern of results
could arise if market participants expect the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates in response
to increases in core inflation, without a response to the more volatile CPI. For most announce-
ments, and in particular for those announcements with highly significant effects on US bond
yields, 2- and 5-year yields react more strongly than 10-year yields. This finding is consistent
with the hump-shaped response to US macro news documented by Faust et al. (2007).
   As expected the effects of US news surprises on US financial markets are much stronger than
their effects on foreign markets. The order of magnitude of news effects across European bonds
is similar for the German, French and UK yields, consistent with the results of earlier studies
such as Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005) and Goldberg and Klein (2011). However, over the full
interval of our study (2000 to 2011) and using the shorter response window (8:25-8:35am), most
news announcements are not associated with a statistically significant effect on foreign bond
markets, with the exception of non-farm payrolls. For GDP announcements some of the effects
are significant, but positive: stronger than expected US real activity is associated with a US
dollar depreciation within 5 minutes of the data release.
   Instead, Table 4 shows broader patterns of significant asset price responses over the longer
8:25am to 4pm window, where payrolls, unemployment, retail sales, core inflation and GDP
releases all enter significantly. The effects of non-farm payrolls on US dollar exchange rates
have the expected signs and are significant at the 1% level, with an R2 of between 0.16 and
0.22. Furthermore, whenever the news effects on exchange rates are statistically significant at
least at the 10% level, the corresponding coefficients have the expected negative sign, so that
positive US macro surprises are associated with dollar appreciation. Non-farm payrolls have the
expected significant effect on exchange rates only over the longer window. This result accords
with Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005), but contrasts with findings in the earlier literature, such
as Faust et al. (2007) and Andersen et al. (2003, 2007), all measured over earlier periods. A
potential interpretation is that foreign exchange markets may take somewhat longer to interpret
the international implications of US data announcements.

4.2   Time variation in the effects of news
Time variation in asset price responses to US macroeconomic data announcements is captured
using results from the Elliott and Müller (2006) quasi-local level test. The null hypothesis that
βk in regression model (1) is stable is rejected if the test statistic is sufficiently negative. If two
indicators a and b are released simultaneously, the test statistic for data release a corresponds
to the null that βa is stable, computed under the assumption that βb is stable as well.




                                                  8
                                                    [Table 5 about here]
                                                    [Table 6 about here]


       Tables 5 and 6 report the test statistics for alternative time windows. The null that the
responses of US bond yields over the 8.25-8:35am window to non-farm payrolls are stable can be
rejected at the 1% level. Thus, the economic news announcements with by far the largest effects
on markets have time-varying responses. For core consumer prices and GDP announcements
parameter stability can be rejected at least at the 5% level. Strong evidence also exists for
time variation in the responses of foreign interest rates to non-farm payrolls and unemployment
announcements over the 8:25-9am and 8:25am-4pm windows. For US dollar exchange rates there
is some indication of time variation in the responses to non-farm payrolls over the 8:25am-4pm
window. Overall, our results suggest that the standard assumption of parameter stability in
asset price responses to news is a good approximation for some news announcements, as Faust
et al. (2007) concluded using different tests, data, and estimation windows. However, the effects
of those announcements that are associated with the largest market movements – in particular,
the non-farm payrolls announcements, core CPI and GDP – exhibit significant time variation.9

4.3      Estimated parameter paths
In order to provide more in depth analysis of the magnitude and drivers of time variation, we
narrow both the set of asset prices and news announcements. In particular, we narrow the set
of asset prices to US 2- and 10-year government bond yields, comparable German bond yields,
and the EURUSD exchange rate. We focus mainly on US payrolls announcements, which have
the largest effects on markets as well as being the indicator with the strongest evidence for time
variation in asset price responses and clear ex ante priors on directional effects.
       Figures 1 and 2 present estimated parameter paths for the responses of US 2- and 10-year
yields to payrolls surprises, computed using the Müller and Petalas (2010) method, together with
   9
    Our findings of time variation in coefficient βk in regression (1) are not simply the consequence of our
assumption of a linear relationship between news surprises and asset price responses. As mentioned in section 2,
previous studies have found evidence for non-linear effects of macroeconomic data announcements, with negative
surprises having larger effects than positive surprises, and larger surprises having disproportionately larger effects.
In the alternative regression
                           K
                           X
                                 1lsk,t >0 β1kt sk,t + 1lsk,t >0 β2kt s2k,t + 1lsk,t <0 β3kt sk,t + 1lsk,t <0 β4kt s2k,t + εt
                                                                                                                        
             qt+ − qt− =
                           k=1

typically not all coefficients are statistically significant. However we still find evidence for significant time variation
in the coefficients βjkt for those macroeconomic announcements that have the largest effects on markets. Details
can be obtained from the authors upon request. Reasons for such asymmetry could be posited. For example,
policy itself may be asymmetric, with fast rate cuts and slow, smoothed rate increases. This would be the
case for a central bank that has financial stability concerns and thinks the Ricardian equivalence fails, with
the private sector being effectively net long holders of government debt. In that case, rate cuts will be fast as
these help private balance sheets but increases will be slow and these hurt holders of bonds, particularly banks.
Observationally, central banks do seem to be behaving this way and the asset price responses to policy may be
capturing that.




                                                                   9
an indication of the uncertainty associated with the estimates.10 The effect of news in non-farm
payrolls on US bond yields ranges between -2 and +13 basis points for a one-standard devia-
tion surprise. This compares to a highly significant 4-6 basis points estimate in the constant-
coefficient regression model. The estimated coefficient paths peak in 2004, during a period of
robust economic growth when the Federal Reserve began a series of 25 basis point rate hikes
(starting in May 2004). The timing of the estimated peaks also matches the statement by Fed-
eral Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan in February 2004 that the Fed was paying particular
attention to the payrolls data.11 The estimated effects of payroll surprises on US bond yields
decline in fall 2008, in particular during the months before and after the Lehman bankruptcy.
The response US 10-year yields over the 8:25am-4pm window briefly turned negative in fall
2008.


                                         [Figure 1 about here]
                                         [Figure 2 about here]


       While we provide a formal econometric decomposition below, this time variation is consistent
with intuitive arguments about the state-dependency and the roles of risk. One interpretation
of the 2004 peak is that investors expected that positive payrolls surprises would be followed
by further 25 basis point policy rate hikes. Their enhanced certainty about the policy path,
contingent on the state of output and inflation, facilitated investor willingness to trade on this
expectation given the news, leading to larger price reactions.
       As a second example, the 2008 episode illustrates how elevated risk conditions and macroe-
conomic conditions could induce time variation. At the height of the financial crisis measures
of risk were elevated, with several potentially off-setting implications for asset price responses
to news. First, the central bank could have been seen as less likely to raise rates (relative to the
prior path) following good news due to existing concerns about financial stability and growth,
and unable to cut rates following bad news due to the zero lower bound. Second, elevated
risk could have signalled that the relationship between macro announcements and subsequent
macroeconomic outcomes was more uncertain, leading markets to place less weight on the macro
news when updating their expectations. These first two effects would imply that US bond yields
rise less in response to good news when risk is elevated, and fall less in response to bad news.
Third, positive macro news could lead to a smaller risk premium and therefore to higher yields
on “safe-haven”assets such as US government bonds. Fourth, positive macro news should im-
ply an improvement of financial stability, raising the likelihood of tighter policy relative to the
prior path. These last two effects magnify the standard reaction of US bond yields to data
announcements.
  10
      The time paths are computed under the assumption that the coefficient on unemployment rate surprises
is constant, as suggested by the tests reported in Tables 5 and 6. If the coefficients on both payrolls and
unemployment are allowed to change over time the estimated time paths for payrolls are very close to those
reported here.
   11
      See Gürkaynak and Wright (2013) for a description of this episode.



                                                    10
       Similar effects are likely to be at play for foreign bond yields, with some modifications:
the response of the risk premium to macro announcements would depend on whether foreign
government bonds are considered “safe-haven”assets or not, the importance of financial stability
considerations would depend on foreign financial stability concerns, and the strength of the
spillover effects through trade and financial links with the US.12 Finally, the response of US
dollar bilateral exchange rates to macro announcements during the crisis should reflect the
movements of US and foreign interest rates, as discussed above, as well as the movement of the
risk premium of foreign currency versus the US dollar. For example, the finding in Fratzscher
(2009) that the US dollar appreciated in response to negative US data surprises rather than
depreciated (as is usually the case) in 2008-2009 could be interpreted as evidence for an increase
of the risk premium on foreign currency.13


                                            [Figure 3 about here]
                                            [Figure 4 about here]


       Figures 3 and 4 report parameter paths for responses of German 2-year yields and the
EURUSD exchange rate to non-farm payrolls announcements. Responses over the shorter 8:25-
8:35am window are very small in magnitude throughout the sample. In contrast, over the longer
8:25am-4pm window the response of German yields mostly mirrors that of US yields – most
notably, the effects on both US and German yields exhibit a sharp peak in early 2004 – but with
two differences. First, the responses are smaller in magnitude than those of US yields, consistent
with the observations of prior studies; and second, while the responses of US yields to non-farm
payrolls surprises declined in 2008, the response of German yields increased over the same
period. The movements of the EURUSD response and the responses of US and German interest
rates over the 8:25am-4pm window are consistent with uncovered interest parity. Quantitatively,
the response of US 2-year yields to non-farm payrolls increased from close to 0 basis points in
2003 to about 13 basis points in 2004. Over the same period the response of German yields
over the 8:25am-4pm window rose from around 1 to 4 basis points. Consequently, in 2002-2004
payrolls surprises were increasingly associated with a widening of the interest rate differential in
favor of US yields. This is in line with the decline in the EURUSD response to payrolls, so that
between 2002 and 2004 positive payrolls surprises were associated with a stronger appreciation
of the dollar. In contrast, in mid-2008 payrolls surprises were associated with lower yields on
US 2-year bonds but higher yields on German 2-year bonds. This is again consistent with the
response of the EURUSD exchange rate, which briefly peaked in 2008.
  12
    Habib and Stracca (2012) explore the empirical determinants of safe-haven currencies.
  13
    Alternatively, the US dollar may have appreciated as international investors scrambled for US dollar liquidity.
For a discussion of the drivers behind the US dollar appreciation in 2008 see also Kohler (2010) and McCauley
and McGuire (2009).




                                                        11
5         Exploring the sources of time variation
5.1        Empirical framework
In this section we formally relate time variation in asset price responses to news to changes
in macroeconomic and financial conditions. To fix ideas, suppose that market interest rates it
evolve according to the process:

                                        it = φt [Et (yt ) , Et (πt ) , Rt ]                        (3)

where φt (·) denotes some possibly non-linear function; yt is a measure of economic activity such
as the unemployment rate, the output gap or GDP growth; πt is the inflation rate; Rt stands for
“risk”; and Et (·) denotes expectations formed by market participants. This equation captures
the fact that, according to the expectations hypothesis of the term structure of interest rates,
longer-term bond yields reflect markets’ expectations about future short-term yields. Short-
term yields are determined by central bank policy decisions, which in turn are modelled as
some version of the Taylor rule. We include risk as one determinant of interest rates to capture
three separate effects. First, the central bank could have a financial stability mandate and
could thus directly react to increases in risk. Second, the risk premium on government bond
yields could depend on changes in measures of risk appetite. And third, risk could affect the
(perceived) forecasting power of macro announcements for subsequent economic outcomes.14
The subscript t of the function φt (·) allows for the possibility that the central bank reaction
function changes over time.
         The response of bond yields to the surprise component of some macroeconomic data an-
nouncement, st , is given by
                                                      3
                                            dit   X ∂φt dZit
                                                =                                                  (4)
                                            dst     ∂Zit dst
                                                     i=1

where Zit ∈ {Et (yt ) , Et (πt ) , Et (Rt )}. This equation presents three reasons why the response of
bond yields to macroeconomic data surprises of a given magnitude are likely to vary over time.
First, the implications of the surprise for market expectations of the relevant macroeconomic
variables, dZit /dst , could vary with the state of the business cycle. Second, the market-perceived
monetary policy reaction function could vary as ∂φt /∂Zit changes over time. This is naturally
the case if the Taylor rule is non-linear, that is if ∂φt /∂Zit itself depends on Zit . And third, the
reaction of risk premia to macroeconomic data announcements could change.
         The first case has received some attention in the literature, as discussed in section 2, with
dit /dst depending on whether recent data announcements have persistently surprised on the
upside or downside, on the absolute magnitude of past surprises, or on asset price volatility
before the release. These papers argue that this finding reflects changes in how markets interpret
the news surprise, i.e. reflecting time variation in dZit /dst . The second case of ∂φt /∂Zit has
some support from Hamilton et al. (2011), who use the response of fed funds futures to news
    14
    Engel and West (2005) and Engel, Mark, and West (2007) make this point forcefully in the context of
exchange rate models.


                                                       12
announcements, together with postulated updating equations for expectations of inflation and
output, to argue that market expectations of the Fed’s reaction function have changed over
time.15 Other support is provided by Goldberg and Klein (2011), who show that changing news
effects on euro area yields are consistent with a perceived firmer anti-inflation stance of the ECB
in its early years. The third effect of risk premia consequences from news has received limited
attention, with the exception of Faust et al. (2007) who combine estimates of the response of
US and foreign bond yields and exchange rates to macro announcements with the assumption
of a constant expected depreciation rate to deduce implications of announcement surprises
for foreign exchange risk premia. In their analysis, positive US macro news are interpreted as
associated with a decline in the foreign exchange risk premium required to hold foreign currency
investments.
       We explore how asset price responses to news depend on Zit by estimating two types of
specifications. First, we consider the regression

                                                            3
                                                            X
                                              βbkt = γ0 +          γi Zi,t + εt                                          (5)
                                                             i=1


where βbkt is the Müller-Petalas estimate of the coefficient on announcement k at time t from
regression (2). In this regression we adjust the standard errors of the estimates of γi to account
for the use of a generated dependent variable, as proposed by Dumont et al. (2005).16 This
specification permits a direct decomposition of the time variation in news effects into the com-
ponents associated with the economic state variables and with a risk proxy. Alternatively we
generate results by directly including these measures within the original regression framework:

                                                 K
                                                 X                 K X
                                                                   X 3
                                 qt+ − qt− =           δk sk,t +             τk sk,t Zit + εt                            (6)
                                                 k=1               k=1 i=1

These specifications allow for a differential impact of news surprises depending on the value
of Zit . The coefficients γk in (5) and τk in (6) capture the joint influence of the three effects
discussed in the previous paragraph. Note that since exchange rate returns can be decomposed
into the interest rate differential and a risk premium it is useful to similarly analyze exchange
rate movements following data announcements within these frameworks.
  15
     There is an active debate over whether monetary policy responses to macroeconomic conditions has changed
over time. See for example Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000), Sims and Zha (2006), Goldberg and Klein (2011),
and Hamilton et al. (2011). For evidence of non-linearities in the central bank reaction function see for example
Assenmacher-Wesche (2006) and Markov and Porres (2012).
  16
     In particular, let γ = [γ0 , γ1 , γ2 , γ3 ]0 and define Z as a T × 4 matrix whose tth row is Zt = [1, Z1t , Z2t , Z3t ].
Then we can estimate the unconditional variance of γ          b as
                                                              h            i
                                                         −1 0                         −1
                                          γ) = Z0Z         Z V ar βbk + σε2 I Z Z 0 Z
                                                       
                                  V ar (b
                                                                                                
Müller and Petalas (2010) show how to compute the T × T variance-covariance matrix V ar βbk , whose (t, t)th
entry is the variance of βbkt . For σε2 we use the Newey-West corrected estimate of the variance of the residuals of
(5).




                                                             13
5.2      Data on US macroeconomic and financial conditions
We employ the CBOE volatility index (VIX) as a measure of risk. The VIX is a key measure
of (risk-neutral) market expectations of near-term volatility conveyed by S&P 500 stock index
option prices.17 As the VIX index trades from 9:15-4:15pm (EST), the regressions use prior
day close values. We also use the target federal funds rate as a measure of the monetary policy
stance.
       We measure (expected) US macroeconomic conditions using data from three alternative
sources. First, we obtain real-time data for real GDP growth, PCE inflation and the unemploy-
ment rate from the Alfred database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. We compute the
US output gap for month t as the difference between real GDP for the last available quarterly
observation, say for quarter t0 , and potential output as of month t measured as HP-filtered real
GDP, filtered over quarters up to and including t0 .18
       Second, we measure the macroeconomic outlook using the survey of professional forecasters,
published by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. In particular, we proxy for the macroe-
conomic outlook on day t by using the latest available survey published prior to day t. Let t0
denote the quarter during which this latest survey was conducted. We measure the outlook for
the real economy as the mean survey response for real GDP growth between quarters t0 − 1 and
t0 +3, and the outlook for inflation as the mean response for CPI inflation over the same quarters
(growth and inflation rates are computed from the mean survey responses for the individual
quarters). We also use forecasts for the unemployment rate in quarter t0 + 3, as well as the
forecast for the change in the unemployment rate between t0 − 1 and t0 + 3.
       Third, we use the Citi Economic Surprise Index for the US as an aggregated measure of
whether US economic data announcements have been on average favorable or not over the
weeks preceding the release. This index is available daily, and we use the t − 1 value in the
regression where the dependent variable is as of day t. For each day, the index aggregates a
wide variety of US macroeconomic data surprises (actual data releases versus Bloomberg survey
median prior to the release) of macroeconomic data announcements over the past three months,
with declining weights for older releases. The weights are derived from relative high-frequency
spot FX impacts of one standard deviation data surprises.19 A positive reading of the index
indicates that economic releases have on balance been above the consensus.


                                             [Figure 5 about here]


       Each of these alternative measures of US macroeconomic conditions has advantages and
drawbacks for the purpose of explaining time variation in financial market responses to news.
  17
     See http://www.cboe.com/spx. Alternatively we use Libor-OIS spreads as a measure of risk, with similar
results. These results can be obtained from the authors upon request.
  18
     We filter out only long-term trends, setting the smoothing factor of the HP-filter to the relatively high value
of λ = 40000. This ensures that the US output gap is estimated to be positive at the end of the sample, as is
commonly thought.
  19
     See James and Kasikov (2008) for details.


                                                        14
Real-time data for output, unemployment and inflation has the advantage that it is available
on a monthly basis, and therefore may most accurately capture the data available on a given
day. In contrast data from the survey professional forecasters is available only quarterly and
can therefore be somewhat stale when explaining the effects of news on a given day. On the
other hand, the macro outlook is likely to be more important for markets and for monetary
policy makers than the current situation. Finally, the Citi Economic Surprise index is available
daily and therefore most accurately describes how the macroeconomic outlook has changed
recently, without capturing the actual level of economic activity and inflation. Time series for
these explanatory variables are reported in Figure 5. The VIX index and measures of forecast
dispersion tend to move together over the medium term. The VIX index in our regressions may
capture both the importance of risk or financial stability concerns and the role of investors’
uncertainty about the macroeconomic outlook.

5.3    Results
The sources of time variation in the responses to US payrolls announcements are similar re-
gardless of whether we estimate specification (5) or specification (6). For brevity, specification
(5) results are reported in Tables 9 and 10 in the appendix. Below, we focus the exposition on
specification (6) decompositions, which directly nests the effects of state variables on the impact
of payrolls announcements. Because non-farm payrolls and the unemployment rate are released
jointly we include both indicators in the regression. However, since only the payrolls response
was found to exhibit statistically significant time variation we include interaction terms for our
macroeconomic- and financial variables with payrolls only. The econometric results are reported
in Table 7 using the outlook for inflation and unemployment from the survey of professional
forecasters and in Table 8 using real-time data for inflation and unemployment. We only report
results for a baseline specification which includes year-over-year inflation, the unemployment
rate as a measure of economic slack, the VIX index and the Federal Funds rate as explanatory
variables. The results are robust to using alternative measures of inflation and real activity, as
well as to using Libor-OIS spreads in place of the VIX index as an alternative measure of risk.20


                                            [Table 7 about here]
                                            [Table 8 about here]


    The results confirm the strong effects of payrolls news across the US yield curve. While the
non-interacted payrolls news enters with the expected positive sign, macroeconomic conditions
and financial stability considerations strongly influence the magnitude and potentially the sign
of this effect both over the short and longer windows. In particular, taken together the results
from specifications (5) and (6) suggest that the VIX index and the level of the Federal Funds
rate are the most robust drivers of time-variation in the responses of US bond yields to macro
  20
     We do not report results for the Citi Economic Surprise Index, which is only available from 2003 and is found
not exhibit a statistically significant link with βbkt .


                                                       15
announcements. Yields rise in response to positive payrolls surprises, but the increase is smaller
when risk and the Federal Funds rate are high.
    Tables 7 and 8 show that risk conditions (proxied by the VIX index) are a highly statistically
significant determinant of time variation in the responses of US government bond yields. US
yields increase on average following positive payrolls surprises, but the increase is smaller when
risk is elevated. The coefficient on the VIX index is always negative and significant at the
1 percent level, across maturities and across time windows. A second important driver of
movements in US bond yield responses to payrolls announcements is the level of the Federal
Funds target rate. When the level of interest rates is already high, bond yields increase less in
response to positive payrolls surprises. The coefficient on the unemployment rate is negative
across specifications, but not always statistically significant. Finally, a somewhat puzzling
finding is that the coefficient on expected inflation is negative in Table 7, while the coefficient
on observed current inflation is positive in Table 8. Together these factors explain almost 7%
percent of the time-variation in responses of US yields.
    This broad pattern of findings carries over to German bond yields. Recall that German
yields show a statistically significant response to US payrolls announcements only over the
8:25am-4pm window. Over this longer window the coefficient on the VIX index is negative and
typically statistically significant. Where significant, the coefficient on the interaction term of
payrolls and the federal funds rate is negative as well. Finally, over the 8:25am-4pm window the
US dollar appreciates versus the euro on average, but less so when the VIX index is elevated.
This is consistent with the finding that the coefficients on risk conditions are always larger in
magnitude for US bond yields than for German bond yields: when the VIX index is elevated
the payrolls effect on US bond yields falls by more than that on foreign yields (relative to the
average effects), corresponding to a smaller than average appreciation of the US dollar versus
the euro.21
    To illustrate these results further Figures 6 (for the 8:25-8:35am window) and 7 (for the
8:25am-4pm window) decompose the estimated coefficients βbk for the response of US bond yields
from regression (2) into the contributions from the constant term, inflation, unemployment, the
risk proxy and the Federal Funds rate according to regression (5). The decomposition shows
that the 2002-2004 increase in US bond yield responses to payrolls mainly reflected a gradual
decline in the VIX index, while conversely the 2008 drop in the coefficient was mainly driven
by the sharp increase in the VIX. The effect of the jump in the VIX index in 2008 was large
enough to more than offset the simultaneous fall in the policy rate to zero.


                                            [Figure 6 about here]
  21
     As a robustness check, we also ran the same regression specifications with the 2003-2005 data excluded from
the sample. For the 8:25 to 8:35 window, the VIX interaction term remains negative and significant and FFR
remains negative but not necessarily significant. For the 8:25 to 4pm window, the effect of the VIX interaction
term is still negative, but with SPF data not significant anymore; the FFR coefficient sometimes turns negative,
but it is still negative when significant. The 2004 episode partly drives the results; but most results are robust
to excluding this episode (VIX and FFR remain mostly negative and significant; where significant the sign is
negative).


                                                       16
                                      [Figure 7 about here]


    Alternative channels for risk may be driving these results. Markets might expect the Fed to
react less strongly to positive macro news when risk is elevated potentially because of financial
stability concerns. Markets might place less weight on announcement surprises when the rela-
tionship between news announcements and the economic outlook is more uncertain. Note that
with δk > 0 and τk < 0 in specification (6) it is possible for US government bond yields to fall
following a positive US macro announcement surprise if the VIX index is sufficiently elevated.
On the forecast accuracy side, two preliminary but not conclusive pieces of evidence are that
the gap between real time GDP and inflation series and later revised actual data does appear
to be positively correlated with risk measures. In addition, the disagreement of macroeconomic
forecasters also tends to move together with the VIX index.


6    Conclusion
Time variation in the responses of government bond yields and US dollar exchange rates to
US macroeconomic news announcements is the default characteristic of these relationships. We
have made three main contributions to underscore this point. First, using high-frequency data
from 2000 to 2011 we provide evidence that asset price responses to news is time-varying both in
regular economic conditions and in more stressed periods, as reflected in our sample by the global
financial crisis. For those macro announcements that have the largest impact on markets, asset
price responses significantly vary over time. Time variation in news effects can be economically
important. For example, the response of US 2-year government bond yields to a 1 standard
deviation surprise in payrolls announcements varies over our 2000-2011 sample between -2 and
+13 basis points. Second, using recently developed econometric methods, we efficiently test
for and demonstrate gradual and large quantitative time variation in news effects. Third, we
show that time variation in news effects is related to changes in macroeconomic and financial
conditions. US bond yields usually increase in response to “good news”, but less so when risk is
elevated. We interpret this result as reflecting some combination of a market perceived financial
stability objective for the monetary policy in the United States and an influence of risk on the
uncertainty associated with the link between macro announcements and the economic outlook.
Spillovers to foreign markets are consistent with results along the US yield curve. However,
these are evident mainly in longer windows of time, for example hours after the announcement
takes place.
    These findings leave a number of questions open for future study. The combination of time
variation in asset price responses to news for exchange rates, bond yields, and risk premia, along
the lines of Faust et al. (2007), remains a promising avenue for future research. In particular, if
foreign exchange risk premia could be measured directly – e.g. by exploiting news effects on FX
volatility implied by options prices – we could better relate the results on asset price responses
and risk to exchange rate determination, building also on work of Engel, Mark and West (2007).


                                                17
In addition, disentangling the channels through which risk conditions enter the time varying
responses of markets will be a potentially fruitful avenue for further analysis.




                                               18
References
 [1] Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Fancis X. Diebold and Clara Vega (2003), “Micro
    effects of macro announcements: real-time price discovery in foreign exchange”, American
    Economic Review 93(1), 38-62.

 [2] Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Fancis X. Diebold and Clara Vega (2007), “Real-time
    price discovery in global stock, bond and foreign exchange markets”, Journal of Interna-
    tional Economics 73(2), 251-277.

 [3] Assenmacher-Wesche, Katrin (2006), “Estimating central banks’ preferences from a time-
    varying empirical reaction function”, European Economic Review 50(8), 1951-1974.

 [4] Bartolini, Leonardo, Linda S. Goldberg and Adam Sacarny (2008), “How economic news
    moves markets”, Current Issues in Economic and Finance 14(6), August 2008.

 [5] Boyd, John H., Jian Hu and Ravi Jagannathan (2006), “The stock market’s reaction to
    unemployment news: why bad news Is usually good for stocks”, Journal of Finance 65(2),
    649-672.

 [6] Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel and Lasse H. Pedersen (2009), “Carry trades and
    currency crashes”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, 313-347.

 [7] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (2000), “Monetary policy rules and macroe-
    conomic stability: evidence and some theory”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(1),
    147-180.

 [8] Cocco, Flavio and Andreas Fischer (1989), “Are announcement effects time depen-
    dent?”Economics Letters 30(2), 157-159.

 [9] Conrad, Jennifer, Bradford Cornell and Wayne R. Landsman (2002), “When is bad news
    really bad news?”Journal of Finance 57(6), 2507–2533.

[10] Dumont, Michel, Glenn Rayp, Olivier Thas and Peter Willemé (2005), “Correcting stan-
    dard errors in two-stage estimation procedures with generated regressands”, Oxford Bul-
    letin of Economics and Statistics 67(3), 421-433.

[11] Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher (2005), “Exchange rates and fundamentals: new
    evidence from real-time data”, Journal of International Money and Finance 24(2), 317-341.

[12] Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, Refet S. Gürkaynak and Eric T. Swanson (2011),
    “Convergence and Anchoring of Yield Curves in the Euro Area”, Review of Economics and
    Statistics 93(1), 350-364.

[13] Elliott, Graham and Ulrich K. Müller (2006), “Efficient tests for general persistent time
    variation in regression coefficients”, Review of Economic Studies 73(4), 907-940.



                                              19
[14] Engel, Charles and Kenneth West (2005), “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals”, Journal
    of Political Economy 113(3), 485-517.

[15] Engel, Charles, Nelson Mark, and Kenneth West (2007), “Exchange rate models are not
    as bad as you think”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, 381-441.

[16] Faust, Jon, John H. Rogers, Shing-Yi B. Wang and Jonathan H. Wright (2007), “The high-
    frequency response of exchange rates and interest rates to macroeconomic announcements”,
    Journal of Monetary Economics 54(4), 1051-1068.

[17] Fischer, Andreas (1989), “Policy regime changes and monetary expectations”, Journal of
    Monetary Economics 24(3), 423-436.

[18] Fleming, Michael J. and Eli M. Remolona (1999), “Price formation and liquidity in the U.S.
    treasury market: the response to public information”, Journal of Finance 54(5), 1901-1915.

[19] Fratzscher, Marcel (2009), “What explains global exchange rate movements during the
    financial crisis?”Journal of International Money and Finance 28(8), 1390-1407.

[20] Gilbert, Thomas, Chiara Scotti, Georg Strasser and Clara Vega (2010), “Why do certain
    macroeconomic news announcements have a big impact on asset prices”, working paper.

[21] Goldberg, Linda S. and Deborah Leonard (2003), “What moves sovereign bond markets?
    The effects of economic news on U.S. and German yields”, Current Issues in Economics
    and Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September 2003.

[22] Goldberg, Linda S. and Michael W. Klein (2011), “Evolving perceptions of central bank
    credibility: the ECB experience”, NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2010,
    153-182.

[23] Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack and Eric Swanson (2005), “The sensitivity of long-term
    interest rates to economic news: evidence and implications for macroeconomic models”,
    American Economic Review 95(1), 425-436.

[24] Gürkaynak, Refet S. and Justin Wolfers (2007), “Macroeconomic derivatives: an initial
    analysis of market-based macro forecasts, uncertainty and risk”, NBER International Sem-
    inar on Macroeconomics 2005, 11-50.

[25] Gürkaynak, Refet S. and Jonathan H. Wright (2013), “Identification and Inference Using
    Event Studies”, The Manchester School 81, 48-65.

[26] Habib, Maurizio M. and Livio Stracca (2012), “Getting beyond carry trade: what makes
    a safe haven currency?”Journal of International Economics 87(1), 50-64.

[27] Hamilton, James D., Seth Pruitt and Scott Borger (2011), “Estimating the market-
    perceived monetary policy rule”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3(3), 1-28.



                                              20
[28] Hautsch, Nikolaus and Dieter Hess (2007), “Bayesian learning in financial markets: testing
    for the relevance of information precision in price discovery”, Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis 42(1), 189-206.

[29] James, Jessica and Kristjan Kasikov (2008), “Impact of economic data surprises on ex-
    change rates in the inter-dealer market”, Journal of Quantitative Finance 8(1), 5-15.

[30] Kiley, Michael T. (2013), “Monetary policy statements, treasury yields, and private yields:
    before and after the zero lower bound”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-16,
    Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

[31] Kohler, Marion (2010), “Exchange rates during financial crises,”BIS Quarterly Review,
    March 2010, 39-50.

[32] Markov, Nikolay and Carlos de Porres (2012), “Is the Taylor rule nonlinear? Empirical
    evidence from a semi-parametric modeling approach”, working paper.

[33] McCauley, Robert N. and Patrick McGuire (2009), “Dollar appreciation in 2008: safe
    haven, carry trades, dollar shortage andoverhedging”, BIS Quarterly Review, December
    2009, 85-92.

[34] Müller, Ulrich K. and Philippe-Emmanuel Petalas (2010), “Efficient estimation of the pa-
    rameter path in unstable time series models”, Review of Economic Studies 77(4), 1508-1539.

[35] Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth West (1987), “A simple, positive semi-definite, het-
    eroskedasticity and autocorelation consistent covariance matrix”, Econometrica 55(3), 703-
    708.

[36] Nyblom, Jukka (1989), “Testing for the constancy of parameters over time”, Journal of the
    American Statistical Association 84(405), 223-230.

[37] Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha (2006), “Were there regime switches in U.S. monetary
    policy?”American Economic Review 96(1), 54-81.

[38] Swanson, Eric T. and John C. Williams (2013a), “Measuring the effect of the zero lower
    bound on medium- and longer-term interest rates”, Working Paper 2012-02, Federal Re-
    serve Bank of San Francisco.

[39] Swanson, Eric T. and John C. Williams (2013b), “Measuring the effect of the zero lower
    bound on yields and exchange rates in the U.K. and Germany”, Working Paper 2013-21,
    Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.




                                              21
                                     Table 1: US macroeconomic announcements

         Data Release               Source1     Frequency     First release    Last release     Units                 Obs.

         Nonfarm Payrolls           BLS         Monthly       1/7/2000         8/5/2011         Change MoM            140
         Unemployment Rate          BLS         Monthly       1/7/2000         8/5/2011         % rate                140
         Retail Sales Less Autos    Census      Monthly       1/13/2000        8/12/2011        % change MoM2         140
         CPI Ex Food & Energy       BLS         Monthly       1/14/2000        8/18/2011        % change MoM2         139
         CPI                        BLS         Monthly       1/14/2000        8/18/2011        % change MoM2         140
         Housing Starts             Census      Monthly       1/19/2000        8/16/2011        Millions              140




22
         GDP                        BEA         Quarterly     1/28/2000        7/29/2011        % change QoQ2,3       47
         Personal Income            BEA         Monthly       1/31/2000        8/2/2011         % change MoM2         138
         Personal Spending          BEA         Monthly       1/31/2000        8/2/2011         % change MoM2         137
         Empire Manufacturing       NY Fed      Monthly       11/15/2002       8/15/2011        Diffusion index       105
         PCE Core                   BEA         Monthly       6/30/2005        8/2/2011         % change MoM2         74

     1
       Acronyms for the sources: BEA, Bureau of Economic Analysis; BLS, Bureau of Labor Statistics; Census, Bureau of the
     Census; NY Fed, Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Acronyms for units: MoM, month over month; QoQ, quarter over
     quarter.
     2
       Seasonally adjusted
     3
       Annualized
                            Table 2: High-frequency exchange rate and bond yield data

         Asset                   Country               Source                       Data starts   Data ends

         Spot Exchange Rate      EURUSD                Thomson-Reuters              1/2000        8/2011
                                 GBPUSD                Thomson-Reuters              1/2000        8/2011




23
         Bond Yields1            France                Thomson-Reuters              1/2000        8/2011
                                 Germany               Thomson-Reuters              1/2000        8/2011
                                 United Kingdom        Thomson-Reuters              1/2000        8/2011
                                 United States         BrokerTec, Thomson-Reuters   1/2000        8/2011

     1
      Two, five and ten year bonds
     Notes: Exchange rates are expressed in terms of USD per foreign currency.
                       Table 3: Effects of news on asset prices: constant coefficient estimation for the 8:25-8:35am window

                                 Payrolls   Unemp      Retail    CPI-XFE       CPI    H-starts     GDP      PIncome     Pspend     Empire    PCEcore

             FX Spot
             EURUSD                0.54       0.74       0.36        0.58     -0.43     0.68      2.15**     1.21***     -0.37       0.87      -0.12
             GBPUSD                0.13       0.16      -0.59       -0.63      0.38     0.07       0.64       0.89**     -0.16       0.05      -0.08

             2-year yields
             US                  4.83***    1.88***    1.49***    1.41***      0.02    0.30**    1.80***      -0.16     0.31***    0.59***     0.31**
             DE                   -0.05      -0.03      -0.06      -0.08       0.06     -0.02     -0.17*      -0.06       0.03       0.09        0.03
             FR                  0.15**       0.04       0.05     -0.16**      0.09      0.02      -0.13     -0.10**      0.02     0.12**       -0.01
             GB                  0.13**      -0.04      -0.01      -0.06       0.07     -0.06      -0.05    -0.13***     -0.02      -0.03       0.04

             5-year yields




24
             US                  5.25***    1.74***    1.56***    1.49***     -0.03    0.30**    1.87***      -0.15     0.33***    0.69***    0.37***
             DE                    0.06      -0.04       0.00      -0.04      0.04      -0.02     -0.09       -0.04      -0.02       0.07       0.05
             FR                   0.07*      -0.03       0.02      -0.10      0.16      -0.04     -0.14       -0.01      -0.03       0.09       0.05
             GB                  0.10**      -0.07       0.03      -0.11      0.08      -0.05      0.07      -0.09**     -0.02      -0.01      -0.00

             10-year yields
             US                  4.01***    1.16***    1.33***    1.33***     -0.06   0.31***    1.53***      -0.01     0.26***    0.49***    0.36***
             DE                    0.04      -0.00       0.02      -0.01      0.02     -0.02      -0.07       -0.04       0.01       0.02       0.06
             FR                    0.03      -0.05      -0.02       0.04      0.03     -0.01      -0.06       0.01        0.01       0.01      0.11*
             GB                  0.09**      -0.05       0.06      -0.10      0.09     -0.05       0.03     -0.11***      0.02      -0.02      -0.01

     Notes: This table reports coefficients βk from regression (1). ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively, based on White
     standard errors. The announcement surprises in columns are: change in nonfarm payrolls, unemployment rate, retail sales less autos, CPI ex food & energy,
     (MoM), CPI (MoM), housing starts, GDP (QoQ, annualized), personal income, personal spending, empire manufacturing, core PCE (MoM). Exchange
     rates are expressed as US dollar per foreign currency. Yields refers to benchmark government bond yields.
                     Table 4: Effects of news on asset prices: constant coefficient estimation for the 8:25am-4:00pm window

                               Payrolls     Unemp        Retail   CPI-XFE       CPI    H-starts     GDP       PIncome     Pspend     Empire     PCEcore

           FX Spot
           EURUSD             -24.53***    -12.18***     -2.94       -0.70     -4.54     3.14     -16.85**      0.02      -9.83***     -5.39      -1.03
           GBPUSD             -17.56***     -9.25**      -2.29       -3.84      0.52     1.45       -7.19       3.79       -6.40**     1.91       -4.70

           2-year yields
           US                  5.92***        1.30*     1.72***     1.47**     -0.11      0.39     2.52**       -0.30        0.74     0.98**       0.84
           DE                  2.25***        0.81*      0.66*       0.60*     -0.20      0.08      0.94        -0.05        0.38      0.42        0.07
           FR                  2.39***       1.06**     0.67**       0.54*     -0.20      0.34     1.44*        -0.11       0.47*      0.43        0.16
           GB                  3.11***       1.24**       1.85      0.74**     -0.12     -0.05      0.95        -0.35        0.18      0.06       -0.37

           5-year yields




25
           US                  4.60***         1.00     2.21***      1.29*      0.14      0.10     2.32**       -0.29       0.76      1.14**       0.86
           DE                  2.65***        0.87*      1.04**     0.73**     -0.40      0.09     1.77**       -0.48       0.46       0.49        0.40
           FR                  2.53***        0.71      1.07**     0.95***     -0.29      0.04      1.32        -0.10       0.36       0.46        0.07
           GB                  1.91***       0.94**       0.52      0.74*      -0.55     -0.09      1.31*       -0.45       0.31       0.15       -0.29

           10-year yields
           US                  3.57***         0.78     1.49***     1.42**     -0.46     0.19        1.82*      -0.27       0.39      1.02**       0.96
           DE                  2.13***        0.69*      0.92**     0.81**     -0.46     0.16       1.32**      -0.02       0.44       0.36        0.50
           FR                  2.11***        0.47      0.77**      0.74**     -0.34     0.11      1.54***      -0.00       0.41       0.22       0.65
           GB                  2.03***       0.94**       0.75       0.46      -0.06     0.07        1.22      -0.57**      0.25       0.25       -0.13

     Notes: This table reports coefficients βk from regression (1). ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively, based on White
     standard errors. The announcement surprises in columns are: change in nonfarm payrolls, unemployment rate, retail sales less autos, CPI ex food & energy,
     (MoM), CPI (MoM), housing starts, GDP (QoQ, annualized), personal income, personal spending, empire manufacturing, core PCE (MoM). Exchange
     rates are expressed as US dollar per foreign currency. Yields refers to benchmark government bond yields.
                                Table 5: Tests for time variation in effects of news on asset prices, 8:25-8:35am window

                                 Payrolls     Unemp      Retail    CPI-XFE         CPI      H-starts     GDP        PIncome     Pspend     Empire     PCEcore

            FX Spot
            EURUSD                 -6.22       -3.77      -3.37       -3.61       -4.55       -4.78       -5.99       -4.54       -4.76     -7.79*      -7.21*
            GBPUSD                 -6.36       -3.60      -3.14       -3.50       -6.82       -5.37       -6.76       -4.16       -4.31    -8.57**       -4.85

            2-year yields
            US                  -14.58***      -5.97     -8.85**   -12.81***      -2.85      -7.58*     -8.55**       -2.63       -4.12      -4.33       -2.63
            DE                    -3.90        -6.23      -7.60*     -6.92        -5.00       -3.51       -3.23       -3.23       -5.16      -4.75       -4.64
            FR                    -6.20        -4.96       -3.20     -6.16        -3.38       -5.05      -8.01*       -2.76       -3.74      -6.12       -2.63
            GB                    -3.50        -3.35       -2.67     -3.34        -5.78       -4.49       -2.77      -7.85*       -4.79      -4.78       -5.34

            5-year yields




26
            US                  -14.68***      -5.36      -5.51    -11.62***       -3.27     -7.25*     -9.87**       -2.01       -5.16      -3.64       -2.82
            DE                    -5.10        -6.45      -5.80      -7.36*        -4.92      -5.27      -6.15        -2.48       -4.52      -3.96      -7.99*
            FR                    -6.36       -7.99*      -4.43       -6.30       -7.17*      -3.02      -7.08        -2.75       -5.03      -4.02       -6.58
            GB                    -3.68        -2.11      -2.56       -4.01        -5.71      -5.15      -5.90        -4.21      -7.49*      -5.11       -6.12

            10-year yields
            US                  -15.36***      -5.73      -4.69      -9.89**       -3.94     -8.19*     -10.25**      -0.98       -6.12      -4.68       -4.03
            DE                    -4.57       -8.66**     -4.23       -6.11       -7.27*      -4.45       -5.96       -3.32       -6.54      -3.22       -5.30
            FR                    -5.72        -4.91      -4.59      -8.97**       -4.13      -5.51       -5.85       -3.27       -4.09      -4.60       -5.95
            GB                    -3.84        -3.12      -2.68       -4.08      -8.51**      -2.41      -7.89*       -2.40       -6.87      -4.88       -4.70

     Notes: This table reports test statistics for the Elliott and Mller (2006) quasi-local level test. The null hypothesis that the coefficients corresponding to the
     announcements listed in columns are stable. The null is rejected if the test statistic is sufficiently negative. ***, **, and * denote rejection of the null at the
     1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. The announcement surprises in columns are: change in nonfarm payrolls, unemployment rate, retail sales less autos,
     CPI ex food & energy, (MoM), CPI (MoM), housing starts, GDP (QoQ, annualized), personal income, personal spending, empire manufacturing, core PCE
     (MoM). Exchange rates are expressed as US dollar per foreign currency. Yields refers to benchmark government bond yields.
                              Table 6: Tests for time variation in effects of news on asset prices, 8:25am-4:00pm window

                                  Payrolls      Unemp      Retail    CPI-XFE       CPI      H-starts     GDP      PIncome      Pspend     Empire     PCEcore

             FX Spot
             EURUSD                -8.04*        -4.05      -4.32      -4.34      -7.81*      -4.39      -3.17       -6.95      -4.34       -2.73      -3.35
             GBPUSD                -7.95*        -5.26      -4.27      -3.30       -4.40      -3.43      -4.81       -4.50      -3.09       -3.20      -4.99

             2-year yields
             US                    -8.42**       -3.26      -2.43       -5.02      -5.60     -7.58*     -8.35*       -4.30      -4.78       -5.11      -4.16
             DE                     -8.13*      -8.38**     -2.94       -5.20      -5.24      -6.83      -5.67       -4.93      -5.25       -4.27      -2.77
             FR                    -9.07**      -9.14**     -3.74      -7.18*      -5.14      -4.98      -5.71       -3.70      -5.83       -3.26      -3.26
             GB                      -5.62       -4.04      -2.98       -2.48      -2.43      -6.92      -3.12       -2.21      -5.10       -4.00      -3.29

             5-year yields




27
             US                   -10.54**       -3.61      -5.03      -3.36       -6.14    -10.38**    -8.45**      -2.90       -4.57      -4.13      -3.68
             DE                    -9.42**      -7.73*      -3.47      -4.36      -7.48*      -6.69      -4.19       -3.60      -7.79*      -3.85      -4.23
             FR                   -10.50**       -6.44      -3.53      -5.53      -7.77*      -6.16      -4.25       -3.96     -8.61**      -3.63      -2.97
             GB                    -9.52**       -6.78      -3.07      -2.65       -2.27      -5.41      -3.53       -4.69       -5.95      -4.24      -5.06

             10-year yields
             US                   -11.46***      -3.88      -2.53      -3.91       -5.39      -6.48     -8.55**      -3.27       -5.17      -2.89      -5.70
             DE                    -10.01**     -9.72**     -3.93      -3.83      -7.39*      -5.45      -3.12       -4.94       -5.72      -3.57      -4.52
             FR                     -8.98**    -10.29**     -2.85      -3.46       -6.67      -5.98      -2.70       -3.64       -5.88      -3.36      -5.37
             GB                     -9.10**    -10.76**     -2.86      -3.83       -6.90      -4.67      -4.75       -3.81      -7.21*      -4.77      -4.75

     Notes: This table reports test statistics for the Elliott and Mller (2006) quasi-local level test. The null hypothesis that the coefficients corresponding to the
     announcements listed in columns are stable. The null is rejected if the test statistic is sufficiently negative. ***, **, and * denote rejection of the null at the
     1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. The announcement surprises in columns are: change in nonfarm payrolls, unemployment rate, retail sales less autos,
     CPI ex food & energy, (MoM), CPI (MoM), housing starts, GDP (QoQ, annualized), personal income, personal spending, empire manufacturing, core PCE
     (MoM). Exchange rates are expressed as US dollar per foreign currency. Yields refers to benchmark government bond yields.
   Table 7: Sources of time variation in responses to non-farm payrolls: regression specification
   (6) using data from the survey of professional forecasters
                                       US yields                            DE yields                     FX
                             2-year      5-year     10-year       2-year      5-year     10-year       EURUSD


  8:25am-8:35am


  Payrolls                  32.10***   30.35***    25.06***        1.43*       0.60       -0.05           7.11
  Unemp                     2.23***     2.16***    1.51***         -0.03       -0.04      -0.01           0.66
  Payrolls × inflation      -5.12***   -4.39***    -3.62***       -0.48**     -0.21*       0.05           -1.62
  Payrolls × UR             -1.12***    -0.83**     -0.74**        -0.10       -0.03      -0.01           -0.63
  Payrolls × VIX index      -0.32***   -0.36***    -0.29***         0.01       0.00       -0.00           0.02
  Payrolls × FFR            -0.88**    -1.07***    -0.92***         0.00       0.03        0.00           0.10

      2
  R                           0.67        0.70       0.70           0.03       0.07        0.01           0.06
  Durbin-Watson               1.97        1.96       1.96           2.03       2.40        2.28           2.06
  observations                128         130         131           128        135         136            140


  8:25am-4pm


  Payrolls                  20.96***   28.80***    28.22***      15.37***    14.19***   10.72***       -213.30***
  Unemp                      1.50**     1.55**      1.27**        1.06**      1.15**      0.90**       -15.40***
  Payrolls × inflation        -1.85     -4.59**    -4.21***      -4.04***     -3.30**    -2.62**        41.60***
  Payrolls × UR               -0.46      -0.34      -0.77*         -0.24       -0.03       0.01           5.01
  Payrolls × VIX index      -0.30***   -0.47***    -0.41***      -0.13***    -0.18***    -0.13***       2.66***
  Payrolls × FFR              -0.51      -0.42       -0.50          0.09       0.07        0.11           1.87

      2
  R                           0.52        0.47       0.43           0.23       0.30        0.27           0.29
  Durbin-Watson               2.05        2.13       2.16           2.25       2.28        2.26           1.82
  observations                105         115         112           129        134         137            140

Notes: This table reports coefficients from regression (5). ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
level, respectively, based on White standard errors. Yields refers to benchmark government bond yields. Inflation and
UR are expected year-over-year CPI inflation and the expected one-year ahead unemployment rate from the survey of
professional forecasters. VIX index is the CBOE VIX index on the day prior to the news release. FFR is the federal
funds target rate.




                                                         28
   Table 8: Sources of time variation in responses to non-farm payrolls: regression specification
   (6) using real-time data
                                         US yields                           DE yields                   FX
                               2-year      5-year     10-year      2-year    5-year      10-year     EURUSD


     8:25am-8:35am


     Payrolls                 16.14***   16.46***    14.06***       1.29      0.12         0.21         2.69
     Unemp                    2.22***     2.13***     1.47***       -0.03     -0.05       -0.01         0.62
     Payrolls × inflation     4.21***      3.42**      2.08*        -0.89     0.08         0.05         1.46
     Payrolls × UR             -1.01**     -0.69*     -0.58*        -0.10     -0.04       -0.03        -0.66*
     Payrolls × VIX index     -0.30***    -0.33***   -0.26***       0.03     0.00**       -0.00         0.02
     Payrolls × FFR           -2.13***    -2.10***   -1.67***       -0.04    -0.04**      -0.03         -0.43

         2
     R                          0.66        0.69       0.68         0.07      0.06         0.01         0.06
     Durbin-Watson              1.87        1.90       1.87         2.17      2.48         2.32         2.03
     observations                126        128         129          121       128         129           133


     8:25am-4pm


     Payrolls                 14.38***   14.41***    16.05***       5.00      4.53         2.34      -120.66**
     Unemp                     1.47**      1.36*       1.05         0.86*    1.01**      0.82**      -14.47***
     Payrolls × inflation      5.24**      3.67*       1.24         0.39      1.05         1.36         12.10
     Payrolls × UR             -0.74*      -0.22       -0.49        -0.12     0.12         0.15         3.33
     Payrolls × VIX index     -0.35***    -0.44***   -0.36***       -0.05   -0.12***     -0.09***     1.73***
     Payrolls × FFR           -1.66***    -1.62***   -1.33***      -0.59*     -0.51       -0.42         5.98

         2
     R                          0.55        0.46       0.40         0.19      0.28         0.24         0.28
     Durbin-Watson              1.81        1.99       1.98         2.20      2.19         2.14         1.90
     observations                103        113         110          122       127         130           133

Notes: This table reports coefficients from regression (5). ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
level, respectively, based on White standard errors. Yields refers to benchmark government bond yields. Inflation and
UR are real-time data on year-over-year core PCE inflation and the unemployment rate. VIX index is the CBOE VIX
index on the day prior to the news release. FFR is the federal funds target rate.




                                                         29
                                             Response of US 2−year yields
                       20
                       15
       basis points


                       10
                        5
                        0
                       −5
                      −10
                        2000   2001   2002     2004    2005    2006    2008   2009   2010

                                             Response of US 10−year yields
                       20
                       15
       basis points




                       10
                        5
                        0
                       −5
                      −10
                        2000   2001   2002     2004    2005    2006    2008   2009   2010




Figure 1: Response of US bond yields to non-farm payrolls surprises, 8:25-8:35am window. The
parameter paths are computed following Müller and Petalas (2010). The coefficients correspond
to the time-varying effect of a one-standard deviation news surprise, in basis points. Dotted
lines represent the 95% equal-tailed posterior interval. Black solid lines indicate the baseline
estimate in specification (1).




                                                        30
                                                   Response of US 2−year yields
                             20

                             15
              basis points




                             10

                              5

                              0

                             −5
                              2000   2001   2002     2004    2005    2006    2008   2009   2010

                                                   Response of US 10−year yields
                         25
                         20
       basis points




                         15
                         10
                          5
                          0
                         −5
                        −10
                          2000       2001   2002     2004    2005    2006    2008   2009   2010




Figure 2: Response of US bond yields to non-farm payrolls surprises, 8:25am-4pm window. The
parameter paths are computed following Müller and Petalas (2010). The coefficients correspond
to the time-varying effect of a one-standard deviation news surprise, in basis points. Dotted
lines represent the 95% equal-tailed posterior interval. Black solid lines indicate the baseline
estimate in specification (1).




                                                              31
                                                      Response of DE 2−year yields


                                0.2
       basis points




                                 0

                        −0.2

                        −0.4
                                 2000   2001   2002    2004    2005    2006    2008   2009   2010

                                                         Response of EURUSD


                                 2
                 basis points




                                 0


                                −2
                                 2000   2001   2002    2004    2005    2006    2008   2009   2010




Figure 3: Responses of German 2-year bond yields and the EURUSD exchange rate to non-farm
payrolls surprises, 8:25-8:35am window. The parameter paths are computed following Müller
and Petalas (2010). The coefficients correspond to the time-varying effect of a one-standard
deviation news surprise, in basis points. Dotted lines represent the 95% equal-tailed posterior
interval. Black solid lines indicate the baseline estimate in specification (1).




                                                                 32
                                                          Response of DE 2−year yields

                                     6
                     basis points




                                     4
                                     2
                                     0
                                    −2
                                     2000   2001   2002    2004    2005    2006    2008   2009   2010

                                                             Response of EURUSD


                                     0
      basis points




                               −50


                        −100

                                    2000    2001   2002    2004    2005    2006    2008   2009   2010




Figure 4: Responses of German 2-year bond yields and the EURUSD exchange rate to non-farm
payrolls surprises, 8:25am-4pm window. The parameter paths are computed following Müller
and Petalas (2010). The coefficients correspond to the time-varying effect of a one-standard
deviation news surprise, in basis points. Dotted lines represent the 95% equal-tailed posterior
interval. Black solid lines indicate the baseline estimate in specification (1).




                                                                     33
                                             (a) real GDP growth                                                                        (b) output gap
             10                                                                                                5

                 5                                                                                             0
   percent




                                                                                           percent
                 0                                                                                         −5
                                 qoq               yoy                                                                    λ=40000                  λ=1600
             −5                                                                                       −10
               00                02           05         07         10       12                          00               02           05              07         10          12

                                            (c) unemployment rate                                                                    (d) core PCE inflation
             15                                                                                                3

                                                                                                               2
             10
   percent




                                                                                               percent
                                                                                                               1
                 5
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                            3m              3m/3m         yoy
                 0                                                                                         −1
                       00         02            05         07       10       12                                      02         04          06         08         10     12

                                       (e) real GDP growth forecast                                                                (f) CPI inflation forecast
                 4                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                          yoy
                 3                                                                                             3
       percent




                                                                                                     percent




                 2                                                                                             2

                 1                                                                                             1

                 0                                                                                             0
                  00             02            05         07        10           12                             00        02            05             07          10         12

                                      (g) unemployment rate forecast                                                                     (h) VIX index
             10                                                                                        100

                 5
   percent




                                                                                                           50
                 0
                                 level              change (percentage points)
             −5                                                                                                0
               00                02            05         07        10           12                                  00         02           05         07          10        12

                                       (i) Federal Funds target rate                                                           (j) Citi Economic Surprise Index
                 8                                                                                     100

                 6
                                                                                                               0
       percent




                 4
                                                                                                 −100
                 2

                 0                                                                               −200
                            00         02           05      07       10      12                                      04           06              08         10          12




Figure 5: Explanatory variables used in section 5. Panels (a) to (c) use US real-time data from
the Alfred database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Panels (d) to (g) use data from
the survey of professional forecasters.




                                                                                      34
                   Response of US 2−year yields non−farm payrolls, 8:25−8:35am

           20


             0


          −20

                        2002        2004         2006      2008        2010

                  Response of US 10−year yields non−farm payrolls, 8:25−8:35am

           20


             0


          −20

                        2002        2004         2006      2008        2010
                      const.        inflation        UR       VIX index          FFR


Figure 6: This chart shows contributions to βk,t from model (5), for the response of US govern-
ment bond yields over the 8:25-8:35am window.




                                                35
                   Response of US 2−year yields non−farm payrolls, 8:25am−4pm

           20


             0


          −20

                        2002        2004         2006      2008        2010

                  Response of US 10−year yields non−farm payrolls, 8:25am−4pm

           20


             0


          −20

                        2002        2004         2006      2008        2010
                      const.        inflation        UR       VIX index         FFR


Figure 7: This chart shows contributions to βk,t from model (5), for the response of US govern-
ment bond yields over the 8:25am-4pm window.




                                                36
Appendix: results for specification (5)


Table 9: Sources of time variation in responses to non-farm payrolls: regression specification
(5) using data from the survey of professional forecasters


                                     US yields                          DE yields                  FX
                           2-year     5-year     10-year       2-year    5-year     10-year    EURUSD


     8:25am-8:35am


     const.              20.75***    20.73***    17.76***       -0.13     0.10      0.11*        1.83**
     inflation             -0.98       -0.88       -0.76        -0.00     -0.01      -0.01        -0.16
     UR                    -1.06*      -0.88      -0.82*        0.01      -0.01     -0.01*      -0.20***
     VIX index           -0.18***    -0.21***    -0.18***       0.00      0.00       0.00         0.01
     FFR                  -1.31**    -1.42***    -1.24***       0.01      0.00       0.00         0.01

         2
     R                      0.49       0.54        0.58         0.32      0.62       0.58         0.66
     Durbin-Watson          0.22       0.25        0.29         0.14      0.23       0.08         0.11
     observations           128         130        131           128      135        136           140


     8:25am-4pm


     const.              16.73***     16.99**    19.33**       4.87**    6.19**     5.07**     -92.87***
     inflation             -0.78       -1.06       -1.16        -0.25     -0.37      -0.35        5.37
     UR                  -0.90***      -0.52       -0.92        -0.12     -0.10      -0.06        4.48*
     VIX index           -0.09***    -0.21***    -0.23***       -0.03   -0.06**     -0.05**     0.73***
     FFR                  -0.62**      -0.87      -1.00*       -0.28*     -0.34      -0.27      5.05***

         2
     R                      0.63       0.46        0.55         0.40      0.39       0.41         0.61
     Durbin-Watson          0.37       0.26        0.37         0.09      0.12       0.15         0.34
     observations           105         115        112           129      134        137           140

Notes: This table reports coefficients from regression (5). ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% level, respectively, based on standard errors corrected to account for generated dependent variables as
suggested by Dumont (2005). Yields refers to benchmark government bond yields. Inflation and UR are expected
year-over-year CPI inflation and the expected one-year ahead unemployment rate from the survey of professional
forecasters. VIX index is the CBOE VIX index on the day prior to the news release. FFR is the federal funds
target rate.




                                                     37
Table 10: Sources of time variation in responses to non-farm payrolls: regression specification
(5) using real-time data


                                    US yields                           DE yields                  FX
                          2-year      5-year     10-year       2-year    5-year     10-year     EURUSD


    8:25am-8:35am


    const.               16.64***   16.87***    14.86***        -0.10     0.09*     0.12***      1.99***
    inflation              1.40        1.15        0.51         -0.01     0.00       -0.02        -0.32
    UR                    -0.93*      -0.73       -0.68         0.00      -0.01     -0.01**      -0.20***
    VIX index            -0.20***    -0.23***   -0.19***        0.00      0.00       0.00          0.01
    FFR                  -1.62***    -1.65***   -1.38***        0.00      -0.00      -0.00        -0.01

        2
    R                      0.48        0.51        0.54         0.30      0.62       0.67          0.73
    Durbin-Watson          0.27        0.28        0.30         0.15      0.17       0.24          0.26
    observations           126         128         129          121        128       129           133


    8:25am-4pm


    const.               14.64***     12.87*     17.00**       3.33*      4.01       3.18       -77.64***
    inflation              0.06        0.83       -1.00        0.74*      0.94       0.72          1.25
    UR                    -0.79**     -0.33       -0.73         -0.09     -0.05      0.00          3.59
    VIX index            -0.09***    -0.22***   -0.21***       -0.03*    -0.06**    -0.06**      0.71***
    FFR                   -0.74**     -1.08*      -1.01*      -0.39**    -0.47**    -0.38**       5.25**

        2
    R                      0.58        0.43        0.51         0.40      0.38       0.39          0.53
    Durbin-Watson          0.29        0.26        0.30         0.19      0.19       0.20          0.25
    observations           103         113         110          122        127       130           133

Notes: This table reports coefficients from regression (5). ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% level, respectively, based on standard errors corrected to account for generated dependent variables as
suggested by Dumont (2005). Yields refers to benchmark government bond yields. Inflation and UR are real-time
data on year-over-year core PCE inflation and the unemployment rate. VIX index is the CBOE VIX index on
the day prior to the news release. FFR is the federal funds target rate.




                                                     38
