                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INFORMATION LOST (APOLOGIES TO MILTON)

                                           Catherine L. Mann

                                         Working Paper 19526
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19526


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2013




Excellent research assistance from Alok Mistry, who experienced his own data breach (stolen laptop)
during the course of this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Catherine L. Mann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Information Lost (Apologies to Milton)
Catherine L. Mann
NBER Working Paper No. 19526
October 2013
JEL No. F29,F5,L19,L86

                                            ABSTRACT

Vast amounts of information result from business and consumer search, communication, and
transactions. All this information can enhance market efficiency and consumer surplus as firms
tailor productsto buyers. But, there is increased risk of information loss. What issues should be
on the Digital Agendawith regard to information loss, and what data are available to inform and
generate incentives for consumer,business, and policy interactions in the information marketplace?
This paper reviews the situationand points out where we need more thought and more data.
Topics include: (1) Frameworks for analysis: How should we model the information marketplace,
particularly with regard to the benefits and costs of information aggregation and protection? (2)
Quantification and data: What is the evidence on the prevalence and nature of information loss,
and what are the costs of information loss, and to whom? (3) Market and Policy Response: What
do we know about the efficacy of market vs. other approaches to incentivize market participants to
avoid loss or remediate after information loss? Throughout, of particular interest is the international
dimension of the information marketplace. What issues arise when countries differ in their attitudes
and policies toward the information marketplace?


Catherine L. Mann
415 South St
Brandeis University
Waltham MA
CLMann@Brandeis.edu
   Abstract ........................................................................................................................... 1	  
I. Introduction .................................................................................................................... 3	  
II. Frameworks for analyzing the information marketplace and data breaches ................. 4	  
   Complete markets: The benchmark market structure .................................................... 5	  
   The Information Marketplace: Violating the complete-markets framework .................. 5	  
   Applying the Pollution Model to Information Flows ..................................................... 7	  
   Too Much Information: Trade-offs with Limits to Rationality ..................................... 8	  
   Multiple players, market power, and the role for disclosure .......................................... 9	  
   The Probability Distribution of Data Breaches ............................................................. 11	  
   Information Marketplace: Challenges to pricing and balancing benefits and costs ..... 12	  
III. Trends in Information Lost ........................................................................................ 12	  
   How much information is lost? And by what means? .................................................. 13	  
   What kind of information is lost? ................................................................................. 14	  
   Is there differentiation by sector? ................................................................................. 16	  
   Cross-border data breaches ........................................................................................... 22	  
IV. Market discipline vs non-market regulatory and legal discipline .............................. 24	  
   The Role for Disclosure ................................................................................................ 25	  
   Trends in Business Costs: Lost Business and Remediation......................................... 27	  
   Market Value of Stolen Information ............................................................................. 30	  
   Discipline by Equity Market ......................................................................................... 30	  
   Policy intervention: Standardization Amid Globalization ........................................... 31	  
   Legal recourse: Evolving Notion of ‘Standing’ ........................................................... 33	  
   Increased Information Security: The Costs.................................................................. 34	  
V: Considerations for the Digital Agenda ........................................................................ 35	  
   Conceptual Framework ................................................................................................. 35	  
   Data needs and analysis ................................................................................................ 35	  
   International jurisdiction ............................................................................................... 36	  
References ......................................................................................................................... 37	  




2
I. Introduction
The expanding scope of Internet use yields a widening array of firms with access to ever
expanding databases of information on individuals’ search, transactions, and preferences.
This information translates into consumers’ ease of transacting, range of complementary
purchases, targeted news and advertising, and other directed goods, services, and
information, all of which increase customer value—but which also raise the probability
and consequences of information loss. Similarly, firms have unprecedented windows
into customer behavior and preferences, with which they can improve products, segment
markets, and therefore enhance profits—but which also raise the probability of losing or
abusing information. The Digitization Agenda can help frame and balance the benefits to
firms and consumers of information gained with the risk and costs of information lost,
particularly in the context of increasingly global flows of information and transactions.

A first priority is a conceptual framework. Three key elements in the structure of the
information marketplace influence the valuation and balancing of benefits and costs.
First, information exhibits economies of scale and scope, which challenges the ability of
the market to efficiently price information. Second, participants in the information
marketplace are not atomistic, rather are asymmetric in terms of market power, which
affects the incidence and distribution of benefits and costs. Third, information loss is a
probabilistic event, but with unknown distribution, which challenges the valuation of
benefits and, particularly, costs. A final element is that the information marketplace is
global, populated by heterogeneous firms and consumers, and by policymakers who
differ in their policy responses to the imperfections in the marketplace.

A second requirement is empirical analysis of the frameworks. Mandated disclosure in
the United States of data breaches was the watershed to enable this study, and its
references. Without disclosure, it is impossible to investigate the risks and potential costs
of information loss as against the benefits of information collection and aggregation.
Disclosure helps reveal to consumers, firms, and policymakers the nature of data loss,
and may change incentives and affect the incidence and balancing of costs and benefits.
However, disclosure can be along a spectrum from every incident being announced to
everyone to only critical incidents being communicated to a few. In fact, there is no
global consistent approach to disclosure, nor even to the notion of disclosure at all, so the
window into the empirical valuation of costs and benefits of the information marketplace
is narrow.

Even so, evidence on how disclosure works is starting to emerge. If the market response
to disclosure is sufficient to apportion and balance costs and benefits, then, in principle,
no policy intervention into the marketplace is needed. So far, this does not appear to be
the case. More information on the nature of data breaches, on incidence of benefits and
costs, of market participant response, and on evidence of the efficacy of policy
intervention should help prioritize the Digitization Agenda.

This paper proceeds along the following path. The next Section reviews various
conceptual frameworks with which we can analyze the structure of the information
marketplace. Section III presents evidence on the extent and nature of information lost.

3
What are the trends: size of loss, sector of loss, source of loss, cost of loss, market value
of information, and so on, including in the global context. Section IV addresses market
and policy responses to information loss, as well as reviews legislative and legal
strategies that could complement market discipline. Particular attention is given to the
challenges of cross-border information flows, including differences in attitudes and
priorities toward data security. Section V concludes with priorities for the Digitization
Agenda.


II. Frameworks for analyzing the information marketplace and data breaches

That consumers gain from using the Internet is clear from increased competition and
reduced prices (Morton, 2006), greater variety (Goolsbee and Klenow, 2006) and faster
access to a wider range of public information (Greenstein and McDevitt, 2009; Yan,
Jeon, Kim, 2012). Wallsten (in this volume) continues the work to value the consumer
benefits of using the Internet. Yet, with rapidly changing technology and social
interaction, it is hard to pin down to exactly how large the increase in consumer surplus
might be and so there is much more work to do.

Using the Internet generates the information that is the basic building block of the
marketplace for information. A conceptual framework for the incidence and balance of
costs and benefits of information in this marketplace includes the valuing of consumer
gain from using the Internet, but it is a more complex framework with more players. For
simplicity, suppose the information marketplace is populated by originators of
information (say consumers, as they reveal their preferences through search and
transactions); intermediaries of the information (say, firms that transmit data, and those
that collect, aggregate, and retain information); and final users (say, firms that call on the
aggregated data to improve products). How should we model the interactions between
the information and the three players? Is the information atomistic or are there economies
and scale and scope in aggregation of the information into a database? Are the players
atomistic and equally numerous, or do they differ in concentration and market power in
their economic relationships? What about the nature of uncertainty? Answering these
questions help to determine to what extent the information marketplace is ‘classic’ in the
Adam Smith sense and ‘complete’ in the Arrow-Debreu sense, or whether it is a market
with imperfections.

Various authors have taken up the challenge of modeling the information marketplace,
some explicitly in the context of data breaches. The several papers reviewed below are
put into the context of a general framework that focuses on a market structure that
includes economies of scale and scope in data aggregation, multiple non-atomistic
players, an in an environment of uncertainty over the nature of data breaches and
consequences. In this kind of market structure it is challenging to value the cost and
incidence of a data breach. Further challenges are that the basic building blocks of
information may be valued differently across geographies and cultures, and the
probability of a data breach may have important attributes that factor into the calculation
of costs and benefits in the information marketplace.


4
Complete markets: The benchmark market structure

The purpose of outlining the characteristics of the perfectly competitive marketplace—
the Adam Smith marketplace—is to provide a benchmark against which the structure of
the global information marketplace can be assessed. If the environment for undertaking
information-rich activities is characterized by perfect competition, then Adam Smith’s
invisible hand—whereby each acting in his own self-interest—achieves the highest
economic wellbeing for all players.

In Adam Smith’s market, one-off transactions generate unique prices for each
transaction. In this classic marketplace, buyers, intermediaries, and sellers are all
atomistic. There are no databases with a history of a specific buyer’s transactions or
those of buyers of similar characteristics that create correlations between transactions
across time or across individuals. No information is retained, so no information can be
lost. Balancing the benefits of information exchange with the potential cost of
information lost is not an issue.

An extension of Adam Smith allows for transactions across time, proximity, currency,
and uncertainty. In the so-called Arrow-Debreu ‘complete’ market (Arrow and Debreu,
1954), economic instruments exist for all possible transactions that the set of market
participants can undertake with each other. A ‘complete’ market accommodates all
dimensions of a transaction through time, space, and under uncertainty and yields a
unique and market-determined price for that transaction in a frictionless world.

Whereas these transactions may be correlated and/or uncertain, the correlations of
transactions (such as interest rates and exchange rates) and uncertainties (probability of
default) are fully known (in the complete market), and therefore will be efficiently
embodied in the relevant prices. In a complete-markets framework, both private and
social optimum outcome can be achieved because there is a perfect (complete) and
frictionless match between transactions and atomistic market participants over all
possible states-of-nature and time. With full information about correlation and
uncertainty, prices will fully reflect benefits of information exchange, which can then be
balanced against the potential cost of information lost. There are no market
imperfections.

The Information Marketplace: Violating the complete-markets framework

In a number of ways the information marketplace violates key assumptions of the
complete markets framework, which makes pricing information difficult, and opens up
for consideration the topics of market imperfections and problems of ranking the second-
best. More specifically, without accurate prices, the benefit-cost calculation surrounding
information exchange as against information lost through a data breach will be very
challenging.

The first violation is the assumption that transactions are one-off or uncorrelated as in
Adam Smith. In fact, information is characterized by economies of scale and scope.

5
That is, the value of information over a series of transactions for an individual is greater
than the sum of the individual transactions because of the correlations across the
individual’s behavior: Economies of scale. The value of information aggregated over
many individuals is greater than the sum of any individual’s set because of the
correlations across individuals: Economies of scope.

Even if each unique piece of information had a uniquely matched price, there would be
an incomplete mapping between the value of that morsel of information by itself, its
value in one database, and its value if two (or N) databases are merged together.1
Databases, which are the product of the information marketplace, are characterized by
economies of scale and scope so that the pricing of information is imperfect, unless there
is full information about all the correlations. Because the information marketplace and its
players are evolving rapidly with technology and Internet use, it is clear that the
correlations needed for the complete-markets framework cannot be known.

The second challenge that the information marketplace brings to the complete-markets
framework is the nature of uncertainty. Uncertainty enters the information marketplace
through the possible mis-use of information. A complete markets set-up could, in theory,
price insurance that pays-off in the case of a data breach, but such price determination in
the information marketplace, in practice, is nearly impossible.

The information marketplace exhibits two types of uncertainty that are difficult to price.
First and most challenging, is the potential correlation over time of information lost. A
data breach today cannot be valued with certainty because the value of the information
lost today is a function of all possible data breaches in the future. Future data breaches
matter for today’s valuation of information lost because of the unknown relationship
between the information lost in today’s breach with the information lost in a future
breach. Economies of scale and scope in information in the future affect valuation in the
present.

The second type of uncertainty is that information lost may not be information abused.
The cost of information lost should differ depending on whether the lost information is
used maliciously or not. The two uncertainties together make valuing information lost
quite difficult. The insurance contracts, which are key instruments in the complete
market framework, are not likely to exist.

The third violation of the assumptions that underpin the complete-markets benchmark
model is that the players are not atomistic. Recall that the information marketplace has
consumers (originators of information), intermediaries (transmitters and aggregators);
and firms (that use information to improve products). Consumers are numerous. Firms
are numerous. Transmitters and aggregators are concentrated and have several types of
market power that will affect the price and value of information and therefore influence

1
 Another way to think about the economies of scope in information in databases is to
consider the diversification gains associated with merging two not-identical financial
portfolios.
6
cost-benefit calculations associated with information exchange, information security, and
information loss. Moreover, the degree of market power and the rules under which the
intermediaries operate vary substantially across countries and policy environments.

These violations of the complete markets framework offer jumping-off points for
research. The following selected papers focus on modeling the information marketplace.
Some papers specifically address how to model the cost-benefit calculation in the case of
information lost. 2

Applying the Pollution Model to Information Flows

Pollution seems like a good analogy for the information marketplace: Pollution has
(negative) economies of scale, asymmetric market position of participants (upstream-
downstream), and uncertainties as to costs and benefits of exposure and remediation.
Hirsch (2006) uses the pollution model and focuses on the negative economies of scale.
He presumes that collecting and aggregating personal information generates negative
externalities. ‘There is a growing sense that the digital age is causing unprecedented
damage to privacy…. digital economy businesses often do not bear the cost of the harms
that they inflict’.

Just as pollution is an outcome of production, so too is information aggregation an
externality of ‘production’ (search and transaction on the Internet). In the pollution-
model of the information marketplace, no data breach is necessary to generate harm.
Aggregation alone departs from the complete-markets framework. With the economy of
scale inherent in information aggregation, there will be a price wedge between the
valuation of information by the consumer and by intermediaries and firms in the
marketplace.

Hirsh continues with the pollution analogy and reviews the evolution of policy strategy
from ‘command and control’ compliance (quantities) to ‘second-generation’ (prices) or
‘outcome oriented’ policy whereby the regulated entities find their own cost-effective
strategy to achieve the legislated goal. Tang, Hu, and Smith (2007) take these strategies
to the information marketplace. They model information collection looking through the
lens of consumer preferences for trust. Standardized regulation does not map into the
heterogeneity of consumer preferences for trust (with some consumers being ‘too’
regulated, others not enough) so overall economic well-being is reduced by such an
approach. In contrast, they find that under circumstances of ‘clarity and credibility’ self-
regulation can achieve a nuanced strategy that meets the heterogeneous preferences in the
marketplace. On the other hand, Ioannidis, Pym, Williams (2013) argue the ‘information
stewardship’ internalizes the social costs of data loss (e.g. pollution). With the prodding

2
  The literature addressed in this paper focuses on the benefits of information exchange
and the costs of information lost. Other research focuses more specifically on the topic of
privacy. For more on modeling privacy see U.S. Dept of Commerce, NTIA chapter
compendium of articles. Roberds and Schreft (2009), Anderson (2006), and references
therein.
7
of such a steward, firms internalize some of the costs of data loss and therefore undertake
higher investments in information security than they would have. Social welfare is
enhanced.

Whereas environmental economics offers a model for the information marketplace, the
analogy is stretched because consumers and firms do gain from information aggregation,
whereas it is hard to imagine anyone actually gaining from downstream pollution.
Moreover, although the pollution model allows for market power and uncertainty, so far,
researchers have not put all three elements of economies of scale/scope, market power,
and uncertainty together in the context of the information marketplace.

Too Much Information: Trade-offs with Limits to Rationality

Full information and frictionless markets are key in the complete market framework.
Acquisti (2010) starts by arguing that that the information marketplace is all about trade-
offs. “In choosing the balance between sharing or hiding one's personal information (and
in choosing the balance between exploiting or protecting individuals' data), both
individuals and organizations face complex, sometimes intangible, and often ambiguous
trade-offs. … But trade-offs are the natural realm of economics.”

But then, he notes that limited consumer rationality and transactions costs make
calculating these trade-offs difficult. Both of these issues affect the pricing of
information, as well as the distribution of benefits and costs of information aggregation
and potentially of its loss. If consumers don’t know the value of their information, they
cannot calculate the trade-off between allowing collection and aggregation against the
possible cost of a data breach. These issues are the departure from the complete markets
and Acquisti’s (2010) jumping-off point for his modeling of the cost-benefit calculations.
How significant are these departures in the information marketplace from the complete-
markets framework?

Researchers have attempted to calculate the value of the aggregation of one’s own
information. Conjoint analysis by Hann, et al (2002) finds that consumers trade their
information for about $40-$50 of product value. Convenience is often cited as a rationale
for allowing the aggregation of one’s own personal information, as in on-line banking.
(Lichtenstein and Williamson, 2006). Another way to value personal information is to
calculate the cost to firms of the inability to use individual and aggregate personal
information to target advertising (Goldfarb and Tucker, 2010). The limited empirical
work on value of information to the consumer suggests that limited rationality is an
important problem.

Policy makers and now businesses differ in their approach to the limited rationality of
consumers. The EU Privacy Directive is at one extreme, disallowing the collection and
retention of personal information on the grounds that consumers don’t know what they
are giving up. Other policy approaches require active consent (opt-in) or more
transparency (‘this website uses cookies… .click here for our cookie policy’). Some
firms are finding a market opportunity in responding to the limited rationality problem.

8
Incorporated into the website are easy-to-use tools that allow customers to edit the
information stream associated with their search and transactions activity and thereby
improve the accuracy and targeting of their own information. 3

However, the presence of economies of scale and scope in information aggregation as
well as the nature of uncertainty regarding data breaches means that the analysis of the
balancing of the benefits from information transmitted against the potential cost of
information lost is more complex than the limited rationality of individuals.

Multiple players, market power, and the role for disclosure

Much of the literature that addresses benefit of information aggregation vs. cost when
information is lost uses a two-player framework– so-called data subjects (such as
customers that ‘provide’ the information) and so-called data holders (such as a firm that
aggregates customer data to create customized products). In fact, there is a third player in
the information marketplace—the intermediaries—through which information ‘transits’
and/or ‘rests.’ Examples range from VISA, Amazon, and Google to less familiar
companies such as ChoicePoint or Acxiom.

Atomistic interaction among market players is an important underpinning of the
complete-markets framework, but is clearly violated in the information marketplace. In
particular, intermediaries are very highly concentrated: Google accounts for about 70
percent of all search4, collecting and retaining all that information; VISA accounts for
about three-quarters of all U.S. card transactions, creating a thick financial and purchase
trail5, and Amazon accounts for 15 percent of all U.S. on-line sales and is ranked fifteenth
among all retail companies, collecting reams of data along the way.6 On the other hand,
there are billions of consumers and merchants that use Google and VISA and shop with
Amazon. Virtually none of them interact with an intermediary such as ChoicePoint or
Acxiom, although their information ‘rests’ there. The differential interactions and
differential concentration are important for the valuation of information and magnitude
and incidence of costs in the case of a data breach.

Considering interactions and concentration, Romanosky and Acquisti (2009) use a
systems control strategy to map alternative legislative approaches to reducing harm from
information loss. Two of the three approaches draw from accident legislation: First, ex
ante ‘safety regulation’ (think seat belts) in the context of the information marketplace
would include promulgation and adherence by intermediaries to, say, Payment Card
Industry Standards. But, these authors argue that ex ante standards focus on inputs
(encryption) rather than outcomes (harm); so are not efficient. Second, ex poste liability

3
  NYTimes: If My Data Is an Open Book, Why Can’t I Read It? http://nyti.ms/12UHryv.
4
  Multiple sources as of April, May, June 2013.
5
  http://www.forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/2013/05/03/visa-and-mastercard-battle-
for-share-in-global-shift-to-plastic/
6
  http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/amazoncom-captures-28-of-top-online-
retailer-sales-205427331.html
9
law (think law suits) could include fines for negligence in the protection of information.
But, ex-post litigation may be ineffective because courts have been unwilling to award
damages based on the probability of some future harm coming as a consequence of a data
breach (but see the evolving legal landscape in Section IV).

A third approach is disclosure of data breaches. Disclosure of data breaches is a key
ingredient to calculating costs and benefits of providing and protecting information, and
of apportioning responsibility and costs in the case of a data breach. But Romanosky and
Acquisti note that consumer cognitive bias (misperception of risk) and costs of disclosing
the data breach itself (disclosing what to whom) are important caveats for the
effectiveness of disclosure.

Romanosky and Acqusiti use their framework to outline an empirical example of where
cognitive bias and disclosure costs are less significant because of the concentrated market
structure of intermediaries. Specifically, they analyze the relationship between credit-
card issuing institutions and firms that hold (and lose) credit-card data. They argue that
information disclosure has promoted the internalization of the costs of remediation by the
data holders (and losers), which increases the incentives for the adequate protection of
personal information even when the individual who has provided that information cannot
demand such protection.

Why does disclosure help align (some of the) private interests? First, a sufficient number
of data breaches have occurred such that these costs have begun to be quantified (to be
discussed in Section III and IV below). Second, the number of affected intermediaries
(card issuers in this case) is sufficiently small that they have market power to demand
remediation (or impose punishment) from the other concentrated intermediary, the data
aggregators/holders. Third, the chain of causation between information loss and required
remediation is revealed because of data-breach disclosure laws. The disclosure laws
along with quantification of costs as well as the small number of players promote the
transfer of remediation costs from the card issuers to the database aggregators, those who
actually lost the information. Thus, at least some of the cost of the data breach was
internalized in this example.

However, the costs of information loss borne by individual card-holders was not
transferred to those firms where the data breach occurred. The market power of
individuals was insignificant, and in a transactions-sense, the individuals were distant
from the data aggregators/holders. Individuals can change card issuers, but they have no
power to affect the relationship between their card issuer and what firm aggregates the
transactions of that card. Thus, the cost of the data breach incurred by individuals was
not internalized by the intermediaries, and the individuals had no market power to affect
such an internalization. Unlike the atomistic players in the complete market framework,
the information marketplace has disparities in concentration and market power that affect
the distribution of costs of a data breach, as well as the price and willingness to pay for
techniques to avoid such a breach. (See more on disclosure in Section III and IV.)




10
The Probability Distribution of Data Breaches

The third key underpinning of the complete-markets framework is the pricing of
uncertainty. For a number of reasons, it is challenging to estimate, and therefore price,
the uncertainty of incurring and then the uncertain consequences of a data breach.
Nevertheless, in the face of costly data breaches (see Section III) firms increasingly are
turning to risk modeling for the decision to invest in information technology security.

However, the shape of the probability distribution of data breach events is crucial to
calculate both the costs of a breach and benefits of undertaking security investments.
Assuming that data breaches follow a ‘normal’ distribution will yield a different
calculation than if data breaches are characterized by ‘fat tails’ or ‘extreme outlier’
distributions. (Thomas et al (2013) consider alternative probability distributions in a
theoretical model of investment in information security.)

An analogy comes from the market for foreign exchange and the financial instruments
that are priced and used in that market. Suppose a firm wants to put a floor on the value
in the home currency of the revenue stream earned abroad in the foreign currency. In a
complete-markets framework, the firm could buy an option that will pay-off when the
home-to-foreign currency exchange rate reaches a particular value. In a complete
markets framework, the probability distribution of exchange rate movements is fully
known. The option would be priced exactly so as to make the firm indifferent to buying
it or not (and on the sell side, the seller indifferent to selling the option or not.) The factor
inducing one firm to buy the option and the other to sell the option is differences in risk
appetite.

Suppose the probability distribution is not accurately parameterized. For example,
suppose that exchange rate fluctuations are assumed to follow a ‘normal’ distribution, but
the true distribution has ‘fat tails’. The probability of the foreign currency depreciation
that triggers the option will be underestimated relative to its value under the true
probability distribution. The firm will not buy the option, and it will experience an
uncompensated loss. On the other hand, if the firm assumes the extreme outlier
distribution is correct, when the true distribution is normal, then the firm will buy too
expensive an option, given the very small likelihood of the extreme event.

In the information market place there is a similar problem of deriving the correct
probability distribution of a data breach. Information on the probability of incurring a
data breach is limited; and incurring a data breach is not identical to the probability of
data abuse. Without knowing the correct probability distribution, too much investment in
information security or too little are equally possible. Moreover, whether the correct
market player is the target of the security effort remains unclear. For example, Anderson
et. al. (2012) point out that one automated spammer accounted for about one-third of
global spam in 2010 and profited $2.7 million. But the 2010 worldwide spending on
preventing spam exceeded $1 billion. So neither the level of spending nor the target
appeared to have been correct.



11
But the challenges run deeper because of the economies of scale and scope in the
information and the differential market power of the players. Does the cost-benefit
calculation for information security differ as to many small breaches (say, the normal
distribution) compared to a rare, but large, data breach (the black swan event). Is a large
data breach more likely to lead to abuse of data, or less likely? The hypothesis of
economies of scale and scope in information suggests that large data breaches,
experienced over time, accumulate to enhance potential abuse of all revealed information,
whether abused before or not. Finally, differential market power has already been seen to
shift the burden of costs of a data breach; it could similarly shift the burden of
responsibility to invest in information security. Free riding and moral hazard are other
aspects of differential market power that cause the information marketplace to deviate
from the complete-markets framework.

Information Marketplace: Challenges to pricing and balancing benefits and costs

The information marketplace violates the class complete-markets framework in three
ways. First, information is characterized by economies of scale and scope, so it is
difficult to price and value. Moreover, the benefits of aggregation increases, but so may
the cost in the case is of information lost. Second, the various market players are not
atomistic. The relationships between the originators of information; the intermediaries
that transmit, aggregate, and hold information; and the users of the aggregated data to
enhance products are characterized by differential marker power. The differential market
power affects the distribution of both benefits of information and the potential costs when
lost. Finally, there is substantial uncertainty about the probability distribution describing
a data breach and potential abuse of information, so it is hard to value information lost.
Collectively, these departures from the complete-markets framework point to potential
inefficiencies in market pricing and in participant behavior. Whether such inefficiencies
suggest policy-maker intervention requires more analysis.


III. Trends in Information Lost

The literature and framework presented in Section II pointed to a variety of data needs:
Value of information incorporating economies of scale and scope. Nature of the market-
power relationships between different market actors. Parameters of the probability
distributions of information lost and/or mis-used. All this information is needed to
evaluate whether the information marketplace is efficiently balancing the value of
information aggregated against the costs of information lost.

Against this series of data needs, this section presents evidence on only the extent and
nature of information lost. What are the trends: size of loss, sector of loss, source of loss,
cost of loss, market value of information, probability of abuse given a breach, and so on,
including in the global context.

The raw data come from several sources including: Privacy Rights Clearinghouse and
Open Security Foundation, which draw from public news sources. A number of
consulting firms that employ industry surveys: Poneman Institute, Symantec, Verizon,

12
Javelin Security Research, KPMG Europe. The Federal Trade Commission and the
Department of Justice, which draw on the consumer fraud on-line report database. Only
some of the raw data are available for research use; most is proprietary.

How much information is lost? And by what means?

Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (PRC) data for 2005 to 2012 show that after a notable drop
in data breaches in 2009, during the depth of the recession, data breaches are on the
increase again. 7 (The number of records lost in each breach, which is a different measure
of information lost, will be discussed below.) PRC disaggregate breaches into various
types: 8 Losing paper documents or losing computers (static desktop or portable);
inadvertent disclosure (such as cc vs. bcc in an e-mail); and various types of fraud (by an
insider employee, by an outsider hacker, through payment card). The first three types of
information lost are more ‘by mistake,’ although the disclosed information could still be
mis-used. The three types of fraud are presumed with malicious intend.

Hacking dominates, and insider fraud is the increasingly important source of data
breaches. But a surprising number of data breaches still take place the ‘old-fashioned
way’ by losing paper documents or laptops and through unintended disclosure.

                           !"#"$%&'"()*$#+#",$-./0'&$"-1$02$/'#)+1$$
                                 3&45"(2$647)#8$9,'"&4-7)+.8'$
    *!!"



    )!!"



    (!!"

                                                                               ,-.-/0-"
    '!!"                                                                       12345"6/12"

                                                                               7/82396:"6/12"

    &!!"                                                                       ;3;:8"</51"6/12"

                                                                               =-1><:8"?83,<"

                                                                               @35.>-A"
    %!!"
                                                                               //;1"B>156/1,8:"

                                                                               ;3CD2"538<"?83,<"
    $!!"



    #!!"



      !"
           $!!'"   $!!("    $!!)"   $!!*"   $!!+"    $!#!"   $!##"     $!#$"




7
  The California disclosure law (discussed in Section IV) passed in 2003. The jump in
breaches from 2005 to 2006 is more likely a consequence of more widespread reporting
of data breach announcements and collection into the database than it is an actual
dramatic jump.
8
  Open Society Foundation also uses this classification scheme.
13
Whereas the announcement of a breach indicates that information has been compromised,
the actual number of records involved in each breach could be a better measure of
potential cost in that a record represents granular information about an individual. Not all
breach disclosures reveal how many records were lost in the breach. In fact only about
half of the announcements include that information. (See more discussion of breaches
that reveal social-security numbers below.)

For the breach disclosures that reveal the number of records lost, over the 2005-2012
period, the histogram of records lost per breach shows that the most frequent breach is
small, involving 1-10,000 records. There is some reduction in breaches with medium
sized losses (100,000 – 500,000 records lost), but little progress in stemming breaches of
either small or huge size. In particular, huge breaches (1,000,000 and up) though
infrequent have not been controlled. This histogram of breaches offers an insight to the
probability distribution of a breach event. A cross-tabulation of the type of breach with
the size of the breach could help target investment in information security. However, not
known is whether huge breaches are more likely to lead to information abuse, or whether
data from small breaches are more likely to be mis-used.


                                                            Records per Breach: All Sectors
                                                               Source: Privacy Rights Clearinghouse

 400	  
 350	  
 300	  
 250	  
 200	  
 150	  
 100	  
     50	  
       0	  
                   2005	               2006	              2007	              2008	             2009	                2010	             2011	        2012	  

               	  1,000	  	     	  10,000	  	     	  50,000	  	     	  100,000	  	     	  500,000	  	       	  1,000,000	  	     +1,000,000	  




What kind of information is lost?

Revealing a social security number (SSN) during a data breach generates far greater
concern and potential for costly information loss compared to a data breach that
compromises other types of personal information (see evidence in Section IV). Based on
the PRC data, there is a mixed picture of whether more or less high-value information is

14
being lost. In part, this mixed picture appears to be because reporting of SSN losses in
increasingly incomplete.

Over the time period, the number of breaches that reveal SNN has increased; but as a
share of all data breaches, those that reveal SSN has declined. And, the number of
reported records where the SSN was compromised declined from a peak in 2007,
although not in trend fashion. So, this suggests that SSN breaches are becoming less
prevalent, perhaps because of enhanced security.


                                                 Breaches with SSN
 100%	                                                                                                              800	  
                                                                                                                     700	  
     80%	  
                                                                                                                     600	  
     60%	                                                                                                           500	  
                                                                                                                     400	  
     40%	                                                                                                           300	  
                                                                                                                     200	  
     20%	  
                                                                                                                     100	  
      0%	                                                                                                           0	  
               2005	        2006	       2007	         2008	     2009	      2010	      2011	        2012	  

                          Breaches	  with	  SSN	                 Other	  Breaches	                Total	  



                       SSN Records lost; % of breaches not disclosing # of records
140,000,000	                                                                                                                50	  
                                                                                                                             45	  
120,000,000	                    record	  with	  SSN	  
                                                                                                                             40	  
100,000,000	                                                                                                                35	  
                                 disclosure	  of	  #	  of	  
 80,000,000	                    records	                                                                                   30	  
                                                                                                                             25	  
 60,000,000	                                                                                                                20	  
 40,000,000	                                                                                                                15	  
                                                                                                                             10	  
 20,000,000	  
                                                                                                                             5	  
               0	                                                                                                           0	  
                          2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  


On the other hand, recall that not all breach announcements reveal the number of records
lost. Within breaches that compromise SSN, the share of those breaches that do not
disclose the number of SSN-related records lost has increased over time. Considering a
sectoral decomposition of data breach announcements, the ‘Business-Other’ (BSO)

15
category is the largest sector that does not disclose whether SSN records have been
compromised. Sectors that perhaps are under greater scrutiny, such as Medical (MED),
Financial (BSF), and Retail (BSR) appear to disclose more information.


                  Undisclosed # of Records with SSN Breaches
                         (% of total breaches with SSN)
    100%	  
     80%	  
     60%	  
     40%	  
     20%	  
       0%	  
                2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  

                             BSO	       BSF	        BSR	       EDU	  
                             GOV	       MED	        NGO	  


In sum, interpreting the data on SSN breaches and required disclosure requires more
analysis. Required disclosure may have led to security investment and thus fewer SSN-
related breaches. Or required disclosure may just have prompted less transparency in
public reporting.

Is there differentiation by sector?

Looking behind the averages, are there differences by sector? Which sectors are the most
prone to data breaches, by what means, and does the size of breach and information
revealed differ by sector? The PRC data can be aggregated into business sectors
(finance, retail, medical, other), government, education, and NGO.9

Data breaches in the medical sector are about double any other sector, with a huge
increase in the last couple of years. This could be a fact, a function of disclosure, or a
function of disclosure and reporting. In contrast to the aggregated data, the main source
of data breach in the Medical sector is lost paper documents and lost laptops. But insider
fraud has a rising role. (Recall that for the aggregated data, outsider hacking appears the
greatest threat). The vast majority of data breaches for medical institutions are small
breaches – 1,000 to 10,000 records lost—but a lot of these data breaches reveal SSN.


9
 More granular data, including firm identifiers, can be obtained directly from the PRC
website. The Open Security Foundation did have a public on-line database (until 2007,
see it used in reference Karagodsky and Mann, 2011), but it now is behind a permission
wall. Efforts to obtain access were not successful. These two sources both draw from
public announcements of data breaches. Cursory analysis comparing the two databases
for overlapping years shows similarity, but they are not identical.
16
However, when the number of records lost with SSN is considered relative to other
sectors, medical is not the largest problem sector.


                                Data Breaches: Medical Institutions
100%	                                                                                                                     250	  

 80%	                                                                                                                     200	  

 60%	                                                                                                                     150	  

 40%	                                                                                                                     100	  

 20%	                                                                                                                     50	  

     0%	                                                                               0	  
                2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  
               CARD	            DISC	        HACK	           INSD	            PHYS	  
               PORT	            STAT	        UNKN	           Total	  


               Medical: Records per Breach Over Time
 100	  

     80	  

     60	  

     40	  

     20	  

       0	  
               2005	         2006	      2007	         2008	       2009	             2010	       2011	         2012	  

                    	  1,000	  	        	  10,000	  	         	  50,000	  	           	  100,000	  	  
                    	  500,000	  	      	  1,000,000	  	   +1,000,000	  




17
                   500	  
                                                   Number of Breaches with SSN by Sector
                   400	  

                   300	  

                   200	  

                   100	  

                                 0	  
                                               2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  

                                                   BSO	     BSF	     BSR	     EDU	     GOV	     MED	     NGO	  




                                                              Records with SSN by Industry
                                  140	  
                                  120	  
                                  100	  
 Millions	  of	  Records	  




                                         80	  
                                         60	  
                                         40	  
                                         20	  
                                           0	  
                                                    2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  

                                                   BSO	     BSF	     BSR	     EDU	     GOV	     MED	     NGO	  



The chart above on records lost that compromise SSN reveals that retail is another sector
that has a lot of data breaches. As shown below, the vast majority of data breaches in
retail are by hackers. The number of records lost per breach is very small, generally, and
the number of breaches that reveal SSN is quite small generally. But, when the retail
sector experiences a big exposure (2007 and 2011), the loss of records with SSN is
enormous. The chart also reveals that 2009, which was the low point for overall
breaches, was low because of the low number of small retail breaches. The Great
Recession hit consumer spending and small business retailing relatively hard. So, the
relationship between overall economic activity and data breaches may warrant further
analysis.




18
                                    Data Breaches: Retail
 100%	                                                                                     150	  


                                                                                            100	  
     50%	  
                                                                                            50	  


      0%	                                                                                  0	  
                2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  
                         CARD	                DISC	                   HACK	  
                         INSD	                       PHYS	                 PORT	  



                        Retail: Records per Breach Over Time
     35	  
     30	  
     25	  
     20	  
     15	  
     10	  
       5	  
       0	  
               2005	   2006	      2007	   2008	        2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  
       1,000       10,000      50,000       100,000         500,000    1,000,000    +1,000,000




A third sector of particular interest is financial and insurance institutions. The number of
data breaches appears to be under control. However the origin of the breach through
insiders is significantly greater share than other sectors, and both hackers and unintended
disclosures also are large. Very large breaches occur nearly every year, along with mid-
size breaches, and these breaches often contain SSN.




19
                        Data Breaches: Finance/Insurance
 100%	                                                                                    120	  
     80%	                                                                                 100	  
                                                                                           80	  
     60%	  
                                                                                           60	  
     40%	  
                                                                                           40	  
     20%	                                                                                 20	  
      0%	                                                                                 0	  
               2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  

                  CARD	         DISC	          HACK	          INSD	         PHYS	  
                  PORT	         STAT	          UNKN	          Total	  



                   Financial: Records per Breach Over Time
 100%	  

     80%	  

     60%	  

     40%	  

     20%	  

      0%	  
               2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  

          1,000     10,000     50,000       100,000    500,000      1,000,000   +1,000,000



Government and educational institutions lose data both from hacking and from
unintended disclosure. The bulk of the losses in the education sector are small, but the
government has experienced some very large losses, and with a large number of records
containing the SSN.




20
                          Data Breaches: Educational Institutions
 100%	                                                                                            150	  
     80%	  
                                                                                                   100	  
     60%	  
     40%	  
                                                                                                   50	  
     20%	  
      0%	                                                                                         0	  
                   2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  

                       CARD	           DISC	        HACK	          INSD	           PHYS	  
                       PORT	           STAT	        UNKN	          Total	  



                              Data Breaches: Government Entities
 100%	                                                                                                    150	  
     80%	  
                                                                                                           100	  
     60%	  
     40%	  
                                                                                                           50	  
     20%	  
      0%	                                                                                                 0	  
                    2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  

                        CARD	            DISC	        HACK	          INSD	          PHYS	  
                        PORT	            STAT	        UNKN	          Total	  



                  Educational Institutions: Records per Breach 2005-2012
      100	  
                                                                   1,000            10,000         50,000
                                                                   100,000          500,000        1,000,000
        80	                                                       +1,000,000

        60	  

        40	  

        20	  

          0	  
                    2005	   2006	       2007	   2008	     2009	   2010	   2011	   2012	  




21
           Government: Records per Breach 2005-2012
 100	  
     80	  
     60	  
     40	  
     20	  
       0	  
                   1	         2	        3	       4	     5	       6	           7	           8	  

               1,000       10,000      50,000     100,000   500,000     1,000,000           +1,000,000



In sum, the sectoral decomposition of the data suggest that a one-size-fits-all approach to
evaluating the costs of data breaches or the approach to data security is not appropriate.
The sectors differ in terms of how data are lost and which size breach is most prevalent.

Cross-border data breaches

Cross-border data breaches have two dimensions: A U.S. institution or consumer may
lose information to foreign perpetrators. Or, a U.S. institution, when it incurs a data
breach, may expose the personal information of a foreign person or firm. What are the
characteristics of these cross-border breaches? The picture is quite murky. First, only the
U.S. has, since 2003, required public announcement. So a time series of public and
reported disclosure is, at present, only available for U.S. firms. When U.S. firms incur a
data breach, further information about the cross-border incident is obtained through firm
survey by consultancies such as Verizon or Ponemon/Symatec. Data on consumer’s
information exposed is self-reported to the US. Federal Trade Commission or by other
survey. In short, data on international breaches is spotty and incomplete.

Verizon reports that about 20 percent of incidents are U.S. hackers compromising the
data of U.S. firms. However Verizon reports a significant rise in the Central-Eastern
European countries as origin of compromise, which it reports as ‘organized crime’
targeting smaller U.S. firms using point-of-sale or other skimming-type devices (this is
consistent with the prevalence in the PRC data on small breaches in the retail sector).
Note however, the very large share of incidents where the origin of the data breach
cannot be determined.




22
Geographical	  origin	  of	  external	  information	  lost,	  	  
%	  of	  incidents	                                                                                                             	  	                 	  	                 	  	            	  	  
Source:	  Verizon,	  DBIR	                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  
	  	                                             	  2007	   	  2008	                                       	   2009	       	  2010	             	  2011	             	  	  	            2012	  
Americas-­‐North	                                      23	             15	                                        19	                     19	             20	              US	                       16	  
Americas-­‐South	                                       3	              6	                                        na	                     <1	              	  	           Colombia	                  1	  
	  	                                                   	  	           	  	                                      	  	                   	  	           	  	           Brazil	  	                1	  
Asia-­‐East	                                                                      12	             18	             18	                      3	                   2	         China	  	           2*	  
Asia-­‐North/central	                                                              9	             nr/	            nr	                      0	                   nr	                               	  	  
Asia-­‐South/Southeast	                                                           14	              3	              2	                      6	                   1	         	  	  	             	  	  
Europe-­‐East,	  Russia,	  Turkey	                                              24	             22	             21	                     65	                   67	        Romania	  	         28	  
	  	                                                                              	  	           	  	           	  	                   	  	                 	  	     Russia	               5	  
	  	                                                                              	  	           	  	           	  	                   	  	                 	  	     Armenia	  	          1	  
	  	                                                                              	  	           	  	           	  	                   	  	                 	  	     Bulgaria	             7	  
Europe-­‐West/South/North	                                           9	                  3	                10	                    2	                 4	      Germany	  	                 1	  
	  	                                                                 	  	               	  	             	  	                  	  	             	  	   Netherland	                  1	  
Middle-­‐East	                                                       5	                  na	                5	                    na	               na	                                    	  	  
Africa	                                                              1	                  1	                 2	                    4	                 1	      	                            	  	  
	                                                                                                                                                                 	  
unknown	  	                                                         nr	                 nr	               31	                    nr	               10	                                    	  	  
	  	                                                                                                                                                             	                   	  	  
*	  external	  threats	  from	  China:	  30%	  of	  threats;	  
                                                             	                 only	  
                                                                                  	   2%	  focused	  
                                                                                                     	                 on	  	  financial	  	  (as	  opposed	  
                                                                                                                                                                   	       to	  industrial)	  
information…	  the	  focus	  of	  this	  section	  of	  the	  paper	  is	  	  not	  on	  industrial	  espionage.	  	  	  	  
nr/	  not	  reported	                                     	  	               	  	             	  	                  	  	             	  	             	  	               	  	  

With regard to specific countries in CEE, Bulgaria and Romania especially (singled out
in the 2012 Verizon report) joined the European Union in 2007. At that point, these
countries should have been brought under the umbrella of the EU Directives on Privacy
(1998), Privacy and Electronic Communications (2003) and Data Retention (2006). So it
is perhaps a surprise that so much threat activity emanates from these countries.
However, another point to consider is that the EU has focused security strategies on data-
in-transit, not data-at-rest. This is because the EU Directives stringently limit data
retention. In contrast, the U.S. security emphasis is on data-at-rest. It is possible that the
different security focus of U.S. vs. EU methods exposes weakness in the U.S. data-in-
transit protocols that can be exploited by forum shoppers who have different knowledge
sets. (See more discussion of Directives below.) Sullivan (2010) and McCarthy (2010)
discuss security and gaps in approach in the global payment card industry.

KPMG reporting on data breaches in the U.K. presents a quite different picture. The U.S.
remains the largest source of global incidents (about 50% of the incidents in January-June
2012), but that is down from 75% of the incidents taking the KPMG data for 2008-June
2012. KPMG does not even report separately the CEE region or any of its countries.
The U.K. originates about 10% of incidents, which is not a country that Verizon separates

23
out. Whether the origin of breaches indeed is so different depending on who is surveyed,
or whether the reporting is so uneven across countries is an obvious question.

Considering just consumers, rather than a survey of firms from the previous sources, the
FTC reports that cross border consumer fraud continues to be dominated by U.S.
consumers reporting to the U.S. FTC. Cross-border consumer complaints (e.g. foreign
consumers complaining about U.S. firms) account for about 13% of all fraud complaints
and that percentage has not changed over time.

120000	  
                          Cross-Border Fraud Complaints, number
100000	                         FTC: Consumer Sentinal

 80000	  

 60000	  
                                             US consumers against Foreign entities
 40000	  

 20000	  

       0	  
               2002	  2003	  2004	  2005	  2006	   2007	  2008	   2009	  2010	  2011	  2012	  


In sum, in the United States, much information is lost the ‘old fashioned way’ (e.g. lost
laptops and paper work, and unintended disclosure). But, information lost via cross-
border hacking is increasingly important in all sectors, with insider-originated losses
particularly notable in finance. Many more data breaches occur with small numbers of
records lost, but in any given year, the largest breaches with a huge number of records,
and high proportion of SSN can occur in any sector. So, should the focus of security
protection be on the numerous small breaches or the very few disastrous breaches?
Finally, sectoral variation and variation in the size of the breach and in how information
is lost may be relevant when considering the role for a domestic focus vs. a global
emphasis on information security.


IV. Market discipline vs non-market regulatory and legal discipline

This Section reviews evidence on strategies to discipline market actors to internalize the
costs of data breaches and balance the benefits of information aggregation against the
costs of when information is lost. If market discipline is sufficiently robust, regulatory
intervention or private legal action may not be necessary.

A key problem, noted in the frameworks sections, is that there are multiple actors.
Whether or not a firm will take action to reduce the probability or type of data breach
depends not only on whether the market punishes the ‘right’ firm, but also on how and
who bears the burdens of lost information. For example, the costs of notification and of

24
ameliorating a data breach (for example, issuing new credit cards) could be the main
channel for market discipline. Similarly, fines imposed within the self-regulatory
hierarchy (for example between merchants, card issuers and payment processors) offers a
disciplining device, as do fines levied by a regulatory agency (such as the Federal Trade
Commission). Finally, legal suits brought by those suffering the information loss could
be sufficiently threatening, or actually costly enough, to encourage firms to enhance their
data security or design their information systems differently, although the international
nature of theft adds another dimension to the legal challenge.

Data on the costs of breaches is an integral part of the analysis—but how to measure
costs, and costs born by whom? Should the focus be on costs to prevent or costs to
remediate? How might market actors respond when information is lost? If the company
is customer-facing, such as a retail firm, sales might drop as customers buy from
competitors. If the company is a financial intermediary, such as a payment processor, it
may be shunned or fined by other parts of the payment chain. If the company is a
technology firm, corporate governance of its own activities may be questioned. If the
company is in the health-care sector, its reputation may suffer. How costly are these
market responses to the announcement of a data breach, and how costly relative to the
costs of enhanced security?

The Role for Disclosure

The disciplinary mechanisms noted above all require that a data breach be acknowledged.
But, to whom the data breach should be disclosed—those whose data are compromised or
an intermediary whose responsibility it is to safeguard the data, or to a government entity
that can force remediation—is less clear. As noted in the framework, individuals are, by
definition, atomistic and therefore lack market power to respond to disclosure and
discipline whoever lost the data. Further, with cognitive bias and limited rationality,
disclosure may not yield the right incentives to protect ones own information, nor
improve the outcome if data are lost. Intermediaries are fewer in number, but this market
position may reduce the incentive to prevent or remediate a data breach, disclosed or not.
With layers of intermediaries, moral hazard is another issue as one intermediary may
free-ride off the security approach of another. So, disclosure to a government entity that
can press for remediation, and induce investment to avoid future losses might be socially
optimal.

A U.S. state law, first introduced in 2003 in California as Senate Bill 1386, mandates that
organizations that maintain personal information about individuals must make a public
announcement if the security of the information has been compromised. The legislation
further stipulates that the organization responsible for the breach must notify each
individual for whom it maintained information—this is a direct cost rather than simply an
indirect cost of, say, loss of reputation. The law forced every firm doing business in
California to comply. By 2007, 46 of the U.S. states had adopted similar versions of a




25
breach-disclosure law, although to date there is no federal legislation governing most
personal data.10

The U.S. approach of such broad-based disclosure to individuals is unique around the
world. 11 Among other countries, only the United Kingdom has legislated disclosure, but
the disclosure is to a governmental agency. Similarly, Japan requires disclosure to a
governmental agency, but the scope of incidents that must be disclosed has been
narrowed on account of ‘excessive’ information flooding the agency. Australia is
considering whether a specific disclosure law is necessary or whether existing law
addresses disclosure. The European Union’s approach here-to-fore under the 2003
Directive on Privacy and Electronic Communications has not required disclosure of
information loss. But the promulgated and evolving General Data Protection Directive
will require disclosure of material breaches to a supra-governmental unit. (European
Commission, 2012.)

Does disclosure even work to reduce the incidence of data breaches, and at what cost?
There is relatively little research on whether disclosure itself works to reduce data
breaches, much more research (discussed below) on whether disclosure punishes firms,
which presumably is the first step needed for firms to receive the signal to safeguard data.
Romanosky, Teland, Acquisti (2011) find that U.S. breach disclosure rules reduce ID
theft by about 6 percent. On the other hand, Romanosky, Acquisti, and Sharp (2010)
consider the optimality of U.S.-style disclosure. Considering parameters of cost to
disclose, response of consumers to disclosure, consumer harm, and reduced rates of data
breach, they find that U.S.-style disclosure probably is too costly relative to the gains.

There is evidence that consumer limited rationality is a problem. Survey evidence from
Poneman Institute (2012) indicates that 85% of consumers are very concerned about data
breaches. Comparing 2012 with 2005, twice as many consumers recall receiving a
notification of a data breach (25% vs. 12%). But, about 60% thought that the
communication informing them of the breach was ‘junk mail.’ So, data security has
salience, but people don’t necessarily respond to disclosure as expected. Retzer (2008)
considering broad-based disclosure rules desensitizes the recipient to the announcement,
which works counter to the role that disclosure should play as a disciplining device.

Even so, firms need to be aware that loss-of-trust matters. Nearly 90% in the Ponemon
study said they had or might discontinue their relationship with the firm over a data
breach. Consumers have reason to punish firms that lose their data. Around one-quarter
of consumers who received a data-breach notification experienced identity theft.

10
   There is federal legislation protecting children (COPPA), health (HIPPA), and
financial data (Grahm-Leach-Bliley Act) but generalized ‘personal information’ is not
protected. At the state level there is a patchwork of legislation that protects some
information in some states – for example, databases with drivers license information are
in the public domain in some states, but not others. For a complete review of US data
security legislation, see Stevens (2012).
11
   See Global Privacy Alliance (2009) for a comprehensive review.
26
Consumers whose SSN were compromised were 5 times more likely to experience
identity theft. The average out of pocket consumer costs of a data breach ranged from
$400 to $700 (2005- 2012, Javelin Strategy Research, 2012). This is substantially higher
than the per-record costs that businesses bear, as will be discussed below.

Trends in Business Costs: Lost Business and Remediation

If remediating after information loss is sufficiently directly costly to a business, then
presumably that business will undertake action to improve information security.
Calculations suggest that the loss of business due to customer turnover and reputation
loss can be the relatively more important cost of a data breach, particularly in the U.S. On
the other hand, remediation costs (customer notification, assistance, audits) are
increasingly important. (Ponemon, 2011). 12 There is substantial variation across sectors
in the cost per record loss. Financial and healthcare were two sectors that had a high
prevalence of fraud and a high density of SSN losses. The higher costs of remediation
could be due to these factors.


                                   Per Record Cost of Data Breaches: Average all Sector
                                                                            source: Ponemon

 	  $250	  	                                                                                                                  	  $214	  	  
                                                                        	  $197	  	     	  $202	  	     	  $204	  	                        	  $194	  	  
 	  $200	  	                                      	  $182	  	  
                                  	  $138	  	  
 	  $150	  	  
 	  $100	  	  
     	  $50	  	  
       	  $-­‐	  	  	  	  
                                  2005	             2006	             2007	             2008	             2009	             2010	             2011	  




12
   The cost per record lost as presented by Poneman is calculated only for breaches of
100,000 records or less. Against these costs, it is possible for a firm to assess the benefits
of engaging in better information security. For example, Symantec now offers an on-line
calculator for potential risk of information loss:
http://eval.symantec.com/flashdemos/campaigns/small_business/roi/


27
  	  $400	  	  
                                  Per Record Cost (by sector) over time
                                              source: Ponemon
  	  $300	  	  


  	  $200	  	  


  	  $100	  	  


       	  $-­‐	  	  	  	  




                                           2009	     2010	     2011	  



Comparing the business costs of losing data across countries reveals some interesting
observations. There is substantial variation in costs per record lost, and also substantial
variation in the components of the costs per record lost as disaggregated into detection,
notification, post-breach costs, and lost business costs. However, these costs do not seem
to depend on level of income of the economy and vary substantially across countries
within the same jurisdiction (e.g. the EU).

First, consider the comparison across countries of overall costs per record lost. Countries
that have a lower per capita income (India) have a lower average cost of records lost.
This reflects lower domestic costs in general (the Balassa-Samuelson effect). On the
other hand, countries with similar regulatory environments (Germany, France, Italy in the
EU) have significant variation in the cost per record lost. These differences in cost,
despite the same regulatory environment, could be due to different sectoral distribution of
firms, or could reflect heterogeneity in consumer attitudes and response to data breaches.

Comparing sectoral variation across countries, it is not the case that countries with high
costs (Germany) or low costs (India) have the highest or lowest cost in all sectors. For
example, costs in the communication sector in Germany are quite low but costs in the
communication sector in India are rather high. Considering particular sectors across all
countries, costs in the financial sector are highest among sectors (although not in India).
But otherwise there is not a clear pattern where costs in certain sectors are always highest
or lowest.




28
   Per record by sector
          (2011)           Germany    India       UK       AUS           France            Italy    Japan      USA
Services                   $344.92   $64.77     $135.59   $125.99        $176.87          $104.28   $195.39   $185.00
Industrial                 $318.18   $38.43     $103.24   $134.92        $111.63          $101.60     n/a     $235.00
Hospitality                $290.11   $148.20    $147.92   $99.21         $145.05          $90.91      n/a     $116.00
Financial                  $275.40   $40.57     $158.71   $199.40        $218.85          $147.06   $365.88   $247.00
Consumer                   $203.21   $52.64     $147.92   $164.68        $189.84          $70.86    $105.08   $203.00
Retail                     $149.73   $31.53     $92.45    $84.33         $100.80          $52.14    $96.45    $174.00
Technology                 $147.06   $64.00     $92.45    $169.64        $195.45          $188.50   $328.51   $134.00
Public Sector              $129.68   $23.70     $95.53    $101.19        $75.94           $62.83    $84.18    $134.00
Communications             $89.57    $140.40      n/a       n/a          $128.61          $89.57    $124.96   $334.00
Pharmaceutical               n/a       n/a      $184.90     n/a            n/a            $131.02   $150.26   $276.00
          Overall
(not average of sectors)   $195.19    $42.85    $121.73   $136.90        $163.10          $104.28   $132.77   $194.00
   Exchange Rate (2011)     0.748     49.124     0.649      1.008         0.748            0.748    82.931



      Next, consider a decomposition of what types of costs are incurred by a data breach (as
      opposed to costs per record lost). In all countries the notification cost is the smallest
      component (although largest in dollar terms in the US which makes sense given the
      California law), and the lost business cost (from customer churn etc) is the largest, and
      relatively larger for the U.S., which may also be consistent with the U.S. disclosure law.
      On the other hand, detection of a breach is relatively larger for other countries compared
      to the U.S., suggesting that the California disclosure law may, over time, have made
      detection by U.S. firms more a matter of course (and therefore less expensive) rather than
      a special one-off event.



                           Costs per Breach by Type of Cost,
                               millions, 2011, Poneman
        $6.00	  	  
        $5.00	  	  
        $4.00	  	  
                                                           Lost	  Business	  Cost	  
        $3.00	  	  
                                                           Post-­‐DB	  cost	  
        $2.00	  	  
                                                           NotiWication	  
        $1.00	  	  
                                                           Detection/Escalation	  
        $0.00	  	  




      29
Market Value of Stolen Information

Another approach to measuring the value of information lost through a data breach is to
go directly to the market. How much is stolen data worth? Getting this information in a
systematic way is very difficult. Snapshots of value in the market show very large ranges
of value of stolen data and it is hard to map the valuation of stolen data to the sectors that
have experienced data breaches. As a point of comparison, however, the value of ‘bank
account credentials’ at anywhere from $30 to $850 could be compared to the business
cost-per-record lost of $250 in the financial sector (U.S. data). Against the value of credit
card information (worth 50 cents to $30 on the open market), the business cost-per-record
lost in retail is $174. If we consider just the business cost, perhaps the most efficient
response is to just pay the thieves. But, recall that the consumer cost was multiples of the
business cost.


                           2007 (avg.1H, H2)            2008                   2009
     Value of Data
                            Low       High      Low            High    Low            High
Credit Card Information    $0.45     $12.50     $0.60      $30.00      $0.85          $30.00
Bank Account Credentials   $20.00   $725.00    $10.00     $1,000.00   $15.00      $850.00
Full Identities            $6.50     $15.00     $0.70      $60.00      $0.70          $20.00
Email Accounts             $2. 50    $35.00     $0.10      $100.00     $1.00          $20.00




Discipline by Equity Market

The direct cost of a data breach is not the only way in which market discipline can work.
A number of studies investigate whether the stock market ‘punishes’ firms that lose
customer data. (See Table 1 Appendix) These papers use the same methodology--
cumulative abnormal returns (CAR)—but differ somewhat in the time horizon over
which they calculate the ‘normal’ return as well as the window over which they calculate
the CAR. They differ in the measure of the market against which to assess the abnormal
return. There also can be a difference in terms of whether to measures losses as a percent
of stock market value or in dollars. On balance the stock market discipline appears
limited as a strategy for aligning private incentives when it comes to protecting
information against loss.

The predominant conclusion is that there is a negative, short term, statistically significant
effect of a breach disclosure announcement on the equity market price of the announcing
firm. The conclusion appears only when SSN are lost. Campbell sums up the findings:
“we do not find a significant market reaction when we examine security breaches that are
not related to confidentiality. In contrast, we find a highly significant negative reaction
for those breaches that relate to violations of confidentiality.” Considering sector-
specific comparators, rather than the broad market indicators, as in Karagodsky and
Mann (2011), suggests that relatively larger CAR losses are associated with data loss by

30
banks and by healthcare firms, when SSN are lost, and when data are lost stolen through
an intrusion by a hacker. This is consistent with the higher per-record costs for these
sectors as noted earlier.

Are these results economically large, that is, compared with what it might cost to put into
place security systems and procedures to avoid information loss? Karagodsky and Mann
evaluate the dollar losses for four representative firms, one from each sector (Bank,
Retail, Computers, Health) by using the findings on CAR and calculating the cumulative
decrease in the firms’ value 30 days following the breach announcement event. The
cumulative dollar loss ranged from $170,000 (J.P. Morgan Chase and Gap), to $1 billion
(IBM) and $7.5 billion (Pfizer). This calculation depends not only on the loss per share,
but also the number of shares outstanding. Firms with more shares outstanding
experience a larger dollar loss, and the loss can be quite large. Whether such dollar
losses are large enough to incentivize firms to increase information security depends on
the cost of those systems and procedures, a topic beyond the bounds of this paper, but
which is critical to the cost-benefit analysis. 13

Policy intervention: Standardization Amid Globalization

A back-of-the envelope calculation suggests that the macroeconomic business cost of
information lost in the U.S. in 2011 was $40 billon, and triple that if consumer costs are
added.14 Is this large or small in a $14 trillion economy? Seems small. But, considering
just the business costs, it is relatively larger when the reference is net business investment
in equipment and software of $107 billion, (BEA NIPA 5.2.5). The distribution of these
costs across sector and size of firm is key for whether the market discipline will work.
But for policymakers, the macroeconomic size may be the most relevant for considering
intervention.

Policy intervention has many possible faces: standardized regulations and enforcement
through fines. A key question is, who should be the policy target? The numerous
consumers and final using firms, or the few intermediaries (transmitters and/or
aggregators) of information? The market-power analysis already suggests and data
confirm that cost to remediate a data breach per consumer exceeds most per business-
related costs.

Oussayef (2008) and Orr (2012) suggest that the focus should be on the consumer – the
originator but also ultimate user of information value, and the point of greatest cost of
loss according to the data. A response to the consumer’s limited rationality would be to

13
   Research on security costs include: Brecht and Nowey, 2102, Demetz and
Balchnecher, 2012.
14
   $200 per record lost and 200 million records lost. 50 million reported records lost with
SSN, grossed up by 2 (about half of breaches reveal SSN) and grossed up again by 2
(about half of SSN breaches disclose the number of records). Assuming consumer costs
of $400 (low end of the Javelin estimate) triples the total.


31
standardize communications with them, for example, standardize privacy policies. But,
generally this is not the direction that regulation or the market is going.

Another approach would be to standardize regulations for the relatively fewer
intermediaries. However, countries differ in the focus for security (data-in-transit vs.
data-at-rest) as noted earlier. How do firms that operate in both the U.S. and the EU
address this problem? The US-EU Safe Harbor Agreement discussed in more detail in
Mann, Eckert, Knight (2000) remains the operational agreement governing cross-border
information flows between the U.S. and Europe. US firms operating within Safe Harbor
engage in self-certification, and submit an enforcement policy to the U.S. Department of
Commerce. Fundamentally, the Safe Harbor remains a self-regulatory mechanism that
rests uncomfortably against the mandate-oriented approach of the EU Directives. 15

Within the EU, the issue of standardization is emerging with the January 2012 EU
General Data Protection Regulation. This regulation addresses information security both
within the EU and between EU firms and firms in other countries. It would harmonize
regulations for all members. Presumably this may cause some standards to be loosened
(in Germany for example) and others to be tightened. It extends these rules to all foreign
companies processing data for EU citizens and EU firms could not transmit data to
countries with insufficient protection.16 Disclosure of data breaches would be within 24
hours, which is quite a switch from no disclosure now. Fines for data breaches could be
up to 2% of global revenue, which is potentially huge. Disclosure, assigning blame, and
enforcement are all issues.

The FDIC (2004) considered the implications of ‘offshoring’ of financial activities to
third parties in foreign countries. It noted that, while the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
affirmed that U.S. data-protection rules covered personal information regardless of its
geographic location, it also noted that it can be difficult in practice to ensure the extra-
territorial application of U.S. rules. In particular, fragmentation and global information
flow mean that U.S. firms may not have (or may choose not to have) full transparency
over the location of their information. Third party breaches can yield large and broad
based thefts. 17

Within the U.S. the Federal Trade Commission has been playing a more active role. The
grounds for FTC action is Contract Law: Firms that lose data are breaking the terms of
service based on privacy statement. Fines can be large: $800,000 fine for Spokeo under



15
     For more on market vs. mandate approach to international data, see Mann (2001) and
Mann and Orejas, 2003.
16
   At present data transit is allowed to Argentina, Canada, Iceland, Norway, US under the
Safe Harbor, and to various important financial centers--Switzerland, Lichtenstein, Isle of
Man and Guernsey.
17
   NYTimes: Cyberthieves Looted A.T.M.’s of $45 Million in Just Hours
http://nyti.ms/ZKTw5H.)


32
the Fair Credit Report Law 18. But these fines don’t always work to change behavior.
(Wyndham has been fined three times)19. Another strategy is the mandated audit: Many
years and a big price-tag could change the balance between which is more costly, to
protect data or to experience a breach and incur both immediate and long-lived audit
costs. A caveat to the firm decision is that the advocacy of the FTC has a political
lifespan.

Finally, the issue of cross-border regulation of information comes up in global trade
negotiations. The World Trade Organization General Agreement on Trade in Services
(WTO GATS) is a ‘positive’ list approach to trade negotiations. This is as opposed to the
‘negative list’ approach whereby trade flows between countries are assumed to be
unburdened by regulations, tariffs, and quotas, except for specific derogations (the
negative list). (This is the so-called Most Favored Nation principle, embraced in the
WTO-precursor of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, GATT). The positive
list approach implies that regulatory and tax treatment of bilateral data flows must be
individually negotiated, thus creating the potential for a complex web of jursidictions and
regulatory guidelines.

Legal recourse: Evolving Notion of ‘Standing’

The role of the legal profession is evolving, and may play a more important role in firms
undertaking appropriate security. (See Fryer, Moore, Chown (2013) for an extensive
review of theory and practice.) Initially, and still true in general today, courts have found
that data breach cases have no standing because the link between a data breach and any
future potential use of that data for harm cannot be proved ex ante (although this is
changing, as per discussion above). Simply losing data (as in losing property) is not
sufficient grounds for a case, since in the U.S. there is no right to privacy. As well, the
costs of information loss have heretofore been unquantified (this is changing, as per data
above). Without threat of legal action, there is reduced incentive for firms to improve
data protection.20

However, research suggests that the legal approach may be beginning to have traction as
a disciplining device in the cases of breaches of financial and medical information.
18
  Edward Wyatt, F.T.C. Levies First Fine Over Internet Data NYTimes.com, June 12,
2012,
19
       	  
   “The Federal Trade Commission filed suit against global hospitality company Wyndham Worldwide
Corporation and three of its subsidiaries for alleged data security failures that led to three data breaches at
Wyndham hotels in less than two years. The FTC alleges that these failures led to fraudulent charges on
consumers’ accounts, millions of dollars in fraud loss… http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2012/06/wyndham.shtm
In response, Parsippany, N.J.-based Wyndham moved to dismiss the complaint… saying.. that the FTC
“singled out” Wyndham in “unprecedented litigation.” … that the commission has neither the expertise nor
the statutory authority to establish data security standards for the private sector,”
http://www.scmagazine.com/wyndham-hotels-challenges-ftc-security-suit-over-breaches/article/258559/

20
  A potential new direction is to focus on ‘industry standards’: If firm experiencing a
data breach did not employ ‘industry standard’ the courts are more likely to find against
the firm, especially if data are used inappropriately. (YouRock)
33
Romanosky, Hoffman, and Acquisti (2012) find that the probability that a firm will be
sued is 3.5 times higher when financial data are involved. Settlement is 30% more
frequent when there is allegation of financial loss, even higher for compromised medical
information and if a class action lawsuit is a threat.

More generally, the risk of class action suits (or ambulance chasing) appears to be
increasingly important to legal consultants. (Gibson Dunn) Poneman indicates that legal
defense costs have risen steadily, from accounting for 6 percent of costs (2006) to 15
percent of costs in 2011. Increased legal costs and threats of legal costs increase
incentives for firms to take evasive action/or protect data to avoid becoming embroiled,
even if the case won’t go against them. But these potential legal costs also cause firms to
push-back against disclosure, particularly of the magnitude and sensitivity of information
lost.

Increased Information Security: The Costs

Given the costs of a data breach, it is not surprising that firms are investigating whether
the benefits of investing in information security are greater than the costs of incurring a
data breach. A full review of this literature is beyond the scope of this paper. There are
theoretical articles and practitioner analysis, and many firms whose business it is to sell
information security solutions. 21 Selected research includes Aurora, Hall, Pinto,
Ramsey, Telang, 2004; Gordon and Loeb, 2006; Bojanc and Jerman-Blazic, 2007; Carty,
Pimont, Schmid, 2012. It is not just the cost of investment but also the organizational
behavioral considerations of information security management (Kwon and Johnson,
2012).

Once information security is institutionalized, will investment costs decline? An
important consideration is whether the investment in information security is against the
‘normal’ intrusion or the ‘black swan’ event. Do security investments differ for these
two types of event? Is there a ratcheting-up of security, even if the threat remains the
same?

From an organization behavior standpoint, the security professional will want to ensure
that the rare event never happens on their watch. But if the way in which a rare event
takes place changes with the technology frontier, it may imply an ever increasing security
budget. Neuhaus and Plattner (2012) address this issue in the narrow context of software
security patches. But the principle needs broader recognition.

To get at the general issue of data-breach hype, a Google Alert ‘data breach’ was
employed for 300 days. There was at least one article every day. On average, there were
1-2 articles in the business press, with a single spike over the 300 days at 5 articles. The
general press, averaged about 2 articles per day, with several days spiking to 7 articles.
In media directed to security professionals, the average daily article count was 3 and on
more than 25 days the number of articles was 6, 7, or 8 articles. There is a lot of




34
communication among security professionals. Is this about best practices (which could
reduce incidence of data breaches) or about threats (which could increase investment in
security)?



V: Considerations for the Digital Agenda


Conceptual Framework

There are three characteristics of the information marketplace that pose challenges to the
pricing of information and the balancing of costs and benefits of securing data: (1)
Information economies of scale and scope. (2) Differential market power among
participants. (3) Unknown probability distribution of data breaches and of abuse of
information.

The conceptual challenge is to put all three elements into a model. Probably the most
difficult is to combine the economies of scale/scope and the probability function because
the cost-benefit calculation regarding today’s data breach is a function of all future
possible data breaches. Numerical simulation models are one possible approach but these
need parameterization using data.

Data needs and analysis

An increasingly amount of data is becoming available on the costs of data breaches to
businesses and consumers. More analysis of these data as to the relationships between
sectors, types of data lost, various costs associated with data loss, nationality of
perpetrator and victim of data loss is beginning to become possible. Research will be
fruitful, but depends on access to a wide range of what often is proprietary data.
Ensuring wider availability would enhance research.

However, key variables are not known. What is the probability of a data breach? The
‘dog that didn’t bark’ (that is, transactions or databases that were not compromised)
would seem to be greater than those that are, but we don’t know. Getting a handle on the
probability of a data breach by sector, size of firm, national jurisdiction, is key for
starting to evaluate and balance the costs of protecting data against the costs of intrusion.
In addition, understanding the relationship between data lost and data abused is
important. Most data appear to be lost ‘the old fashioned way,’ not stolen. Is the
likelihood of abuse low or even zero for that kind of data breach? In this regard, the large
but infrequent malicious data breaches would seem to be more costly than the small, but
frequent breaches, but more analysis of data breaches by size, sector, and type of breach
is needed.

Cost of investing in data security and costs of limiting data aggregation are not widely
available. One area for research is the intersection of the investment strategy with the
probability of a data breach. Investing against the infrequent but disastrous event may be

35
inefficient, particularly in a rapidly changing technological environment. Similarly,
evaluating the cost of limiting data aggregation as lost benefits also depends on the
probabilities.

International jurisdiction

The information marketplace and many firms are global, but policy jurisdictions and
consumers are still local. Countries differ in their emphasis for information security,
data-in-transit vs. data-at-rest and these differences can create exploitable gaps for
hackers. Considering ways to reduce international arbitrage offers an area for research in
the political, economics, and technological spheres.

Countries also differ in their approach to information aggregation, protection, and breach
disclosure. These differences are not likely to be overcome, since deep-seated cultural
values play some role. More work is needed on the value of information, the value of
protection, and the costs of a breach both within and across international borders.




36
References

Acquisti, Alessandro (2010) “The Economics of Personal Data and the Economics of
Privacy” draft dated November 21, 2010.

Acquisti, Alessandro, Allan Friedman, and Rahul Telang (2006) Understanding the
Impact of Privacy Breaches 35th Research Conference on Communication, Information
and Internet Policy (TPRC).

Anderson, Horace E. (2006) “The Privacy Gambit: Toward a Game-Theoretic Approach
to International Data Protection,” Pace University Law Faculty Publications, 1-1-2006.

Anderson, Ross and Chris Barton, Rainer Bohme, Richard Clayton, Michel J.G. van
Eeten, Michael Levi, Tyler Moore, Stefan Savage (2012) “Measuring the Cost of
Cybercrime,” WEIS 2012.

Arora, Ashish, Anand Nandkumar, Rahul Telang (date) Does information security attack
frequency increase with vulnerability disclosure? An empirical analysis”

Ashish Arora, Christopher M. Forman, Anand Nandkumar and Rahul Telang (date),
“Competitive and strategic effects in the timing of patch release”

Arrow, Kenneth J. and Gerard Debreu (1954) "Existence of an equilibrium for a
competitive economy". Econometrica 22: 265–290. doi:10.2307/1907353

August, Terrence and Tunay I. Tunca (2011) “Who Should be Responsible for Software
Security? A Comparative Analysis of Liability Policies in Network Environments, WEIS
March 2011.

Demetz, Lukas and Daniel Bachlechner (2012) “To Invest or Not To Invest: Assessing
the economic viability of a policy and security configuration management tool” WEIS
2012.

Bamberger, Kenneth A. and Deirdre K. Mulligan (2011) “Privacy on the Books and On
the Ground,” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 63:247, 247-315.

Brecht, Matthias and Thomas Nowey (2012) “A Closer Look at Information Security
Costs” WEIS 2012.

Campbell, K., L.A. Gordon, M. P. Loeb and L. Zhou, (2003) The Economic Cost of
Publicly Announced Information Security Breaches: Empirical Evidence from the Stock
Market, Journal of Computer Security, Vol. 11, No. 3.

Carty, Matt, Vincent Pimont, David W. Schmid (2012) Measuring the Value of
37
Information Security Investments, IT@Intel White Paper, January.

Cavusoglu, Huseyin, Birendra Mishra, and Srinivasan Raghunathan. (2004) The Effect of
Internet Security Breach Announcements on Market Value: Capital Market Reactions for
Breached Firms and Internet Security Developers, International Journal of Electronic
Commerce / Fall, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 69–104

European Commission (2012) “Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL on the protection of individuals with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (General Data
Protection Regulation).

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2004) Offshore Outsourcing of Data Services by
Insured Institutions and Associated Consumer Privacy Risks, June.

Fryer, Huw, Roksana Moore, and Tim Chown (2013) “On the Viability of Using Liability
to Incentivise Internet Security”, WEIS 2013.

Gatzlaff, Kevin M. and Kathleen A. McCullough. (2010) The Effect of Data Breaches on
Shareholder Wealth, Risk Management and Insurance Review, Vol. 13, No. 1, 61-83

Gibson Dunn (2012) “2011 Year-End Data Privacy and Security Update” February 7.

Global Privacy Alliance (2009) BREACH NOTIFICATION LEGISLATION KEY
ELEMENTS TO CONSIDER, August.

Greenstein, Shane and Ryan McDevitt (2011) "The Global Broadband Bonus: Broadband
Internet’s Impact on Seven Countries," in The Linked World: How ICT Is Transforming
Societies, Cultures and Economies, The Conference Board.

Greenstein, Shane and Ryan McDevitt: (2009) "The Broadband Bonus: Accounting for
Broadband Internet's Impact on U.S. GDP," NBER Working Paper #14758.

Hann, Il-Horn, Kai-Lung, Hui, Tom S. Lee, I.P.L Png, (2002) “Online Information
Privacy: Measuring the Cost-Benefit Trade-Off,” Twenty-Third International
Conference on Information Systems.

Hirsh, Dennis D. (2006) “Protecting the Inner Environment: What Privacy Legislation
Can Learn from Environmental Law” Georgia Law Review, vol 41 no. 1, p1-62.

Ioannidis, Christos, David Pym, and Julian Williams (2012) “Sustainability in
Information Stewardship: Time Preferences, Externalities, and Social Co-Ordination”
WEIS2012.

Javelin Strategy and Research (2013). “Data Breaches Lead to Identity Fraud”.



38
Kannan, Karthik, Jackie Rees, and Sanjay Sridhar. (2007) Market Reactions to
Information Security Breach Announcements: An Empirical Analysis, International
Journal of Electronic Commerce / Fall, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 69–91

Karagodsky, Igor and Catherine L. Mann (2011) “Do Equity Market Punish Firms that
Lose Customer Data?

Kwon, Juhee and M. Eric Johnson (2012) “Security Resources, Capabilties and Cultural
Values: Links to Security Performance and Compliance,” WEIS2012.

MacCarthy, Mark (2010 “Information Security Policy in the U.S. Retail Payments Industry”
WEIS 2010

Mann, Catherine L. (2001) “International Internet Governance: Oh, What A Tangled Web
We Could Weave!,” Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, Summer/Fall.

Mann, Catherine L. and Diana Orejas (2003), “Can the NAFTA Partners Forge a Global
Approach to Internet Governance?” in North-American Linkages, Richard G. Harris, ed.
Ottawa: Industry Canada, 2003.

Mann, Catherine L., Sue E. Eckert, Sarah Cleeland Knight (2000) Global Electronic
Commerce: A Policy Primer. Institute for International Economics: Washington DC.

Morton, Fiona Scott (2006) “Consumer Benefit from Use of the Internet”, in Adam B.
Jaffe, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern eds. Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol 6 . The
MIT Press.

Neuhaus, Stephan and Bernard Plattner (2012) “Software Security Economics: Theory
and Practice,” WEIS 2012.

Oussayef, Karim Z. (2008) “Selective privacy: Facilitating Market-Based Solutions to
Data Breaches by Standardizing Internet Privacy Policies,” Boston University Journal of
Science and Technology Law, Vol. 14:1, 104-131.

Orr, Madolyn (2012) “Foxes Guarding the Henhouse: An Assessment of Current Self-
Regulatory Approaches to Protecting Consumer Privacy Interests in Online Behavioral
Advertising,” www.ftc.gov/os/comments/privacyreportframework/00231-57343.pdf

Ponemon Institute (2012) “Consumer Study on Data Breach Notification,” sponsored by
Experian Data Breach Resolution, June.

Retzer, Karin (2008)”Data Breach Notification: The Changing Landscape in the EU,”

Roberds, William and Stacey Schreft (2009) “Data Breaches and Identity Theft,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 56, pp 918-929.



39
Romanosky, Sasha and Alessandro Acquisti (2009) “Privacy Costs and Personal Data
Protection; Economic and Legal Perspectives” Berkeley Technology Law Journal vol 24
no 3, pp 1061-1101.

Romanosky, Sasha, Alessandro Acquisti, and Richard Sharp (2010) “Data Breaches and
Identity Theft: When is Mandatory Disclosure Optimal?”, TPRC 2010. Available at
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1989594

Romanosky, Sasha, Rahul Telang, Alessandro Acquisti (2011) “Do Data Breach
Disclosure Laws Reduce Identity Theft?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 256-286.

Romanosky, Sasha, David A. Hoffman, and Alessandro Acquisti (2012) “Empirical
Analysis of Data Breach Litigation,” Temple University Legal Studies Research Paper
No. 2012-30. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1986461 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1986461

Stevens, Gina (2012) “Data Security Breach Notification Laws,” Congressional Research
Service, R42475.

Sullivan, Richard J. (2010) The Changing Nature of the U.S. Card Payment Fraud:
Issues for Industry and Public Policy,” WEIS2010

Thomas, Russell Cameron, Marcin Antkiewicz, Patrick Florer, Suzanne Widup, Matthew
Woodyard (2013) “How Bad Is It? A Branching Activity Model to Estimate the Impact
of Information Security Breaches,” WEIS 2013

US Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Agency
(date?) “Chapter 1 – Theory of Markets and Privacy,”
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/page/chapter-1-theory-markets-and-privacy

Black swan events were introduced by Nassim Nicholas Taleb in his 2001 book Fooled
By Randomness, which concerned financial events. His 2007 book The Black Swan

Tang, Zhulei; Yu (Jeffrey) Hu, and Michel D. Smith (2007) "Gaining Trust Through
Online Privacy Protection: Self-Regulation, Mandatory Standards, or Caveat Emptor,"
Journal of Management Information Systems vol 24:4 p 153-173.

Yan Chen, Grace YoungJoo Jeon, Yong-Mi Kim (2012) "A Day without a Search
Engine: An Experimental Study of Online and Offline Searches," (location)




40
Appendix Table 1: Summary of literature review of equity market effect of data breach

Author              Days to     Market index        Interval for     # events   Time        Mean CAR %
                    calculate                       CAR              in the     period      loss by window
                    market                          calculation      dataset    covered     (reported if
                    model                                                                   significant)


Campbell, et. al.   121         NYSE                -1 to +1         43         1997-2000   −0.02
                                AMEX
                                NASDAQ

Acquisti, et. al    92          NYSE                0 to +1          79         2000-2006   -0.58
                                NASDAQ              0 to +2                                 -0.46
                                                    0 to +5                                 0.21
                                                    0 to +10                                1.3


Cavusoglu, et. al   160         NASDAQ              2 days           78         1996-2001   Not signif
                                                    Day 0                                   –0.0086
                                                    Day +1                                  –0.0123
                                                                                            (check
                                                                                            magnitudes
Kannan, et. al      50          SIC codes control   -1 to +2         72         1997-2003   -0.65
                                group S&P 500       -1 to +7                                -1.4
                                index               -1 to +29                               2.22


Gatzlaff and        245         Value-weighted      Day 0            77         2004-2006   -0.57
McCullough                      S&P500 index        0 to 1                                  -0.84
                                                    0 to x in one                           avg: -0.74
                                                    day increments
                                                    to 0 to +35
Health study




Karagodsky and                  NYSE, NASDQ,        Day +1                                  -0.7%
Mann                                                Day -1 to + 7                           range: 1% -
                                                                                            1.3%
                                Ken French          Day -1 to +7
                                Sectors
                                1. banks                                                    1.2%
                                2. health                                                   2.5%
                                3. technology                                               no loss
                                4. retail                                                   1%
                                5. insurance                                                no loss
                                6. brokers                                                  no loss




41
Data sources (incomplete) :

DLDOS, open security foundation public database. Further information about the
database is available at http://attrition.org/dataloss/dldos.html. [this database is no longer,
as of first quarter 2012, available for immediate download].

Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, www.privacyrights.org/data-breach




42
