                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOW PRODUCT STANDARDIZATION AFFECTS CHOICE:
     EVIDENCE FROM THE MASSACHUSETTS HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGE

                                     Keith M Marzilli Ericson
                                          Amanda Starc

                                       Working Paper 19527
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19527


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2013




We thank Raj Chetty, David Cutler, David Dranove, Jonathan Gruber, Ben Handel, Larry Katz, Jon
Kolstad, David Laibson, Ariel Pakes, Jim Rebitzer, Josh Schwartzstein, and Bob Town for thoughtful
comments, along with seminar participants at the American Economic Association annual meeting,
the Healthcare Markets Conference, the NBER Insurance Meeting, and the University of Wisconsin.
We acknowledge funding from the Lab for Economic Applications and Policy (LEAP) at Harvard
University, and Boston University and Wharton internal research funds. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Keith M Marzilli Ericson and Amanda Starc. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Product Standardization Affects Choice: Evidence from the Massachusetts Health Insurance
Exchange
Keith M Marzilli Ericson and Amanda Starc
NBER Working Paper No. 19527
October 2013
JEL No. D14,D80,H31,I11,L15

                                           ABSTRACT

Standardization of complex products is touted as improving consumer decisions and intensifying
pricecompetition, but evidence on standardization is limited. We examine a natural experiment:
thestandardizationof health insurance plans on the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange. Pre-
standardization, firmshad wide latitude to design plans. A regulatory change then required firms
to standardize the cost-sharingparameters of plans and offer seven defined options; plans remained
differentiated on network, brand,and price. Standardization led consumers on the HIX to choose
more generous health insurance plansand led to substantial shifts in brands' market shares. We
decompose the sources of this shift into threeeffects: price, product availability, and valuation. A
discrete choice model shows that standardization changed the weights consumers attach to plan
attributes (a valuation effect), increasing the salience of tier. The availability effect explains the
bulk of the brand shifts. Standardization increased consumer welfare in our models, but firms
captured some of the surplus by reoptimizing premiums. We use hypothetical choice experiments
to replicate the effect of standardization and conduct alternative counterfactuals.


Keith M Marzilli Ericson
Boston University School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kericson@bu.edu

Amanda Starc
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Room 303 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
astarc@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
Market e¢ ciency relies on consumers making informed choices. Yet in many contexts, con-
sumers face di¢ cult trade-o¤s because they may not understand the product itself, may have
di¢ culty comparing di¤erent products1 , may be overwhelmed by large choice sets2 , or may
be unable to observe important dimensions of product quality. Market makers and regula-
tors often seek to help consumers with choice architecture that simpli…es complex problems.
For example, policy-makers may require …rms to disclose certain types of information about
their products (e.g. gas mileage on cars; see Dranove and Jin 2010), may create certi…cation
schemes that indicate whether a product has met minimal levels of quality (e.g. Leslie and
Jin 2003 on restaurant quality, Houde 2013 on energy e¢ ciency). Relatedly, policy-makers
may "nudge" consumers into making di¤erent (potentially better) choices, for instance by
changing how information is presented, what the default option is, or other aspects of the
decision interface (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian 2009). Providing clear, transparent informa-
tion or simplifying a choice menu is often seen as a benign nudge that can improve market
outcomes and consumer surplus.
    We examine the e¤ects of product standardization, a policy designed to improve con-
sumer choice and increase competitive pressure on …rms. Using insights from the industrial
organization literature and behavioral public economics, we show how standardization af-
fects consumer choice, welfare, and …rm behavior in a complex market setting. Our context–
consumer choice of health insurance plans on the Massachusetts health insurance exchange
(HIX)– shares similarities to other markets for complex products, and it is an important
market itself: consumer choice of health insurers is a key foundation of the U.S. health care
system. Moreover, the insights and methodological tools utilized in this study are applicable
to a wide range of policy interventions.
    We identify the e¤ects of standardization using a natural experiment: the standardization
of health insurance plans on the Massachusetts HIX. Initially, the Massachusetts HIX gave
…rms wide latitude to design the terms of insurance plans; these plans were then grouped into
tiers based on actuarial value (a measure of the plan’s overall level of coverage). However, a
regulatory change in 2010 standardized the …nancial cost-sharing characteristics of plans on
the exchange, allowing only seven distinct plan types. Firms were still permitted to set prices
and di¤erentiate themselves by brand and physician/hospital network. This di¤erentiation
    1
    See Kling et al. (2011) on comparison frictions in the Medicare Part D market.
    2
    On choice overload in general, see Iyengar and Lepper (2000). In the health insurance context, Hanoch
et al. (2009) and Bundorf and Szrek (2010) show experimentally that decision making di¢ culty grows with
choice set size. Finally, Frank and Lamiraud (2009) examine health insurance markets in Switzerland, and
…nd that as the number of choices o¤ered to individuals grow, their willingness to switch plans for a given
gain declines.


                                                    2
matters for consumers.3
    We …rst show reduced-form evidence that standardization had a substantial e¤ect on
brand and characteristics of plan chosen: consumers who enroll just before and just after the
change look similar but make di¤erent choices. Overall, the generosity of plans chosen rose
post-standardization (there was a drop in the share of enrollees choosing bronze tier and high
deductible health plans). There were also major shifts in insurers’relative market share. We
show that these changes were a result of the policy, rather than confounding factors such as
changes in the composition of consumers or seasonal e¤ects. We also show that these shifts
did not result merely from changes in relative prices.
    Standardization could have a¤ected choice through two major channels: an "availability"
and a "valuation" e¤ect. For the availability e¤ect, choices could change because the mix of
products available changed and the utility-maximizing choice might have di¤ered between the
old and new choice sets. This is easily accommodated in the standard, utility-based model
of consumer choice. However, preferences may be context-dependent (Tversky and Simonson
1993). Thus, we allow for a valuation e¤ect: a change in decision weights after standardiza-
tion (that is, the parameters of the decision utility function that rationalize observed choices
change). Note that the decision utility function may be distinct from welfare-relevant util-
ity,4 and may be a¤ected by seemingly-irrelevant factors (see e.g. Ericson and Starc 2012a
on heuristics). Here, standardization may alter decision utility because it shifts consumers’
attention (DellaVigna 2009) or changes the salience of product characteristics (e.g. as in
Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer 2012).
    To distinguish between the availability and valuation e¤ects, we estimate a discrete choice
model in which a consumer’s choice is a function of underlying preferences and context-
dependent decision weights. Our methodology allows us to identify both utility parameters
and the di¤erential e¤ects of changes in choice architecture that resulted from the policy
change. We allow decision weights on various insurance attributes (deductible, brand, etc.)
to vary pre- and post-standardization. We …nd that decision weights di¤er signi…cantly pre-
and post-standardization. We then present a more structured model of consumer choice in
which the salience of bundles of product characteristics is allowed to vary across regimes (e.g.
…nancial characteristics, brand, etc.).5 We decompose the total e¤ect of standardization on
   3
     Starc (2012) …nds that consumers have preferences over the brands in the Medigap market, despite plans
having identical …nancial and network characteristics. We note that in this context, carrier denotes both
network breadth and less tangible characteristics like customer service and trustworthiness.
   4
     For example, Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin (1997) distinguish "decision utility"–the function that
rationalizes observed choices–from "experienced utility", the hedonic ‡ow from actual consumption. Changes
in the choice interface may change the decision weights, but are unlikely to change the hedonic ‡ow from
insurance plans.
   5
      We present two additional models– an optimization friction model, and a substitutability model– to



                                                    3
market shares into components and …nd that the valuation e¤ect is larger in magnitude
than the availability e¤ect; changes in relative prices play a minor role. We …nd that
standardization increased consumer surplus and overall welfare.6 But …rms reoptimized
prices and captured some of the additional surplus and consumer welfare would have been
higher if prices had not changed.
    In practice, standardization of products often entails two changes: a change in the choice
menu (i.e. the options o¤ered), as well as changes to the decision interface (e.g. simpli…ca-
tions enabled by standardization). While both types of changes are relevant for estimating
the policy-relevant e¤ect of standardization, it can be valuable to disentangle them in order
to make predictions for other contexts. To separate these, we conduct an experiment in
which participants make hypothetical insurance choices from menus and choice interfaces
similar to the HIX’s pre- and post-standardization menu, as well as a new counterfactual
condition that separates the changes in product availability from the consumer interface.
    Our experimental design replicates the e¤ect of standardization on choice: although
baseline choices di¤er between experiment participants and HIX enrollees, the experiment
replicates the major shifts (toward more generous plans and among brands) resulting from
standardization in the actual HIX. This supports the validity of our research design on the
HIX: standardization itself, rather than a shift in the composition of enrollees, explains the
results.7 We run a third condition to dissociate the e¤ect of the choice menu change from
the choice interface: in this treatment, participants see the post-standardization choice menu
using the pre-standardization choice interface. Results show that choices would have been
di¤erent if standardization had not been accompanied by a change to the decision interface.
Moreover, we …nd that standardization induces shifts in the reported importance of plan
attributes.
    The complexity of insurance plans make HIXs an ideal context to examine standard-
ization. The multiple dimensions of these products are di¢ cult for consumers to evaluate
(e.g. coinsurance, copayments, deductibles, maximum out-of-pocket limits). Health insur-
ance markets have particularly high levels of consumer confusion (e.g. see Abaluck and
Gruber 2010 on Medicare Part D), and evidence indicates individuals misunderstand impor-
illustrate natural, complementary interpretations of the consumer’s decision process.
    6
      We use two di¤erent welfare criteria, the pre- and post-standardization decision utility indices, as welfare
evaluation in the presence of choice inconsistencies is controversial (see Bernheim and Rangel 2011, Beshears
et al. 2008). While the two criteria give di¤erent magnitudes of the e¤ect of standardization, both agree
that standardization increased welfare. For simplicity, we discuss the pre-standardization criterion in the
text and leave the post-standardization criterion for an appendix.
    7
      These results also support the use of hypothetical choice experiments in health insurance; see also
Kesternich, Heiss, McFadden, and Winter (2012); Ericson and Kessler (2013); and Krueger and Kuziemko
(2013).



                                                        4
tant aspects of insurance contracts (Handel and Kolstad 2013). While most existing health
insurance markets do not have standardized plan types, Medigap (Medicare Supplement In-
surance) is an exception. Suggestive evidence from interviews with program administrators
indicates that Medigap’s standardization reduced consumer confusion (Fox, Snyder, and Rice
2003; also see Rice and Thomas 1992).8
    Our results provide guidance for the design of HIX, while also adding to the behavioral
public …nance literature (e.g. on tax salience, see Finkelstein 2010, Chetty, Looney, and Kroft
2012) and the industrial organization literature. Designing HIXs well is important: they are
part of a movement toward consumer-driven markets for health insurance, and approximately
20 million consumers will receive coverage via the exchanges under the Patient Protection
and A¤ordable Care Act (ACA). Various states have established HIXs as a result of the ACA;
the federal government will run the exchanges for other states. There is a debate among
economists and policy-makers over the extent to which HIX regulators should actively shape
the o¤erings in the market, including whether to standardize plans. Understanding consumer
demand for insurance, and how it is a¤ected by standardization, is critical in implementing
the ACA e¤ectively and is relevant for a number of other insurance markets as well (e.g.
employer-sponsored insurance, Medicare Part D).
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the policy change in Massachusetts
and our data sources. Section 3 provides reduced form evidence of the impact of standardiza-
tion. Section 4 outlines the empirical model and presents the structural estimates. Section
5 conducts counterfactual analyses and welfare analyses, and Section 6 describes the hypo-
thetical choice experiment. Section 7 concludes.


2       The Massachusetts HIX
2.1     History and Existing Literature
The Massachusetts HIX was established by the state’s 2006 health reform. The HIX we
examine is an unsubsidized health insurance exchange (termed "Commonwealth Choice")
for individuals and families with incomes over 300% of the poverty line who were not of-
fered employer-sponsored insurance; a separate, subsidized program serves individuals under
300% of the poverty line. In the time frame we analyze (2009-2010), the exchange had been
    8
     A well-identi…ed analysis is di¢ cult, since many regulations changed simultaneously. Relatedly, Finkel-
stein (2004) …nds that the introduction of minimum standards in the Medigap market reduced the fraction
of the population holding such insurance. However, we are unaware of any work examining the e¤ect of the
Medigap standardization on price competition or consumer choice among brands.




                                                     5
operating for 2 years, and was highly regulated by the Connector Authority.9 The Massa-
chusetts reform was widely seen as a success: uninsurance rates fell to nearly zero and costs
rose no faster than in neighboring states (Kolstad and Kowalski 2012). The HIX played
an important role in this reform by providing a marketplace for choosing among a variety
of regulated insurance options. Consumers purchasing an exchange plan can choose a plan
through an internet portal or by phone; most enroll through the HIX’s website. On the
website, consumers input demographic information that a¤ects pricing and then are able to
compare various plans.
    In previous work, we have modeled consumer demand on the Massachusetts HIX prior to
standardization (Ericson and Starc 2012a), and examined pricing regulation in the presence
of imperfect competition (Ericson and Starc 2012b). In Massachusetts, insurers can only
price on age, family size, and location; critically, the oldest consumer in a plan can only be
charged twice the rate of the youngest consumer. We show that tighter restrictions on how
prices can vary with age lead to higher prices for younger consumers, but increase overall
welfare in the presence of an e¤ective mandate. See Ericson and Starc (2013) for more detail
on the HIX.


2.2       Plan Standardization
Under the ACA, states have a great deal of latitude in designing exchanges, including plan
design. However, throughout its existence, the Massachusetts HIX has taken an active
approach. Initially, a number of tiers were de…ned (bronze, silver, gold) by actuarial value,
in a model that was subsequently duplicated by the A¤ordable Care Act. The Connector
Authority required insurers to o¤er a minimum number of products (six, distributed across
tiers) and it awarded a seal of approval only to selected providers (Toolkit 2011). This
system evolved over time so that in late 2009 25 distinct plans were o¤ered by 6 insurers:
Blue Cross Blue Shield, Neighborhood Health Plan, Tufts, Health New England, Harvard
Pilgrim, and Fallon.
    Interest in standardizing the plans grew out consumer feedback, as consumers were con-
fused by the existing choice architecture. Board members further saw this as an oppor-
tunity to improve choice, stating that "consumers don’t have to worry that there’s some
sort of ’gotcha’in the health insurance purchase. They can know that they are comparing
equivalent products and so make better informed decisions based on premium and provider
di¤erences".10 However, board members faced a di¢ cult choice of how to standardize the
products; the Connector had little research to guide their decision.
  9
      Eventually, it will transition to being an ACA exchange, with slightly di¤erent regulation.
 10
      Nancy Turnbull, quoted in Toolkit (2011).


                                                       6
    The initial standardization led to the creation of seven product categories: Gold, Silver-
High, Medium and Low, and Bronze-High, Medium, and Low. The plans were initially
o¤ered by the same set of six insurers. As a result, while standardization lowered the num-
ber of contract designs (…nancial parameters) used in the market, it actually increased the
total number of plans, in the sense of contract design-carrier combinations. Crucially, stan-
dardization also unbundled the decision making process into one decision about a contract
design, followed by a decision about an insurer. (The standardization process is an ongoing
one; the silver medium plan was later eliminated due to low demand, and additional insurers
have been added.)
    Standardization was a policy change that did two things: it altered both the plans avail-
able and the display of information in the marketplace. Pre-standardization, plans were
simply listed in ascending premium order. Post-standardization, consumers …rst choose
a standardized …nancial package and then choose among carriers. This choice process de-
coupled the choice of …nancial characteristics from the choice of carrier, potentially leading
to di¤erent decision weights on carrier and characteristics like deductibles and copayments.
Screenshots that show the choice interface both pre- and post-standardization are available
in the appendix.
    Figure 1 shows the plan designs available before and after standardization for each insurer,
focusing on plan’s deductible and coinsurance for hospital admissions. (There are additional
plan design parameters not displayed, including out-of-pocket maximum, physician copay,
etc.) Each marker represents a plan that is available; the size of the marker indicates that
plan’s relative market share. Note that virtually all the pre-standardization plans were
available in similar forms post-standardization; the o¤set markers in the pre-standardized
panel indicates when an insurer’s plan design di¤ered slightly from the standardized version.
In e¤ect, standardization aligned all the plan options on the grid and …lled in the holes in
the grid.
    Plan standardization can a¤ect choice in a number of ways. First, relative prices may
change. Second, the addition of new plans to the choice set may alter choices; we refer to this
as the "availability" e¤ect. Third, the relative weights consumers place on plan attributes
may be altered by the option menu itself and the information presentation; we refer to this
as the "valuation" e¤ect. The pricing and availability e¤ects are easily accommodated in a
standard plan choice model, while a model that incorporates alternative decision processes
is necessary to capture the valuation e¤ect.
    Plan standardization can also be interpreted as lowering search costs– here, the cost
of using acquired information to compare plans. Existing literature has examined search
costs in markets with homogenous goods (see e.g. Cebul et al. (2011) and Hortascu and


                                               7
Syverson (2004)). Lowering search costs through improved information disclosure can lead to
increased price competition (Sorensen (2000)) or improved quality (Jin and Leslie (2003)).11
In our context, standardization does not turn plans into homogenous products–they are still
di¤erentiated on network/brand– but does reduce di¤erentiation on cost-sharing. Because
the prices are listed clearly on the HIX, the search problem is not primarily about …nding
prices, but about network quality (e.g. "is my doctor covered?") and plan generosity ("Is
20% coinsurance on hospital spending better a $500 copayment per hospital admission?").


2.3     Data
Our dataset is transaction-level data (purchase, cancellation, and payments) from the un-
subsidized market (Commonwealth Choice) from the beginning of the Connector’s existence
in July 2007 until July 2010. We observe approximately 50,000 transactions. There are large
spikes in initial enrollment during the …rst month of the Connector’s existence as well as just
before the individual mandate took e¤ect in December 2007, with a steady-state enrollment
of approximately 1,000 households per month.
    Our main analyses focuses on the subset of the data for which we have detailed price
information: Nov. 2009-Feb. 2010. Because our data from the Connector is transaction-
level data, we do not observe all the plan prices that individuals face. However, for this
subsample, we collected an extensive set of price quotes from the Connector website using
a Perl script. In this narrow timeframe there are no other major changes in the consumer
population or HIX regulation beyond plan standardization. We supplement this data sample
with data dating back to Nov. 2008 to examine trends in plan choice, control for seasonality,
and to conduct di¤erence-in-di¤erence analyses.


3     Reduced-Form Evidence
3.1     Plans Chosen Pre- and Post-Standardization
The reduced-form evidence shows that standardization had a signi…cant e¤ect on the level
of insurance generosity chosen, as all as on the choice of insurer (brand/network). Figure
1 graphically shows each insurance plan’s design and market share before and after stan-
dardization, and Figure 2 gives precise, aggregate numbers. It is immediately apparent that
standardization leads to a large increase in Neighborhood Health Plan’s market share (38.7%
  11
     In the health insurance setting, Dafny and Dranove (2005) show that health plan report cards do "tell
consumers something they don’t know" and increase enrollment beyond the role of market-based information,
and Jin and Sorensen (2006) …nd that plan ratings have a meaningful e¤ect on quality of health plan chosen.


                                                    8
to 49.3%), and a large decrease in Fallon’s market share (21.1% to 7.6%); both di¤erences
are highly statistically signi…cant (p<0.001). Other insurers also saw shifts in market share
to a lesser degree.
    Turning to the generosity of health plan, standardization increased the overall generosity
of health plan chosen. Bronze plans are popular during both time periods, but their market
share declines by about 5 percentage points post-standardization (p=0.01); the decline in
bronze enrollment is absorbed roughly equally by silver and gold plans. The largest di¤erence
is a shift away from high-deductible health plans (HDHPs, a particular sub-type of bronze
plans12 ): while 54% of enrollees overall chose HDHPs pre-standardization, only 29% chose
HDHPs post-standardization (p<0.001).
    Table 1 shows that enrollees chose more generous plans post-standardization. We cal-
culate each plan’s actuarial value– the fraction of health care costs that are insured for a
representative sample of the population–using the federal government’s formula for the ACA
exchanges.13 The mean actuarial value of chosen plans rises from 78% pre-standardization
to 83% post-standardization.14 The corresponding mean out-of-pocket cost declines by
$259/year, with a reduction in the standard deviation of out-of-pocket spending as well.


3.2     Di¤erence-in-Di¤erence Estimates and Trends
Our preferred reduced form estimates come from a comparison of the months immediately
prior to and following standardization described above. Our enrollee age-mix is similar pre
and post-standardization (Table 1) and we …nd no evidence of trends in choice in the six
months prior to standardization (see Table A.3 and Figure A.1.)
    We also estimate a di¤erence-in-di¤erence model that directly accounts for any potential
seasonality. In this model, we use data from the year prior to standardization (Nov-Dec.
2008 and Jan.-Feb. 2009) as a placebo test. This time period that did not see any major
changes to the HIX. Table A.2 (column 3) shows that there were no signi…cant changes in
tier chosen for Nov-Dec. 2008 versus Jan.-Feb. 2009, alleviating concerns that seasonality
is driving our results. Nov-Dec. 2008 versus Jan.-Feb. 2009 saw only very small changes in
brands chosen (less than 5 percentage point shift in market share), and these shifts were in
the opposite direction from the shift seen after standardization.
    Thus, the formal di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimates in column 2 of Table A.2 are very
similar to our main speci…cations, and in fact show a slightly larger e¤ect of standardization.
  12
     We de…ne high-deductible health plans (HDHP) following the tax code as plans with at least a $1200
individual deductible ($1150 in 2009).
  13
     Available at http://www.cms.gov/cciio/resources/regulations-and-guidance/index.html
  14
     For bronze plans, actuarial value is generally within the 60-70% range. Silver plans range between 70-90%,
and gold plans have actuarial values above 90%.


                                                      9
However, our di¤erence-in-di¤erence analysis is limited in the data it can examine: because
we do not have detailed plan design data for the period prior to Nov. 2009, we cannot include
actuarial value, HDHP status, or out-of-pocket costs in our model for this period. However,
the similarity for the attributes we can observe indicates that our primary estimates do in
fact identify the e¤ect of standardization.


3.3     Hedonic Pricing
To examine the e¤ect of the standardization on prices, we present a series of hedonic regres-
sions in Table 2. Unadjusted for generosity, plans are slightly cheaper in 2010 (column 1).
However, column 2 shows that this is largely because in 2010, there were more plans avail-
able in the lower tiers (bronze and silver) than in 2009. If anything, plans became slightly
more expensive, adjusted for …nancial generosity. Columns 3 and 4 show that this e¤ect is
not uniform across plan types. Less generous tiers become relatively more expensive, while
the cost savings associated with choosing a HDHP, controlling for actuarial value, are larger
in 2010. The observed changes in relative prices predict shifts in choice: for example, we
should expect more consumers to choose gold plans and HDHPs in 2010 since they became
relatively cheaper. Since we in fact see a shift away from HDHPs our consumer choice model
must be ‡exible enough to allow for other factors to a¤ect choice: the choice menu available
and the decision process itself.


4      Standardization and Consumer Choice
4.1     Shifting Decision Weights: Results
We model consumer choice as a discrete choice problem. First and most fundamentally,
products are di¤erentiated based on network and brand. Second, we are interested in mod-
eling consumer choice of plans, and so infer valuation of insurance attributes from those
choices.15 In our model, consumers face a discrete choice from a set of plans, and attach
decision weights to various plan characteristics. In our baseline model, we assume that con-
sumer i’s decision utility of plan j is given by uij = j + ij + "ij , with the mean value
of a plan denoted by j and the individual-speci…c component denoted by ij : Given the
  15
    The alternative method of forming consumers’ subjective expected distribution of out-of-pocket costs
under each plan, and evaluating plans using a risk-averse utility function for money, is not feasible in our
application. First, we do not know consumers’subjective expected distribution of costs, since beliefs may
not match actual claims. Second, evidence shows that consumers do not value insurance plans according
to the standard expected utility model (Abaluck and Gruber 2009, Barseghyan et al. forthcoming). Third,
claims data are unavailable for this population. Fourth, plans would still be di¤erentiated based on network.


                                                     10
assumption that the error term "ij is i.i.d. extreme value, the probability that consumer i
purchases product j can be written as:

                                                  exp j + ij
                                       sij =
                                               1 + j exp j +        ij


    While a standard model of consumer choice can account for both the availability e¤ect
and the e¤ect of price changes, we also seek to explore how consumer valuations di¤er pre-
and post-standardization. To capture the valuation e¤ect, we allow the decision utility index
to depend on both primitive preferences and context: changes in context can alter how an
attribute is valued.16
    In Table 3, we separately estimate decision-weights pre- and post-standardization. Util-
ity is given by uij = Xij ( + 1P ost ) + ( + 1P ost ) pij +"ij ; where          and are pre-
standardization decision weights, 1P ost is a post-standardization indicator, and        is the
additive shift in each decision weight post-standardization. To cleanly identify price sensi-
tivity ; we follow a similar identi…cation strategy to that used in our previous work (Ericson
and Starc 2012b). Becuase prices set by …rms jump discontinuously at round numbered ages
(e.g. 30, 35, 40, etc.), while preferences evolve continuously with age, can be identi…ed by
allowing preferences to change continuously with age. To implement this by allowing for an
age-trend in price-sensitivity. For a detailed discussion on the validity of this strategy and
its robustness to a variety of speci…cations, see Ericson and Starc (2012b).17
    Column 1 of Table 3 presents a conditional logit speci…cation that allows for heterogeneity
in based on age, but no further heterogeneity in decision weights. Then, in column 2, we
present a mixed logit speci…cation that allows to take on a log-normal distribution, so
that demographically-identical individuals in a given year vary in how much weight they
put on premiums. In the mixed logit speci…cation, the estimated standard deviation on the
premium coe¢ cient is substantial and statistically signi…cant.
    Both speci…cations show little evidence that standardization increased price sensitivity.
Column 1 shows that the premium coe¢ cient indeed becomes more negative (more price
sensitive) post-standardization, a di¤erence of about 4 percent; this di¤erence is not statisti-
cally signi…cant. Column 2 estimates a distribution of separately pre- and post- standard-
  16
     While we use the language of decision utility indices and decision weights, the idea is related to that of
Bernheim and Rangel’s (2010) "ancillary conditions" which, although they do not change the characteristics
of a product, can still a¤ect choice.
  17
     Only relative changes in decision weights are identi…ed by comparing decisions in two contexts. We
thus need to normalize the utility of one of the plans (or the outside option, in the absence of an e¤ective
mandate) to be zero in both years. We normalize the utility of the gold BCBS plan to be zero and unchanged
across years. This plan was chosen both because it is contractually identical and has similar market share
before and after the policy intervention.


                                                      11
ization. The mean values of pre- and post-standardization are -0.043 and -0.040, respec-
tively; the mean individual is slightly less price sensitive post-standardization. (Similarly, the
medians are -0.046 and -0.042, indicating slightly less price sensitivity post-standardization).
One can also see relative changes in the valuation of tiers (bronze is the comparison category):
HDHPs receive more negative weight post-standardization, and the perceived di¤erences be-
tween silver/gold plans and bronze plans increase post-standardization, even holding con-
stant actuarial value. Table A.4 shows that a similar pattern results even if actuarial value
is not included.


4.2     Context and Salience Model
In order to interpret and generalize our …ndings, we add additional structure. First, in
our salience model, we allow standardization to change the relative salience of bundles of
attributes (e.g. estimating whether tier becomes more or less important relative to brand).
This change in salience can result from changes in attention (DellaVigna 2009) due to how
standardization changed the decision process and information presentation. Changes in
salience can also arise from simple shifts in the option menu (see Bordalo, Gennaioli, and
Shleifer 2012 on how the option set itself can alter the salience of characteristics), or can
result because consumers perceive implicit recommendations contained in the design of choice
set (contextual inference; see Kamenica 2008).
    In this salience model, we capture the change in salience by letting a parameter multiply
bundles of attributes. Thus, if represents the primitive preference for characteristic x, a;x
represents the decision weight under a particular context a: (This keeps the decision weights
more closely linked to the underlying utility of the product.) We estimate three di¤erent
values of post-standardization for di¤erent bundles: P ost;f for …nancial characteristics (tier
and HDHP), P ost;b for brands, and P ost;p for premium. This contrasts to the approach in
Table 3, which simply estimates di¤erent decision weights before and after standardization.
    We can identify how standardization changes decision weights from one context to an-
other, but of course cannot identify context-free fundamental utility parameters.18 Formally,
let jP re be the pre-standardization decision index of a plan with characteristics Xj and
 jP ost be the post-standardization decision index of a plan with the same characteristics

Our discrete choice model measures jP re = Xj P re and jP ost = Xj P ost , but we cannot
  18
     In a model in which context a¤ects the decision weight placed on product characteristics, underlying
utility is not easily identifed (or even de…ned). Is a product popular because it contains a bundle of popular
characteristics or because its good characteristics are particularly salient to consumers in the context? The
literature has taken varied approaches to this problem. While some papers rely of documenting dominated
decisions or modelling things that directly a¤ect utility, like switching costs (Handel 2013), other papers rely
on restrictions from theory (Abaluck and Gruber 2012).


                                                      12
separately identify the vectors ; P ost ; and P re : Hence, we normalize P re = 1; and identify
  (the valuation of characteristics pre-standardization) and P ost (the changes in valuation
post-standardization). When P ost;x > 1; the decision weight placed on that characteristic
increased post-standardization, and when P ost;x < 1; the weight decreased.
    In this model, the decision index for the conditional logit in 2009 is written as:

                                vijt = Bjt     b   + Fjt    f   +    i pijt   + "ijt

where Bjt is a matrix of brand dummies and Fjt is a matrix with silver, gold, and HDHP
dummies. The 2010 decision index is then given by:

                   vijt = Bjt    b P ost;b   + Fjt    f    P ost;f   +   i pijt P ost;p   + "ijt :

    Identifying P ost requires some additional assumptions, which are likely to be valid in
our context. There cannot be di¤erential measurement error across the two years of data.
The characteristics we measure (such as brand and metal dummies) cannot have increased
or decreased in value: bronze plans must be equally generous across the two regimes. This is
likely to be satis…ed: the post-standardization plans were modelled after pre-standardization
plans, and we include the plans’ actuarial values to control for any additional di¤erences.
Also, there can be no heteroskedasticity that requires rescaling of the coe¢ cients (see Train
2003). In our example, this assumption is likely to be satis…ed: in our optimization frictions
model below, we speci…cally model the heteroskedasticity by allowing the variance of the
idiosyncratic error term to change post-standardization. We …nd only a slight change in the
variance of the error term.


4.3    Optimization and Substitutability Models
In addition to our main salience model, we estimate an optimization friction model and a sub-
stitutability (nested logit) model. All of these models build on a discrete choice framework
and have similar practical interpretations despite the slightly di¤erent conceptual interpre-
tations. The optimization frictions model is consistent with reduced search or optimization
costs, while the substitutability model is consistent with reduced comparison frictions (Kling
et al 2009).
    Our optimization frictions model allows context to a¤ect the degree of "optimization
frictions" facing consumers. Here, we do not interpret the error term "ijt as a primitive
preference unobserved to the econometrician, but rather as a friction (error) impacting the
decision index. Then we write the 2009 decision index as above and the 2010 decision index


                                                      13
as:
                            vijt = Bjt   b P ost;b   + Fjt   f   P ost;f   +   i pijt   +   P ost;" "ijt ;


where P ost;" allows the variance of the error term to vary post-standardization. It is
straightforward to see that the optimization frictions model is just a di¤erent normalization
than the salience model: rather than normalizing the variance of the error terms across
years, we normalize the price coe¢ cient across years. Furthermore, the economic content of
these normalizations are complementary: in both, the relative importance of …nancial and
network characteristics is allowed to vary across the two regimes.
    In the …nal type of structure, we estimate a nested logit model, allowing for the sub-
stitutability of products to vary pre- and post-standardization. After standardization, as
shown by screenshots in the appendix, the choice process is structured such that consumers
…rst choose a tier and then choose an insurer brand, making a nested logit model a natural
choice. This nested logit model will allow us to specify a correlated error structure within
pre-speci…ed nests of bronze, silver, and gold plans. In the nested logit model, the deter-
ministic part of utility is still given by uij = j + ij , but uj is decomposed into Xj ;the part
that varies within a tier, and Zs ; the part that is constant within a tier. Tiers–bronze, silver,
or gold–are indexed by s. We estimate the nested logit plan model in two steps: …rst, we
estimate the probability of choosing a plan, conditional on the tier chosen. In the second
step, we estimate the probability of choosing a given tier.19
    We denote the dissimilarity parameter (an inverse measure of the correlation of the error
terms within a nest) by . This parameter should change if product standardization leads
consumers to view products as closer substitutes and strengthens the degree of price competi-
tion as a result. We thus allow the nesting parameters to vary pre and post-standardization,
and so estimate both P re and P ost . In the model, product standardization may lead con-
sumers to view products as closer substitutes and strengthen the degree of price competition
as a result.
    Econometrically, the dissimilarity parameter can play a similar role to the salience
parameters described above if it is allowed to vary across years. To see that, note that the
dissimilarity parameter performs two distinct functions in estimation. First, it determines
the correlation coe¢ cient between error terms within a tier: the closer is to zero, the higher
the correlation. In addition, the dissimilarity parameter a¤ects the relative weighting of
characteristics within the nest Xij , relative to characteristics outside of the nest Zs : the
  19
     In the nested logit model, the probability of choosing a plan j conditional on choosing a plan within
                           exp( 1 (Xij ))
tier s is given by sij = l2s exp( 1 (Xil )) ;and the probability of choosing a given tier is given by sis =
 exp(Zs ) exp Xij [
                  = s
                             :
 s   exp(Zs ) exp Xij [
                      = s




                                                             14
closer is to zero, the higher the relative weight on the characteristics Zs . For a of zero,
only the characteristics in the outer nest are salient to consumers. The larger the ratio of
 P re = P ost , the greater is P ost;f (multiplying tier) in the previous models.



4.4     Discussion
A few modelling choices deserve additional discussion. First is the impact of consumer
heterogeneity. We estimate mixed logit speci…cations in both the decision weight and
structured models. However, because it is often di¢ cult to identify consumer heterogeneity
in preferences separately from variation in decision processes (Ericson and Starc 2012a), we
also estimate a nested logit speci…cation to estimate ‡exible patterns of substitution between
plans in our substitutability model.
    Our focus is on consumer decision-making, rather than …rm behavior. This is largely
driven by the institutional environment and the nature of the policy change. For example, we
take policies as given because the plan parameters are heavily regulated both pre- and post-
standardization, and set entirely by the HIX post-standardization. By contrast, …rms were
allowed to reprice their policies. We do not need to assume that the post-standardization
prices are equilibrium prices, as …rms are likely learning about demand. However, we do
incorporate the observed change in prices into our counterfactual simulations and welfare
calculations. In addition, this paper focuses only on …rst-time choosers with no history in
the HIX. We are interested in how standardization a¤ects consumer choice; individuals who
are inertial and do not make a new choice are, in e¤ect, not exposed to standardization.
Also, the vast majority of enrollees in this time period (and all the enrollees in our analysis
sample) are making a …rst-time choice, so this analysis is a good guide to …rm incentives as
well. (See Ericson and Starc 2012b for an extended discussion of inertial consumers.)
    One limitation is that our dataset does not contain information on consumer costs, and
we cannot examine the impact of standardization on (adverse) selection across plans.20 Since
our primary analyses focus on consumer choice, rather than …rm pricing, cost information
and/or adverse selection would not alter our results. Change in selection would a¤ect …rm
pricing strategies, and we cannot model that change. However, note that the policy change
was not accompanied by a large price increase in more generous plans, as would be predicted
by an adverse selection death spiral; if anything, the relative premium for more generous
plans fell.
 20
    As highlighted by Handel (2013), changes in selection could have potentially serious consequences in
markets where consumers are susceptible to behavioral biases.




                                                  15
4.5       Results
Table 4 presents our estimation of the optimization friction, salience, and nested logit mod-
els in which the multiplicative change in decision weight is constrained to be the same
within groups of characteristics: for brand b ; for …nancial cost-sharing characteristics f ;
for premiums p , and/or for the error term " . Each model strongly rejects the hypothesis
that the decision utility is constant across years. The …rst column in Panel A allows for a
di¤erent variance of the idiosyncratic error term post-standardization, as well as a change
in the weight placed on …nancial characteristics f and brand b :21 The results show that
the variance of "ij is slightly lower post-standardization ( " = 0:96), consistent with choices
being less "noisy" post-standardization. In this model, we estimate that the tier/HDHP
…nancial characteristics become much more important post standardization ( f = 3:39),
while brand becomes only slightly less important ( b = 0:98).
    The second and third columns of coe¢ cients in Panel A estimate the salience model
using a conditional logit model (Salience Model 1) and a mixed logit model that allows for
unobserved consumer heterogeneity in premium sensitivity (Salience Model 2). Both models
show a very similar pattern: p is about 1, indicating that standardization did not increase
(or decrease) price sensitivity, and the b coe¢ cient on brand is again slightly lower than one,
indicating less weight placed on brand post-standardization. Finally, both speci…cations show
that …nancial characteristics become much more important post-standardization ( f > 2):
    Finally, Panel B presents the nested logit speci…cation. The dissimilarity parameter in
2009 in much higher than the dissimilarity parameter in 2010 (0.28 vs. 0.14). This indicates
a higher correlation of errors within a tier post-standardization and a much higher weight on
tier post-standardization, consistent with the results in Panel A. In both years, plans within
a nest are very close substitutes. The ratio of the dissimilarity parameters is closely related
to the tier salience parameter; the model implies a tier of 1.96, which is similar to that
estimated in the optimization friction and salience models. In addition, the nested model
implies a higher degree of substitutability between plans within a tier post-standardization.
We argue that standardization led to a shift in the valuation of plan attributions, largely
because certain plan characteristics, such as tier, were more heavily emphasized and became
more salient to consumers.
 21
      We hold salience of premiums …xed across the two years, as the model needs one normalization.




                                                    16
5      Counterfactuals and Welfare
5.1     Simulations
Given estimates of primitive preferences and the change in the salience (or the valuation
e¤ect), we now turn to counterfactual exercises that allow us to decompose the changes in
market shares into availability and valuation e¤ects. We also estimate the welfare impact of
standardization. We …rst run a counterfactual experiment that attempts to disentangle the
supply- and demand- side forces that explain changes in market shares across plans. Using
the Salience-1 model estimated in Table 4, we simulate the percentage of consumers choosing
bronze plans pre- and post-standardization, using both old and new hedonic price vectors.
To be precise, in the …rst two columns, we simulate choices using the pre-standardization
decision weights ( ) and choice set, under either the 2010 or 2009 hedonic price vectors.
In the second two columns, we use the post-standardization decision weights ( P ost ) and
choice set, again under each hedonic price vector.
    The decision to model counterfactual prices using the hedonic model relies on the fact
that the hedonic model predicts prices extremely well, with a R2 of over .9 in nearly every
speci…cation. Hedonic prices provide the best representation of the idea of "holding prices
…xed" at the 2009 levels. The use of hedonic prices allows us to capture the key features of
the market with minimal additional assumptions.22
    Figure 3 reports results of the counterfactuals, plotting the percent of enrollees in each
brand or tier by year. The upper left panel shows actual 2009 and 2010 choices. The lower
left panel shows availability e¤ect: the e¤ect of shifting the choice set, holding constant
decision weights and prices at their 2009 levels. This choice set shift is what leads to a large
increase in Neighborhood’s market share, and decreases in Fallon’s share and the market
share of HDHP plans. The upper right panel shows the valuation e¤ect: shifting decision
weights (holding constant prices at 2009 levels and using the 2010 choice set) leads to the
increase in generosity of plan chosen: enrollees shift away from HDHP and bronze plans.
Finally, the lower right panel shows the e¤ect of shifting prices. The result of the price shift
actually counteracts the availability and valuation e¤ects: changes in prices alone would
have led to a decline in Neighborhood’s market share, and in increase in HDHP and bronze
plans.23
    Decomposing the valuation and availability e¤ects is important: our simulations in which
we shift thechoice set alone (availability e¤ect) also show that more enrollees would have
  22
    Also, as detailed in Ericson and Starc (2013b), an equilibrium model of pricing requires incorporating
modi…ed community rating regulation and is outside the scope of this paper.
 23
    Appendix Table A.6 provides more detailed counterfactuals in numerical form.



                                                   17
chosen bronze plans. In reality, the fraction choosing bronze plans fell. The simulations
in which we shift decision weights alone show that the valuation e¤ect is the source of
this decline in bronze plans chosen. (Recall, standardization increased the weight enrollees
attached to tier). Similarly, product availability disproportionately a¤ects Neighborhood’s
market share. Our simulations predict that the market share of Neighborhood plans would
be an extremely high 72% in 2010 if individuals had still used pre-standardization decision
weights and faced pre-standardization prices. A large part of this availability e¤ect is due
to the existence of the relatively inexpensive, low deductible "Bronze High" plan. However,
the valuation e¤ect’s increased weight on tier counteracts this availability e¤ect, reducing
Neighborhood’s market share to 48% with post-standardization decision weights.
     To summarize: the reduction in the market shares of bronze plans is largely due to
valuation, rather than availability or supply-side factors. The reduction in HDHPs is due to
both availability and valuation e¤ects. The large increase in Neighborhood’s market share
is largely due to the availability e¤ect. Demand-side factors and the change in plan o¤erings
due to regulation, rather than …rm pricing, are largely responsible for the shifts in choices
we see.


5.2     The E¤ect of Standardization on Welfare
In order to calculate standardization’s e¤ect on welfare, we make two additional choices.
First, we choose to calculate welfare under a revealed preference welfare criterion that uti-
lized the post-standardization decision utility index. This welfare criterion re‡ects the choices
consumers make when regulators feel they are better informed about their options.24 Second,
we have to accommodate the expansion in the number of plans in 2010. Recall that there
are actually more plans post-standardization than pre-standardization. Our welfare analyses
hold the number of plans …xed, choosing the 18 most popular plans in 2010 to compare to
the 18 plans in 2009. Thus, we potentially underestimate the positive e¤ects of standardiza-
tion on welfare by reducing some of the availability e¤ect in addition to correcting for the
additional error draws from the logit model.
    We present our estimates of the change in consumer welfare in Table 5 using our salience
model and nested logit model.25 For each welfare criterion, we measure equivalent variation
  24
     Following the welfare framework of Bernheim and Rangel (2012), we note that one cannot rank the
inconsistent choices. Fortunately, these di¤erent welfare criteria give similar results, though of slightly
di¤erent magnitudes.
  25
     We don’t present welfare estimates based on the optimization friction model, as the " terms can be
interpreted either as errors or preference shocks. Under an error interpretation, making fewer errors clearly
improves welfare.




                                                     18
using the standard formula of Nevo (2001) and McFadden (1999), which is given by:

             EVw = (1=    w)   log        j2fpostg   exp (     wj )    log        j2fpostg   exp (   wj )


where j = w pj + Xj w is the estimated mean utility of plan j; which can be decomposed
into the disutility of price w pj and the positive utility of plan characteristics (or …xed
e¤ects) Xj w : Note that the coe¢ cients have subscripts w; which re‡ect the welfare-relavant
decision utility index based on the post-standardization choices.
    When consumers make choices according to a decision utility function that di¤ers from
a welfare-relevant utility function, the formula for utility needs to be adjusted. That is, we
may want to evaluate the impact of 2009 choice set under the 2010 decision utility function.
This requires a simple o¤set term to the formula for utility in the logit model. In order to
do this, we assume that the idiosyncratic component of utility is held …xed and integrate
over this component. This assumes that the choice is made based on the decision utility
index and is represented by the …rst, traditional term in the calculation. Then, we subtract
o¤ the expected, deterministic component of utility, represented by the …rst share-weighted
average, conditional on the decision utility index. We then add in the expected, deterministic
component of utility conditional on the welfare criterion, noting that the i.i.d. error term as
already been accounted for in the …rst term. Letting w be the welfare criterion and d be the
decision criterion, we then have:

                                                                              w                       d
              EU = (1=    w ) log (   j   exp (   wj ))           j sjw Xij       +    j sjw Xij            :
                                                                              w                       d


    There are a number of components of each simulation: a decision utility index, a welfare
criterion, a price vector, and a choice set. In each cell of Table 5, we compute the equivalent
variation associated with facing the pre-, rather than post-standardization choice set. In the
…rst row, decision utility indices and price vectors are allowed to vary across years. In the
second row, the post-standardization decision utility function is held …xed. This implies that
by construction, the compensating variation is higher (pre-standardization utility is lower),
as the o¤set term is always negative because consumers are not fully optimizing. In the third
row, the price vector is …xed at the 2009 level.
    The welfare results across our di¤erent models are qualitatively and quantitatively similar.
Row 1 presents our estimate of the total e¤ect of standardization on welfare, which includes
a shift in menu, premiums, and decision utility index. Using either welfare criterion, we …nd
that standardization improved welfare by 6-7% percent of premiums (or $23-26/enrollee per
month), depending on the exact speci…cation. When the 2010 choice set is expanded to the


                                                          19
full set in the second panel, we see that the e¤ect grows to $41-$46/enrollee per month.
    We then consider the welfare gain in the absence of a shift in the decision utility index
(i.e. assuming that individuals would always optimize using post-standardization decision
weights). Row 2 shows that the welfare change is slightly larger holding the decision utility
index constant, indicating that standardization had a positive impact on consumer surplus
due to both the availability and valuation e¤ects. If the valuation e¤ect was zero, row 2
would be equal to row 1.
    We then examine the e¤ect of prices for plans, which di¤ered pre and post standardiza-
tion. To conduct counterfactual simulations that hold prices constant across years, we use
a hedonic pricing model. Thus, in row 3 we evaluate welfare under a standardization event
that (counterfactually) held prices constant at pre-standardization levels–that is, a simula-
tion in which, were a plan to be o¤ered in the identical form pre- and post-standardization,
it would have the same price. The simulation, therefore, does allow for changes in prices
that result from changes in plan generosity. Thus, we use the EVw formula above, but plug
in the counterfactual prices at the pre-standardization level: p^pre
                                                                 j : Here, we …nd that stan-
dardization would have increased welfare even more if price levels had remained constant.
    The standardization policy change improved welfare. This is due to both the valua-
tion and availability e¤ects, with the bulk of the welfare gains coming from the availability
e¤ect. Standardization both helped consumers trade-o¤ various product characteristics in
a constructive way and made high value, low deductible, low premium, restrictive network
plans - such as the Neighborhood "Bronze High" plan - available to consumers. The results
of the constant pricing simulations imply that changes in …rms’premiums capture part of
the surplus that results from standardization: the e¤ect of standardization is smaller than
it would have been absent a supply-side e¤ect. Nudges that a¤ect consumer behavior are
also likely to a¤ect equilibrium outcomes as …rms respond to changing consumer demand.


5.3    Discussion
We estimate that standardization improves outcomes for consumers and that …rms can cap-
ture some of the newly generated surplus. Why didn’t …rms o¤er such an assortment of
plans initially? At least part of the explanation is that standardization introduced addi-
tional choice while providing additional decision support tools that allowed consumers to
express their preferences. Another potential explanation is that …rms were still learning and
did not know this deviation would be pro…table: the market is relatively new (approximately
4 years old at the end of our sample period) and that may not have been enough time for …rms
to learn about both costs and demand. Since the HIX may be a relatively small proportion


                                             20
of insurers’books of business, they may not have a huge incentive to perfect their o¤erings
in this particular market. Finally, selection could have led to the product assortment in the
pre-standardization period. A single …rm introducing one of the new standardized plans
might have attracted a relatively high cost subset of the population, making deviations from
a pre-standardization equilibrium unpro…table.
    The policy change was not without risk. If the insurers had been forced to o¤er only one
plan at each level - bronze, silver, and gold - the consumers would have been made worse o¤
under the 2010 prices regardless of their preferences and the exact array of plans. (Having
a bronze plans with and without a high deductible is critical.) The regulator redesigned the
menu in a way that provided valuable additional choice to consumers. However, this type
of policy intervention requires caution: without expanding the choice set and providing a
high-value option to consumers, the policy change could have reduced welfare.


6      Experiment
The standardization on the Massachusetts HIX involved two changes. First–and most
importantly–the choice set changed. Second, the choice interface changed. Recall that post-
standardization, plans within the same sub-tier had identical …nancial characteristics–this
is the change in the choice menu. However, this change also enabled a change in the choice
interface: instead of choosing a plan from the list of plans available26 , post-standardization
enrollees …rst chose a tier of insurance generosity, and then chose an insurer. In addition,
slightly di¤erent information was displayed pre versus post-standardization.
    We conduct an experiment to examine the extent to which standardization had an ef-
fect through a) the change in choice menu versus b) the change in choice interface. The
experiment disassociates these two changes. We assign participants to one of three con-
ditions: The "Pre-Stdz." condition replicated the HIX’s pre-standardization choice menu
and interface, while the "Post-Stdz." condition replicated the HIX’s post-standardization
choice menu and interface. The third condition, "Alt-Post." has exactly the same plans as
in the "Post-Standardization" condition, but uses the pre-standardization decision interface
(plans are presented in a list, and characteristics of plans were presented as they were in
the pre-standardization interface). Comparing Pre-Stdz. to Post-Stdz. choices allows us to
establish the validity our experimental design (and the validity of our analysis of the HIX
data). Comparing Post-Stdz. choices to choices in the counterfactual Alt-Post condition
  26
    On the HIX pre-standardization, participants had the option to …lter this list to just "tier" (e.g. just
look at the bronze, silver, and/or gold policies), but the characteristics of each tier were not described at the
…ltering stage. There was no ability to …lter more narrowly. See the Online Appendix for details.



                                                       21
allows us to examine the extent to whether the observed shifts in choice or due to the menu
or the interface.
    We recruited participants from an online panel (run by the …rm Qualtrics) who roughly
matched the demographics of individuals purchasing insurance on the HIX: they lived in
one of these northeastern states (ME, VT, NH, MA, CT, RI, and NY), and had relatively
high household incomes ($35k+ for an individual or $65k+ for a family of four). Participants
answered some demographic questions. They were then assigned to a condition, and asked to
pick the insurance plan they preferred. This is our primary variable of interest. After making
their choice, participants were asked to rate the salience of various plan characteristics. They
were then shown another choice menu, and asked to make a second choice, and then asked
to rate the salience of various plan characteristics in this second menu.
    We …rst examine the reduced form e¤ect of the various conditions. Our hypothesis
of interest is not about the levels chosen in our experiment, but in di¤erences between
conditions. Examining the actual choices on the HIX (Table 1), we make predictions for
the comparison of choices in the Pre-Stdz and Post-Stdz conditions. Although there are
many di¤erences between observed choices in 2009 and 2010, we focus our hypotheses on
the three largest e¤ect sizes (>10 percentage point di¤erences) seen in the actual HIX data.
Our hypotheses are that standardization should:

 H1: Reduce the fraction of participants choosing high deductible health plans (HDHP)

 H2: Increase the market share of Neighborhood Health Plan

 H3: Decrease the market share of Fallon

    We have three additional weaker hypotheses (shifts in choice between 5 and 10 percentage
points): standardization should decrease the fraction of bronze plans chosen, increase the
fraction silver plans chosen, and increase the market share of Tufts Health Plan.
    Table 6 shows the summary statistics for the experiment, by condition. First, note that
experimental participants choose more generous plans than observed in the actual HIX. There
are many potential explanations for this, including selection into the exchange; Ericson and
Starc (2012a) show that plans chosen on the HIX are less generous than observed in employer-
sponsored insurance. The distribution of brand choices is similar between the actual data
and the observed data, with the biggest exception is that Tufts is relatively more popular
among the experimental participants. (Note that we intentionally chose a geographic region
in which the smallest insurer, Health New England, was not o¤ered.)
    The treatment e¤ects in the experiment verify all three predictions, even though the
baseline levels of choice di¤er between the experiment and the actual data. In the Post-Stdz.

                                              22
condition, the fraction choosing HDHP drops by 16 percentage points, the market share
of Neighborhood Health Plan increases by 17 percentage points, and the market share of
Fallon drops by 4 percentage points. (All these di¤erences are signi…cant with p < 0:01:)
Similarly, we …nd small directional support (though statistically insigni…cant) for a decrease
in bronze and an increase silver plans. The only shift we do not replicate was the market
share of Tufts Health Plan: experimental participants were slightly less likely to choose
Tufts in the Post-Stdz. condition, while HIX enrollees were slightly more likely to choose
Tufts post-standardization; this may be an artefact of the high rate of preference for Tufts
among experimental participants. Appendix Table A.7 veri…es these results using a regression
framework; controlling for demographics alters point estimates of di¤erences only slightly,
but improves precision. Appendix Table A.8 runs conditional and mixed logit choice models
on the experimental data–analogous to 3. It …nds many similar shifts in decision weights:
an increase post-standardization in valuation of the gold tier (relative to bronze) and the
disutility from HDHP plans. However, we do not …nd a signi…cant age trend in premiums,
and valuation of silver tiered plans increases post-standardization only in the mixed logit
speci…cation. Finally, we …nd an increase in price sensitivity post-standardization in the
conditional logits, larger than that found in the actual HIX data.
    These results show that hypothetical choice experiments can approximately replicate
actual behavior, and add to a growing literature validating such experiments in the health
insurance context (Kuzeimko and Krueger 2013, Kesternich et al. 2013, Ericson and Kessler
2013). The experiment’s results con…rms the validity of our design analyzing the actual HIX
data, providing evidence that observed shift in choices was due to standardization rather
than some other factor (e.g. a shift in enrollee composition).
    The counterfactual condition "Alt.-Post" uses the post-standardization menu with the
pre-standardization choice interface. There are only small di¤erences in the brands chosen,
comparing this condition to the Post-Stdz. condition. However, the alternative interface
leads experimental participants to make more extreme choices than in the Post-Stdz. con-
dition: Alt.-Post participants are both more likely to choose a gold plan and more likely
to choose a HDHP plan than Post-Stdz. participants. This is consistent with the post-
standardization interface enabling consumers to di¤erentiate among plans in a more accu-
rate way; it can be di¢ cult to di¤erentiate among plans in a long list, and individuals may
gravitate toward one end or another. Note that the change in interface is complementary to
the change in choice menu, as the post-standardization interface simpli…cations would not
have been possible without the concurrent change in the choice menu.
    After participants made their choice in from their assigned menu, we asked them to rate
"how important" various factors were in making their choice on a scale of 1-7 (not at all


                                             23
important to extremely important). Table 7 gives means by condition (Appendix Table A.8
shows that results are unchanged controlling for covariates). The most important category is,
unsurprisingly, premium with a rating of about 6.0, with the following categories close behind
(5.4 to 5.8): cost of hospital stay, cost of a doctor’s visit, deductible and "maximum out
of pocket expense". Tier was rated the least important dimension for all three conditions–
while it may have been useful in organizing information, individuals seemed instead to rely
on the …nancial characteristics of plans.
    These importance ratings were a¤ected by condition: standardization increased the im-
portance of tiers relative to the other characteristics of plans. The regression point estimates
indicate that the measured importance of every other listed attribute declined, except brand.
However, these results show that the increase in the importance of tier came primarily from
the interface redesign, rather than the choice menu. The Post-Alt condition did not show
any signi…cant change in the importance of tier, as compared to the Pre-Stdz. condition.
This suggests that theories of salience that only rely on the attributes of choice (rather than
how they are presented) miss important elements of salience.
    Two additional factors were related as less important in the Post-Stdz. condition, as
compared to Pre-Stdz.: cost of hospital stay and maximum out of pocket expense. Both were
surprising: ex ante, hospital stay seems equally prominent in both conditions. Moreover,
only in the Post-Stdz. condition was information about maximum annual out-of-pocket
cost directly listed. One hypothesis is that participants interpreted "maximum annual out
of pocket expense" as referring to their subjective assessment of the total risk they would
face in the plan, and that in the Post-Stdz. condition they relied more on tier instead.
Finally, neither brand nor tier varied in importance across the three conditions. This result
is consistent with our discrete choice models estimated on the actual HIX data, which did
not …nd an increase in price sensitivity post standardization.


7    Conclusion
The HIX standardization provides an opportunity to see how change in choice architecture
a¤ected choice and welfare in a policy-relevant setting. We have provided a ‡exible template
for other researchers examining how regulation and choice architecture a¤ect markets in a
model that can capture availability, valuation, and pricing e¤ects. Such changes can alter
the decision weights consumers attached to multiple product characteristics. In this market,
consumers trade-o¤ …nancial generosity, network breadth, and premiums. Standardization
emphasized the …nancial, rather than network, characteristics of plans. As a result, post-
standardization consumers chose more …nancially generous plans. Our experimental results

                                              24
con…rm and extend our analysis of the HIX data. We show that product standardization
allows consumers to more accurately di¤erentiate between plans and that changes in the
choice set were complementary to changes in the information interface.
    Our study highlights the potential for regulators to help consumers when making choices
from complicated set of products. Simple shifts can have large impacts, shifting choices and
improving (or reducing) consumer welfare.




                                            25
References
 Abaluck, J. (2011). What Would We Eat if We Knew More: The Implications of a Large-
   scale Change in Nutrition Labeling. Working Paper, Mass. Inst. Technol.
 Abaluck, J. T. and J. Gruber (2011). Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evi-
   dence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program. American Economic Re-
   view 101 (4), 1180–1210.
 Barseghyan, Levon, Francesca Molinari, Ted O’Donoghue, and Joshua C. Teitelbaum.
    (Forthcoming). The Nature of Risk Preferences: Evidence from Insurance Choices.
    American Economic Review, forthcoming.
 Bernheim, B. D. and A. Rangel (2009). Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-theoretic
    Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 124 (1), 51–104.
 Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2008). How are Preferences
    Revealed? Journal of Public Economics 92 (8), 1787–1794.
 Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2012). Salience Theory of Consumer Choice.
    NBER Working Paper 17947 (3).
 Bundorf, M. K. and H. Szrek (2010). Choice Set Size and Decision Making: The Case of
   Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plans. Medical Decision Making 30 (5), 582–593.
 Cebul, R., J. Rebitzer, L. Taylor, and M. Votruba (2011). Unhealthy Insurance Markets:
    Search Frictions and the Cost and Quality of Health Insurance. American Economic
    Review 100 (4), 1842–1871.
 Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2009). Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.
    American Economic Review 99 (4), 1145–1177.
 Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2011). $100 Bills on the Sidewalk: Suboptimal
   Investment in 401(k) plans. Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3), 748–763.
 Dafny, L. and D. Dranove (2008). Do Report Cards Tell Consumers Anything They Don’t
    Already Know? The Case of Medicare HMOs. The Rand journal of economics 39 (3),
    790–821.
 Dafny, L., K. Ho, and M. Varela (2013). Let Them Have Choice: Gains from Shifting
    Away from Employer-sponsored Health Insurance and Toward an Individual Exchange.
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (1), 32–58.
 DellaVigna, S. (2009). Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field. The Journal
    of Economic Literature 47 (2), 315-372.

                                           26
Dranove, D. and G. Z. Jin (2010). Quality Disclosure and Certi…cation: Theory and
   Practice. The Journal of Economic Literature 48 (4), 935-963.
Ericson, K. M. M. and J. Kessler (2013). The Articulation E¤ect of Government Policy:
   Health Insurance Mandates Versus Taxes. NBER Working Paper 18913 .
Ericson, K. M. and A. Starc (2012a). Heuristics and Heterogeneity in Health Insurance
   Exchanges: Evidence from the Massachusetts Connector. The American Economic
   Review 102 (3), 493–497.
Ericson, K. M. M. and A. Starc (2012b). Pricing Regulation and Imperfect Competition
   on the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange. NBER Working Paper 18089 .
Ericson, K. M. and A. Starc (2013). Designing and Regulating Health Insurance Ex-
   changes: Lessons from Massachusetts. Inquiry, 2012-2013 Winter;49(4):327-38.
Finkelstein, Amy. (2004). Minimum Standards, Insurance Regulation and Adverse Selec-
   tion: Evidence from the Medigap Market Journal of Public Economics, 88(12):2515-
   2547.
Finkelstein, Amy. (2009). E-ztax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics, 124(3):969-1010.
Fox, P. D., R. E. Snyder, and T. Rice (2003). Medigap Reform Legislation of 1990: A
   10-year Review. Health Care Financing Review 24 (3), 121–138.
Frank, R. G. and K. Lamiraud (2009). Choice, Price Competition and Complexity in
   Markets for Health Insurance. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 71 (2),
   550–562.
Grubb, M. D. (2009). Selling to Overcon…dent Consumers. The American Economic Re-
   view 99 (5), 1770–1807.
Handel, B. (2013). Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
  Nudging Hurts. The American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Handel, B. R. and J. T. Kolstad (2013). Health Insurance for Humans: Information Fric-
  tions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare. NBER Working Paper 19373 .
Hanoch, Y., T. Rice, J. Cummings, and S. Wood (2009). How much Choice is Too Much?
  The Case of the Medicare Prescription Drug Bene…t. Health Services Research 44 (4),
  1157–1168.
Hortaccsu, A. and C. Syverson (2004). Search Costs, Product Di¤erentiation, and Wel-
   fare E¤ects of Entry: a Case Study of SP 500 Index Funds. Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 119 (4), 403–456.

                                         27
Iyengar, S. S. and M. R. Lepper (2000). When Choice is Demotivating: Can One Desire
   Too Much of a Good Thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79 (6), 995.
Jin, G. Z. and P. Leslie (2003). The E¤ect of Information on Product Quality: Evidence
    from Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2),
    409–451.
Jin, G. Z. and A. T. Sorensen (2006). Information and Consumer Choice: the Value of
    Publicized Health Plan Ratings. Journal of Health Economics 25 (2), 248–275.
Kahneman, D., P. P. Wakker, and R. Sarin (1997). Back to Bentham? Explorations of
  Experienced Utility. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (2), 375–406.
Kamenica, E. (2008). Contextual inference in Markets: On the Informational Content of
  Product Lines. The American Economic Review 98 (5), 2127–2149.
Kesternich, Iris, Florian Heiss, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter. (2013). Suit the
   Action to the Word, the Word to the Action: Hypothetical Choices and Real Decisions
   in Medicare Part D Journal of Health Economics.
Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Sha…r, L. C. Vermeulen, and M. V. Wrobel (2012).
   Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans. The Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics 127 (1), 199–235.
Krueger, Alan B., and Ilyana Kuziemko. (2013). The Demand for Health Insurance Among
   Uninsured Americans: Results of a Survey Experiment and Implications for Policy.
   Journal of Health Economics.
Lacetera, N., D. G. Pope, and J. R. Sydnor (2012). Heuristic Thinking and Limited
   Attention in the Car Market. The American Economic Review 102 (5), 2206–36.
Rice, T. and K. Thomas (1992). Evaluating the New Medigap Standardization Regula-
   tions. Health A¤airs 11 (1), 194–207.
Sorensen, A. T. (2000). Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription
   drugs. Journal of Political Economy 108 (4), 833–850.
Starc, A. (2012). "Insurer Pricing and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from Medigap. Work-
   ing Paper.
Toolkit Series (2011). Determining Health Bene…t Designs to be O¤ered on a State Health
   Insurance Exchange. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts Foundation Health Re-
   form Toolkit Series.
Train, K. E. (2003). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University
   Press.

                                         28
  Tversky, A. and I. Simonson (1993). Context-dependent Preferences. Management Sci-
     ence 39 (10), 1179–1189.




                                                  Pre-Standardization
                BCBS


                Fallon


               Harvard


               N'Hood
     Insurer




                 Tufts

                                                  Post-Standardization

                BCBS


                Fallon


               Harvard


               N'Hood


                 Tufts

                    Deductible:   $2000   $2000     $2000     $1000      $250   $500     $0
                      Hospital:    20%     $500        $0        $0      35%      $0   $500


                                                       Plan design


Figure 1: Plan Design and Market Share Before and After Standardization. The x-axis
indicates plan design parameters. All post-standardization plans line up with one of the
listed designs, while pre-standardization plans are o¤set from the vertical line when plans
di¤er slightly in parameters. Size of markers indicates relative market share. Only bronze
and silver plans are shown above.




                                                      29
Figure 2: Enrollee Plan Choice, Pre- and Post-Standardization




                             30
                                               Observed Choices                                                                                        Shift in Decision Weights
                0 20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                      0 20 40 60 80
   Percent




                                                                                                          Percent
                                 1516 1913     6 12   5 2   22 8 34 49     45 29 6155 3034    9 11                                           13 14 1212        9 11   2 0    11 13 52 48     39 31 71 57 25 34   4 9
                                      rim




                                                                                                                                                  rim
                                                                                 d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                         E




                                                                                                                                                     E
                                N n




                                                                         Br P




                                                                                                                                            N n




                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                      BS




                                                                                                                                                  BS
                                                                               ze
                                         d




                                                                                                                                                                                                 ze
                                                                                                                                                     d
                                       fts




                                                                                                                                                   fts
                                                                               er




                                                                                                                                                                                                 er
                                                                              ol




                                                                                                                                                                                                             ol
                                     llo




                                                                                                                                                 llo
                                    oo




                                                                                                                                                oo
                                      N




                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                              H




                                                                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                             lv




                                                                                                                                                                                               lv
                                                                           on




                                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                  Tu




                                                                                                                                              Tu
                                 BC




                                                                                                                                             BC
                                                                            G




                                                                                                                                                                                                            G
                                  ilg




                                                                                                                                              ilg
                                   H




                                                                                                                                               H
                                                                           D




                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                 Fa




                                                                                                                                             Fa
                                                                          Si




                                                                                                                                                                                            Si
                                 'H




                                                                                                                                             'H
                                                                          H




                                                                                                                                                                                            H

                                                                                                                                                                                           Br
                                 .P




                                                                                                                                             .P
                                 H




                                                                                                                                            H
                                               Brand                               Tier                                                                        Brand                                 Tier
                                                2009 Actual                         2010 Actual                                              Decision Weights:                             2009                  2010




                                               Shift in Choice Set                                                                                                    Shift in Prices
             0 20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                            0 20 40 60 80
                                                                                                            Percent
  Percent




                                 14 7   17 6   8 5    6 3   17 7 38 72     50 35 60 67 3527   5 6                                               7 13    6 12    5 9    3 2    7 11 7252      3539 6771 2725      6 4
                                      rim




                                                                                                                                                     rim
                                                                                 d




                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                         E




                                                                                                                                                        E
                                N n




                                                                                P




                                                                                                                                              N n




                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                      BS




                                                                                                                                              .P S
                                                                               ze




                                                                                                                                                                                                 ze
                                         d




                                                                                                                                                        d
                                       fts




                                                                                                                                                      fts
                                                                               er




                                                                                                                                                                                                 er
                                                                              ol




                                                                                                                                                                                                ol
                                     llo




                                                                                                                                                    llo
                                    oo




                                                                                                                                                   oo
                                      N




                                                                                                                                                     B




                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                              H




                                                                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                             lv




                                                                                                                                                                                               lv
                                                                           on




                                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                  Tu




                                                                                                                                                 Tu
                                 BC




                                                                                                                                               BC
                                                                            G




                                                                                                                                                                                              G
                                  ilg




                                                                                                                                                 ilg
                                   H




                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                            D




                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                 Fa




                                                                                                                                               Fa
                                                                          Si




                                                                                                                                                                                            Si
                                 'H




                                                                                                                                                'H
                                                                         H




                                                                                                                                                                                           H
                                                                         Br




                                                                                                                                                                                           Br
                                 .P
                                H




                                                                                                                                            H




                                               Brand                               Tier                                                                         Brand                                Tier
                                  Choice Set:                       2009                      2010                                              Prices:                             2009                         2010




Figure 3: Counterfactual Simulations: Enrollment Under Alternative Decision Weights,
Prices, and Choice Sets. Notes: Choice set shift holds constant decision weights and prices
at 2009 levels. Price shift holds constant decision weights at 2009 levels and uses the 2010
choice set. Decision weight shift uses the 2010 prices and choice set.




                                                                                                     31
Table 1: Plan and Enrollee Characteristics, by Year
                                 2009 2010
 Actuarial Value                 77.8 82.5           p<0.001
 Mean OOP Cost                   1129 870            p<0.001
 Std. Dev. OOP Cost              803 752             p<0.001

 Monthly Premium Paid $374 $389                      p=0.02

 Enrollee Age                    42.5     43.3       p=0.12
 N                               982      1336
 Notes: *** p<0.001,** p<0.01,* p<0.05. Two sample tests of
proportions (binary variables) or t-tests (continuous variables).
Sample is restricted to consumers enrolling in a HIX plan for
the …rst time between November 1, 2009 and February 28,
2010.




                                                      32
                 Table 2: Hedonic Regressions, List Prices
                            (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
 2010 Dummy                 2.019         11.71***      16.72***     116.2***
                            (3.552)       (1.915)       (4.074)      (26.11)
 Silver                                   111.4***      124.5***     112.3***
                                          (2.279)       (3.970)      (3.862)
 Gold                                     227.6***      284.0***     244.5***
                                          (4.059)       (5.723)      (6.252)
 Silver*2010                                            -10.07**     3.805
                                                        (4.751)      (4.649)
 Gold*2010                                              -38.36***    -17.88**
                                                        (7.205)      (7.757)
 HDHP                                                   -19.48***    47.76***
                                                        (5.253)      (6.854)
 HDHP*2010                                              3.657        -15.07*
                                                        (6.090)      (8.509)
 Actuarial Value            6.469***      -11.89***                  3.416***
                            (0.128)       (1.493)                    (0.229)
 Actuarial Value2                         0.0832***
                                          (0.00922)
 Actuarial Value*2010                                                -1.164***
                                                                     (0.298)
 Constant                   -206.4*** 684.0***          277.3***     -21.65
                            (11.51)   (59.34)           (3.379)      (20.50)
 Fixed E¤ect                age cat.  age cat.,         age cat.,    age cat.,
                                      insurer           insurer      insurer
 Observations               70,577    70,577            70,577       70,577
 R2                         0.719     0.920             0.917        0.922
 Robust standard errors clustered at age category-plan-geography level. Sample is
restricted to consumers enrolling in a HIX plan for the …rst time between November
1, 2009 and February 28, 2010.




                                                   33
Table 3: Discrete Choice Model: Decision Weights
Vary Pre- and Post-Standardization
                     (1)                       (2)
                     Condit. Logit             Mixed Logit
 Silver              0.542***                  1.282***
                     (0.175)                   (0.187)
 Gold                1.299***                  2.427***
                     (0.259)                   (0.293)
 Silver*2010         0.0901                    0.336*
                     (0.171)                   (0.177)
 Gold*2010           0.342                     0.455*
                     (0.229)                   (0.256)
 HDHP                1.248***                  0.575***
                     (0.189)                   (0.202)
 HDHP*2010           -1.091***                 -0.248
                     (0.172)                   (0.196)
 Premium             -0.0254***
                     (0.00183)
 Premium*2010        -0.000981
                     (0.000733)
 Premium*Age         0.000269***              0.000364***
                     (2.47e-05)               (3.78e-05)
 Actuarial Value     0.0447***                0.0593***
                     (0.00555)                (0.00568)
 Mixed Logit: Lognormal Distribution         of i
 Premium*2009, Mean[ln     i]                 -3.140***
                                              (0.0662)
 Premium*2010, Mean[ln              i]        -3.223***
                                              (0.0632)
 Premium*2009, SD[ln           i]             0.340***
                                              (0.0301)
 Premium*2010, SD[ln           i]             0.288***
                                              (0.0250)
 Insurer Fixed E¤ect Yes                      Yes
 N Person            2318                     2318
 N Person-Plan       70,577                   70,577
 *** p<0.001,** p<0.01,* p<0.05. This table presents esti-
mates from conditional and mixed logit models in which the
weights on product characteristics are allowed to vary by year.
The mixed logit models the price coe¢ cient as distributed log-
normally in the population. Sample is restricted to consumers
enrolling in a HIX plan for the …rst time between November 1,
2009 and February 28, 2010.



                                                    34
                              Table 4: Structured Change in Decision Weights
      Panel A Models:                 Optim. Frict.                 Salience 1                 Salience 2
       , Error Term        0.96      [0.0560]
       , Premium                                             0.96     [0.0438]          1.01        [0.0102]
       , Financial Char.   3.39      [0.419]                 2.30     [0.270]           2.67        [0.579]
       , Brand             0.98      [0.145]                 0.95     [0.0864]          0.94        [0.176]
      Pre-Standardization Decision Utility Index:                     Distribution      of i :
                                                                     Mean[ln    i]      -3.63       [0.0730]
                                                                       SD[ln    i]      0.0448      [0.0081]
      Premium               -0.0249 [0.0020]                 -0.0258 [0.0013]
                                                        10
      Premium*Age           0.0003 [1.80*10                ] 0.0003 [2.38*10 5 ]         0.0003     [2.67*10 5 ]
      Silver                0.170    [0.0566]                0.187    [0.0320]           0.241      [0.0934]
      Gold                  0.526    [0.1251]                0.599    [0.0715]           0.740      [0.2642]
      HDHP                  -0.0796 [0.0300]                 -0.0823 [0.0228]            -0.0581    [0.0536]
35




      Actuarial Value       0.0197 [0.0033]                  0.0135 [0.00160]            0.0234     [0.0465]
      Fixed E¤ects          insurer                          insurer                     insurer
      Panel B: Nested Logit Model:                                                       Upper Nest:
                          Bronze Nest         Silver          Nest         Gold Nest            Choice of Tier
      Premium          -0.0528 [0.0034] -0.0422               [0.0039] -0.0179 [0.0084] , 2010 0.141 [0.0422]
      Premium*Age      0.0006 [0.0001] 0.0004                 [0.0001] 0.0002 [0.0001] , 2009 0.276 [0.0469]
      Actuarial Value 0.0387 [0.0037] 0.0755                  [0.0068]                  Silver  0.519 [0.0769]
      Fixed E¤ects     insurer            insurer                      insurer          Gold    1.16 [0.0762]
      Notes. Bootstrapped standard errors in brackets. Salience model 1 estimates the salience model using a conditional logit,
     while salience model 2 uses a mixed logit. Panel B presents the substitutability model. The parameters in the …rst panel
     should be interpreted relative to 1, the normalized value for 2009. Actuarial value is measured on a 0 to 1 scale using the
     federal calculator. AV is not included in the gold nest of panel B due to lack of variation in AV among gold plans. Sample
     is restricted to consumers enrolling in a HIX plan for the …rst time between November 1, 2009 and February 28, 2010. N
     Enrollees = 2318 for all speci…cations.
                                               Table 5: Welfare
                                                      Conditional Logit Mixed Logit Nested Logit
 Constant Size Choice Set:
 Total Welfare Change, in $/month                     22.81                   23.87             26.24
 holding decision weights constant                    27.04                   27.95             30.26
 holding prices constant (hedonics)                   40.83                   42.64             47.51
 Full Choice Set:
 Total Welfare Change, in $/month                     41.73                   42.49             46.09
 holding decision weights constant                    45.96                   46.66             50.10
 holding prices constant (hedonics)                   59.75                   60.23             67.35

 Avg. Premium Paid in 2010 , in $/month 386.70                                386.70            386.70
 Notes. This table presents welfare changes calculations in dollars per enrollee per month. The welfare criterion
used corresponds to the 2010 estimated preferences (decision weights) in Table 4; evaluations using 2009 pref-
erences are similar and contained in Appendix Table A.5. The …rst panel compares only the 18 most popular
2010 plans to the 2009 plans to eliminate welfare gains due to additional error draws in the logit model. The
second panel compares the entire 2010 choice set to the 2009 choice set. When prices are held constant, the
hedonic pricing model is used.
Table 6: Experiment: The E¤ect of Choice Menu and Interface
                             Experiment    Observed in HIX
                         Pre Post Post-Alt 2009 2010
 Bronze          33% 30%                 40%          61%     55%
 ... Bronze HDHP 29% 13%                 27%          54%     29%
 Silver          41% 43%                 28%          31%     34%
 Gold            26% 26%                 32%          9%      11%

 Blue Cross              16%     18%     18%          13%     16%
 Fallon                  5%      1%      6%           21%     8%
 Harvard Pilgrim         10%     6%      6%           16%     13%
 Neighborhood            43%     59%     63%          39%     49%
 Tufts                   26%     16%     8%           5%      12%

 N                       299     307     304          982     1336
 Compares choices in the experiment, by condition, alongside observed HIX
choices.




                                                     36
            Table 7: Experiment: Importance of Plan Characteristics by Condition
                Tier         Hospital      MaxOOP Deduct.             Brand        Premium Dr. Visit
Post-Alt    0.233            -0.0971       -0.0832       0.0767       0.174        0.0693     0.0764
            (0.153)          (0.107)       (0.105)       (0.105)      (0.142)      (0.0977)   (0.104)
Post-Stdz. 0.608***          -0.315***     -0.211*       -0.0205      0.212        -0.0453    -0.142
            (0.153)          (0.112)       (0.109)       (0.105)      (0.143)      (0.0995)   (0.110)
Constant    3.060***         5.706***      5.856***      5.535***     3.997***     5.987***   5.555***
(Pre-Stdz.) (0.110)          (0.0748)      (0.0730)      (0.0720)     (0.101)      (0.0675)   (0.0759)
Notes. Dependent variable is level of importance (scale:1 to 7, higher is more important).




                                                   37
Web Appendix




     A.1
            1
                                       Standardization: Jan. 1, 2010




                      .8
  Fraction of Enrollees
.2      .4  0  .6




                     9                                                                        0
                  00                                                                        01
                ,2                           Enrollment Date                         1,
                                                                                        2
  l1                                                                             b
Ju                                                                            Fe



                                     BCBS                      Fallon
                                     Harv ard Pilgrim          Neighborhood




                           Figure A.1: No Evidence of Time Trends




                                               A.2
       Table A.1: Basic Summary Statistics
                            2009 2010
 Bronze                     60.8     55.5       p=0.01
 Silver                     30.5     33.9       p=0.09
 Gold                       8.7      10.6       p=0.11
 HDHP                       54.1     28.7       p<0.001
 Chosen Plan:
 Actuarial Value            77.8 82.5           p<0.001
 Mean OOP Cost              1129 870            p<0.001
 Variance OOP Cost          803 752             p<0.001

 Premium Paid               $374 $389           p=0.02

 BCBS                       12.9     15.7       p=0.06
 Fallon                     21.1     7.6        p<0.001
 Harvard Pilgrim            15.9     13.3       p=0.08
 HNE                        6.1      2.3        p<0.001
 Neighborhood               38.7     49.3       p<0.001
 Tufts                      5.3      11.8       p<0.001

 Age                        42.5     43.3       p=0.12
 N                          982      1336
 Notes: *** p<0.001,** p<0.01,* p<0.05. Two sample
tests of proportions (binary variables) or t-tests (continu-
ous variables). Sample is restricted to consumers enrolling
in a HIX plan for the …rst time between November 1, 2009
and February 28, 2010.
                               Table A.2: Di¤erence-in-Di¤erence Estimates
                    Pre. V. Post Std.                    Di¤erence in Di¤erence          2008 v. 2009 Placebo
 Bronze          -0.0533** (0.0207)                      -0.0711** (0.0302)              0.0178     (0.0220)
 Silver          0.0336*      (0.0196)                   0.0339      (0.0286)            -0.000372 (0.0208)
 Gold            0.0197       (0.0123)                   0.0372**    (0.0179)            -0.0174    (0.0130)
 BCBS            0.0279*      (0.0146)                   0.0193      (0.0228)            0.00857    (0.0175)
 Fallon          -0.135*** (0.0149)                      -0.170*** (0.0228)              0.0344** (0.0173)
 HNE             -0.0379*** (0.00869)                    -0.0457*** (0.0114)             0.00777    (0.00732)
 Neighborhood    0.106***     (0.0207)                   0.149***    (0.0301)            -0.0434** (0.0219)
 Harvard Pilgrim -0.0256*     (0.0149)                   -0.0339     (0.0215)            0.00824    (0.0155)
 Tufts           0.0653*** (0.0114)                      0.0809*** (0.0165)              -0.0156    (0.0120)
 N Enrollees     2318                                    4334                            2016
 Displays coe¢ cients on an indicator for post-standardization (or post-placebo). Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors in parentheses. Each row contains 3 regressions for that row’s dependent variable. Sample for Pre. v. Post
Std. is the paper’s analysis sample (Nov 2009-Feb 2010). Sample for Di¤erence Placebo is Nov. 2008-Feb. 2009
and otherwise has the same sample selection criteria. The di¤erence in di¤erence regressions use both samples.


                                                     A.3
                         Table A.3: No Pre-Existing Trends in Choice
                  (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)
              BCBS              Fallon         HNE             N’Hood       Harvard      Tufts
 Enroll Date  6.49e-05          -0.000153      0.000124        0.000297*    -0.000229    -0.000104
              (0.000124)        (0.000152)     (7.99e-05)      (0.000177)   (0.000141)   (8.51e-05)
 Observations 2,699             2,699          2,699           2,699        2,699        2,699


                  (7)           (8)            (9)
                  Bronze        Silver         Gold
 Enroll Date  0.000173   -8.42e-05  -8.84e-05
              (0.000180) (0.000171) (0.000105)
 Observations 2,699      2,699      2,699
 Sample: First-time enrollees, Jul. 2009 through Dec. 2009.
Linear probability model. Coe¢ cient on enrollment date pre-
sented, with robust standard errors in parentheses. See also
Figure A.1




                                                 A.4
   Table A.4: Standardization and Decision Weights, Robustness Excluding AV
                           Condit. Logit Condit. Logit Mixed Logit Mixed Logit
 Premium                   -0.0215*** -0.0227***
                           (0.00171)  (0.00176)
 Premium*2010              -0.000428  -0.00115
                           (0.000697) (0.000729)
 Premium*Age               0.000224***0.000241***                0.000269***       0.000305***
                           (2.36e-05) (2.40e-05)                 (3.14e-05)        (3.41e-05)
 Silver                    0.188      0.575***                   1.017***          1.120***
                           (0.130)    (0.173)                    (0.159)           (0.180)
 Gold                      1.004***   1.458***                   2.032***          2.348***
                           (0.234)    (0.255)                    (0.269)           (0.282)
 Silver*2010               0.655***   -0.0880                    0.503***          0.115
                           (0.122)    (0.170)                    (0.139)           (0.176)
 Gold*2010                 1.019***   0.322                      0.818***          0.396
                           (0.205)    (0.229)                    (0.229)           (0.252)
 HDHP                                 0.374**                                      -0.327*
                                      (0.155)                                      (0.180)
 HDHP*2010                            -1.164***                                    -0.570***
                                      (0.172)                                      (0.192)
 Mixed Logit: Lognormal Distribution of alphai
 Premium*2009, Mean[ln     i]                                    -3.501***         -3.348***
                                                                 (0.0751)          (0.0724)
 Premium*2010, Mean[ln              i]                           -3.525***         -3.394***
                                                                 (0.0723)          (0.0679)
 Premium*2009, SD[ln           i]                                0.311***          0.325***
                                                                 (0.0355)          (0.0336)
 Premium*2010, SD[ln           i]                                0.315***          0.308***
                                                                 (0.0320)          (0.0294)
 Insurer Fixed E¤ect Yes                      Yes                Yes               Yes
 N Person            2318                     2318               2318              2318
 *** p<0.001,** p<0.01,* p<0.05. This table presents estimates from conditional and mixed logit
models in which the weights on product characteristics are allowed to vary by year. The mixed
logit speci…cations model the price coe¢ cient as distributed lognormally in the population. Sample
is restricted to consumers enrolling in a HIX plan for the …rst time between November 1, 2009 and
February 28, 2010.




                                                    A.5
                                          Table A.5: Welfare
                                            Conditional Logit  Mixed Logit               Nested Logit
 Welfare Criterion                          2009    2010      2009   2010               2009    2010
                                Constant Size Choice Set:
 Total Welfare Change, in $/month 30.54 22.81           30.71                 23.87     32.13      26.24
 holding decision weights constant  25.22 27.04         26.62                 27.95     29.13      30.26
 holding prices constant (hedonics) 43.69 40.83         41.59                 42.64     43.78      47.51
                                    Full Choice Set:
 Total Welfare Change, in $/month 48.63 41.73           48.04                 42.49     52.95      46.09
 holding decision weights constant  44.75 45.96         45.10                 46.66     51.15      50.10
 holding prices constant (hedonics) 65.12 59.75         63.59                 60.23     67.30      67.35

 Mean Premium Paid, in $/month              352.45 386.70           352.45 386.70 352.45 386.70
 Notes. This table presents welfare changes calculations in dollars per enrollee per month. The welfare
criterion in the …rst column corresponds to 2009 and salience parameters of one for premium, brand, and
…nancial characteristics; the criterion in the second column corresponds to 2010 and the salience parameters
estimated in Table 4. The …rst panel compares only the 18 most popular 2010 plans to the 2009 plans to
eliminate welfare gains due to additional error draws in the logit model. The second panel compares the
entire 2010 choice set to the 2009 choice set. When prices are held constant, the hedonic pricing model is
used.




                                                   A.6
Table A.6: Counterfactual Plan Enrollment: Alternative
Decision Weights and Prices
 Decision Weight       2009 2009 2010 2010 Observed
 Prices                2010 2009 2010 2009 Observed
                         2009   Choice   Set
 Bronze                 0.65     0.60    0.48   0.43          0.61
 Silver                 0.31     0.35    0.43   0.45          0.30
 Gold                   0.04     0.05    0.09   0.11          0.09
 HDHP                   0.54     0.50    0.39   0.36          0.45

 BCBS                   0.16    0.14     0.17   0.14          0.15
 Fallon                 0.22    0.17     0.19   0.15          0.22
 Harvard Pilgrim        0.22    0.17     0.19   0.15          0.19
 HNE                    0.06    0.06     0.01   0.01          0.05
 Neighborhood           0.25    0.38     0.28   0.40          0.34
 Tufts                  0.09    0.08     0.12   0.10          0.05

                         2010   Choice   Set
 Bronze                 0.71     0.67    0.57   0.52          0.55
 Silver                 0.25     0.27    0.34   0.36          0.34
 Gold                   0.04     0.06    0.09   0.11          0.11
 HDHP                   0.39     0.35    0.31   0.28          0.29

 BCBS                   0.13    0.07     0.14   0.07          0.16
 Fallon                 0.11    0.07     0.13   0.08          0.08
 Harvard Pilgrim        0.12    0.06     0.12   0.07          0.13
 HNE                    0.02    0.03     0.00   0.00          0.02
 Neighborhood           0.52    0.72     0.48   0.68          0.49
 Tufts                  0.09    0.05     0.11   0.07          0.12
 Notes. This table describes plan market shares across counterfactual
scenarios in which decision weights and prices vary by year. The he-
donic pricing model is used. The averages are presented for the 2009
consumers and choice set in the …rst panel and the 2010 consumers
and choice set in the second panel.




                                                    A.7
        Table A.7: Experiment: The E¤ect of Choice Menu and Interface
                           Panel A: Generosity
                HDHP  Bronze      Silver                             Gold
 Pre-Stdz.                Comparison Condition
 Post-Stdz. -0.161*** -0.0245     0.0113                             0.0132
            (0.0332)  (0.0384)    (0.0411)                           (0.0362)
 PostAlt    -0.0260   0.0731*     -0.133***                          0.0603
            (0.0369)  (0.0398)    (0.0393)                           (0.0371)
 Controls   Yes       Yes         Yes                                Yes

                                     Panel B: Brand
                BCBS          Fallon      HarvardPilgrim             N’Hood Tufts
 Pre-Stdz.                        Comparison Condition
 Post-Stdz. 0.0142            -0.0398*** -0.0451**                   0.188***      -0.117***
            (0.0310)          (0.0136)    (0.0220)                   (0.0394)      (0.0325)
 PostAlt    0.0162            0.00565     -0.0429**                  0.203***      -0.182***
            (0.0312)          (0.0187)    (0.0217)                   (0.0395)      (0.0296)
 Controls   Yes               Yes         Yes                        Yes           Yes
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Controls include age, state of residence, level of
self-reported health, education, and income category. All regressions have N=910.
                       Table A.8: Salience of Plan Characteristics, by Condition
                Tier         Hospital Stay Max OOP Deduct. Brand                      Premium Dr Visit
 Pre-Stdz.                                        Comparison Category
 PostAlt    0.219            -0.108             -0.107     0.0651    0.165            0.0496       0.0485
            (0.153)          (0.106)            (0.103)    (0.105) (0.144)            (0.0983)     (0.105)
 Post-Stdz. 0.576***         -0.325***          -0.234**   -0.0433 0.160              -0.0659      -0.150
            (0.153)          (0.111)            (0.108)    (0.105) (0.143)            (0.100)      (0.110)
 Controls   Yes              Yes                Yes        Yes       Yes              Yes          Yes
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Controls include age, state of residence, level of self-reported
health, education, and income category. All regressions have N=910.




                                                    A.8
Table A.9: Results from Experiment: Decision
Weights Vary Pre- and Post-Standardization
                          (1)               (2)
                     Condit. Logit          Mixed Logit
 Silver              0.549                  1.238***
                     (0.386)                (0.458)
 Gold                1.149**                2.379***
                     (0.503)                (0.666)
 Silver*2010         -0.0337                0.392
                     (0.384)                (0.428)
 Gold*2010           0.690                  1.072**
                     (0.430)                (0.484)
 HDHP                0.728**                0.541
                     (0.346)                (0.399)
 HDHP*2010           -1.755***              -1.664***
                     (0.412)                (0.445)
 Premium             -0.00422
                     (0.00269)
 Premium*2010        -0.00347***
                     (0.00108)
 Premium*Age         2.32e-05               6.75e-05
                     (3.59e-05)             (5.00e-05)
 Mixed Logit: Lognormal Distribution       of    i
 Premium*2009, Mean[ln     i]               -4.495***
                                            (0.405)
 Premium*2010, Mean[ln               i]     -4.115***
                                            (0.292)
 Premium*2009, SD[ln            i]          0.431***
                                            (0.132)
 Premium*2010, SD[ln            i]          0.580***
                                            (0.152)
 Insurer Fixed E¤ect Yes                    Yes
 N Person            543                    543
 N Person-Plan       14685                  14685
 Notes. Limits sample to Pre-Stdz. and Post-Stdz. conditions
only (excludes Post-Alt.), and limits to ages 65 and under.


A.1       Experiment Design
Participants were recruited using Qualtrics Panels. Participants were limited to residents of
northeastern states (Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, Connecticut, Rhode


                                                  A.9
Island, and New York.) Individuals gave their income, and were screened out of the ex-
periment if their pre-tax household income was below the following thresholds: $35,000 if
single, $45,000 for a household of 2, $55,000 for 3, or $65,000 for 4 or more. After answering
some demographic questions, participants were assigned to a condition. Participants were
divided into two major age groups: over 45 and under 45. Assignment to condition was
balanced within age group, and each age group saw di¤erent prices (as prices on the HIX
are age-dependent).
    Participants saw the choice menu (plans and prices) available in zipcode 02130, and saw
age 35 prices (if under 45) and age 50 prices (if over age 45). Zipcode 02130 (Jamaica Plain,
Mass.) is similar to other zipcodes, with the exception that Health New England was not
o¤ered in this area; Health New England has relatively low market share.
    Participants in the Pre-Stdz. condition simply chose their plan from the list of plans
in an interface similar to the HIX’s pre-standardization interface. (Compare Figure A.4
with Figure A.7.) In the Post-Stdz. condition, participants …rst chose a tier (Figure A.5),
and then chose a plan (Figure A.6); compare to Figures A.2 and A.3. Finally, participants
in the Alt-Post condition saw the post standardization plans using the pre-standardization
interface (Figure A.8).
    After making their choices, participants rated how important each of a list of attributes
was for their decision, on a scale of 1-7. Then, participants made an additional choice in
a di¤erent condition: participants in the Pre-Stdz. condition made their second choice in
the Post-Stdz. condition, while participants in both the Post-Stdz. and Alt-Post conditions
made their second choice in the Pre-Stdz. condition. (Our primary analyses rely only
on participant’s …rst choice, but this data was collected since the marginal cost was low).
Participants then rated the importance of the factors for their second condition.




                                            A.10
Figure A.2: Post Standardization Choice Interface: Choose Tier




Figure A.3: Post Standardization Choice Interface: Choose Plan




                            A.11
Figure A.4: Pre Standardization: Choice




                 A.12
Figure A.5: Experiment: Post-Stdz. Choice of Tier




                      A.13
Figure A.6: Experiment: Post-Stdz. Choice of Plan




                      A.14
Figure A.7: Experiment: Pre-Stdz. Choice




                 A.15
Figure A.8: Experiment: Post-Stdz. Alternative Interface




                         A.16
