                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         CREDIT HISTORY: THE CHANGING NATURE OF SCIENTIFIC CREDIT

                                            Joshua S. Gans
                                             Fiona Murray

                                        Working Paper 19538
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19538


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We thank Susan Scotchmer, Ben Jones and participants at the NBER Changing Frontier conference
for helpful comments. Responsibility for all views expressed lies with the authors. The latest version
of this paper is available at research.joshuagans.com The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Joshua S. Gans and Fiona Murray. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Credit History: The Changing Nature of Scientific Credit
Joshua S. Gans and Fiona Murray
NBER Working Paper No. 19538
October 2013
JEL No. O32

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper considers the role of the allocation of scientific credit in determining the organization of
science. We examine changes in that organization and the nature of credit allocation in the past half
century. Our contribution is a formal model of that organizational choice that considers scientist decisions
to integrate, collaborate or publish and how credit should be allocated to foster efficient outcomes.


Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com

Fiona Murray
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-470
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
fmurray@mit.edu
                                                                                             2



I.     Introduction

       We are interested in the institutional conditions confronting scientists engaged in

cumulative innovation and the ways they have changed since Vannevar Bush famously

evoked the image of an Endless Frontier of scientific progress. While many scholars have

explored changes in outputs, i.e., in the rate and direction of the scientific frontier, we are

examine changes in the production of scientific knowledge. In seeking to explain how the

organization of knowledge production has changed, scholars have focused on two critical

factors: the vast number of new technologies that enable scientific progress (Mokyr 2002,

Agrawal and Goldfarb 2008) and the increasing burden of knowledge needed for

cumulative progress at the frontier (Jones 2009). We propose a third, previously

overlooked, factor grounded in the formal institutions and norms of science: the

assessment and allocation of credit. The institutions of credit are central to the incentive

system of open science (Merton 1957, Dasgupta and David 1994). While not as easy to

observe as the growing array of new equipment that fill laboratories today, and harder to

conceive of than the notion that to contribute to the frontier today means knowing more

than those contributing fifty years ago, we argue that credit has also changed in a range of

critical dimensions in the years since the “Endless Frontier.”

       We start our essay by focusing briefly on economic and sociological perspectives

on the nature of scientific credit. In Section II, we then develop our perspective on the

core organizational choices made by scientists as a way of motivating the central

importance of scientific credit in the ways in which knowledge production is organized,

using an example from number theory in mathematics to highlight these choices. Section
                                                                                        3



III elaborates our “credit history” – how the institutions and norms of scientific credit

have changed over the past fifty years. We do so by exploring three debates that have

animated the scientific community over the past fifty years. Building on the qualitative

insights from the past fifty years, Section IV lays out a formal model that places credit

allocation alongside the changing technical costs and knowledge burden of research to

explore the relative importance of these three factors. Section V concludes with

predictions for how science is likely to change going forward and implications of the

continually changing nature of scientific credit for the scientific community.



II.    Credit and the Organization of Science

A.     Choices in the Organization of Science

       The post-Vannevar Bush years have seen growing interest among scholars in

disciplines spanning the history, economics and sociology of science in understanding the

production and accumulation of scientific knowledge (rather than simply a focus on

scientific knowledge itself). While economists such as Arrow (1952), Nelson (1959) and

Rosenberg (1990) have famously pursued questions regarding the rate and direction of

scientific progress, sociologists including de Solla Price, Garfield and Merton were

among those highlighting the social and institutional nature of scientific progress at the

frontier. More recently, the economics of science has been concerned with the institutions

that shape knowledge accumulation, among them, decisions regarding the production and

disclosure of knowledge (Azoulay, Graff Zivin and Manso 2010, David 2008, Furman

and Stern 2011, Mokyr 2002, Murray and Stern 2007, Murray et al. 2009).
                                                                                              4



        As they work at the knowledge frontier, scientists (in a variety of organizational

settings) also make a range of meaningful organizational choices although these have

been less widely examined by scholars of science. Particularly for those researchers

working within the Academy, there is considerable flexibility with regards to a range of

choices. Indeed, one can think of academic laboratories as small enterprises in which the

faculty scientist is effectively a CEO within significant autonomy. Among their

autonomous organizational choices two are critical: First, the scope of the project -

whether to undertake a small research project and then disclose or to undertake a more

substantial but possibly longer project and disclose at a later time. Second, whether and

with whom to collaborate with, who to have as a co-author etc. We place these choices at

the front and center in our analysis of the organization of knowledge production and its

transformation over the past fifty years.

        A useful way to understand scientists’ organizational choices is to build on the

conceptual approach developed by Green and Scotchmer (1995) in the context of

cumulative innovation in the private sector and by Aghion et al. (2008) with regards to

scientific research. Accordingly, research follows a particular “line” which sets an

intellectual trajectory for progress and along which research can be understood as taking

place in discrete stages or “chunks.” At each stage, scientists (or those who fund them)

have the freedom to determine specific organizational arrangements, control rights and

rewards; within the constraints of the broader institutional context. With respect to the

organizational arrangements made by scientists working within academia, we argue that

three elements are critical: First, they must determine a sequence of cumulative projects

that follow along the line they are pursuing; i.e. they set a particular intellectual trajectory
                                                                                           5



and map out two or more projects along that line. Second, they must determine the

optimal way to approach these projects with respect to collaborative choices. Third, they

must determine their disclosure choices for these projects. Taken together, these three

elements lead to three distinctive organizational outcomes for any two steps along a

research trajectory (and can thus be generalized along a much more significant path):

   •   Integration – under integration, scientists may choose to undertake both projects

       in a line themselves (i.e. within their laboratory with no external collaborators)

       and only then publish both steps.

   •   Collaboration – under a collaboration strategy, scientists bring in collaborators

       (from other laboratories presumably with complementary skills) to complete both

       the projects in a line and publish a paper describing both steps with co-authors.

   •   Publication – rather than collaborate or integrate a scientist may choose to

       publish the first stage in the line and then simply wait to be cited (in the market

       for ideas) by follow-on researchers who pursue the second stage of the line at

       some later point.

While conceptual in our exposition, these three organizational alternatives reflect the very

real choices made by academic scientists throughout the course of their careers as

independent investigators. They are sharply illustrated in the recent case of discoveries in

number theory.

       On April 14, 2013, Dr. Yitang Zhang, a previously unknown lecturer at the

University of New Hampshire, submitted a paper to the Annals of Mathematics that

purported to prove that there were infinitely many pairs of consecutive prime numbers
                                                                                        6



with a gap of, at most, 70 million. This was the first such bound established and one of

the most significant steps towards proving a long-standing conjecture that there exist an

infinite number of twin primes (that is, a bound of size 2, the smallest possible). The

paper was accepted for publication on May 14th.

       Zhang’s contribution reflects a strategy that we would describe as “publication” –

it was sole authored but he chose to publish as soon as he had established an advance

rather than take the next step i.e. follow an integration strategy. What is interesting is

what has happened since that time: In subsequent months other researchers showed that

the 70 million bound established by Zhang was capable of significant refinement. By July,

it had been reduced from 70 million to just 5,414. With each advance, Zhang’s

contribution became more significant.

       What is salient for the purposes of our analysis is the way in which follow-on

researchers chose to chart the continued research trajectory. And as the bound fell to

400,000 there were contributions from a number of individual researchers who raced to

publish even the smallest improvements i.e. they followed a publication strategy.

However, in June, 2013, Field’s medallist, Terence Tao proposed a change in

organization! He set up the bounded primes problem as a Polymath project. Polymath

projects are online collaborative endeavours in mathematics using many researchers to

solve unsolved problems in a short amount of time. There had been seven such projects

over the previous two years all with some measure of success. The important feature of

the Polymath project is that all conjectures, failed routes and advances are made public

and transparent. For the bounded primes problem, in just a month, the bound fell from
                                                                                            7



just below 400,000 to its current level. The end result was a many-authored paper with

this final result and proofs of varying efficiently i.e. a modern form of collaboration.

       The bounded primes example vividly demonstrates the range of organizational

choices that can be pursued, as well as the changes in organizational modes scientists

pursue today. It highlights the importance of thinking more deeply about organizational

choices and credit in science. The simple dichotomy between sole authored and

collaborative works does not capture the richness of the scientific knowledge production

process. Here we argue that much can be gained by explicitly considering publication

(and citation) as an organizational model for cumulative scientific endeavours alongside

integration (sole authorship and secrecy) as well as collaboration.


B.     Organizational Choices and Institutions of Credit

       Our organizational perspective highlights the factors that influence scientists as

well as the central role of credit in the organization of science along research trajectories.

Without the consideration of credit, the reward structure that lies at the heart of scientific

work is ignored and our explanations of knowledge production are inadequate. Our

argument is as follows: selecting whether to integrate, collaborate or publish (and rely on

the citation market) depends at least in part on the ways in which scientists’ believe that

they will be rewarded for each of these alternatives. Specifically, a scientist choosing

among these options must consider the cost of pursuing each project along the line as

well as the time it will take for to accumulate the relevant specialized knowledge – the

traditional factors thought to shape the organizational calculus made by researchers from

one laboratory to another. Nonetheless these explanations are incomplete. While the costs
                                                                                          8



and benefits of the necessary technology and specialization are critical, scientists must

also consider the benefits and costs in terms of the level of credit they will receive under

different organizational arrangements.

       Under integration a scientist receives all the credit for a substantial amount of

research progress along the line, but must balance this against the potential costs of

acquiring the specialized knowledge and accessing relevant technology. In contrast, the

attractiveness of collaboration depends upon the trade-offs between the benefits of

additional resources (expertise and technology) brought to the project by co-authors and

the possible costs of how credit is allocated and shared between scientists and their

collaborators (see Bikard, Murray and Gans 2013 for an empirical elaboration of this

issue). Lastly, under the publication choice, citation markets provide an alternative form

of credit – in the form of citation and acknowledgement that may itself be valued by

researchers and those who evaluate them – that must be considered as a scientists may

then receive credit for the first stage project in the form of publication and credit in the

form of citation recognition from the second stage researchers.

       The trade-offs driving scientists’ organizational choices emphasize the importance

of credit as a more institutionally-grounded, but nonetheless important, countervailing set

of costs and benefits that balance the technical costs and benefits of pursuing particular

organizational strategies along a given research line. The role of credit as a central

institutional feature shaping the organization of science came to the attention of

economists upon publication of Dasgupta and David’s influential 1994 paper: “Towards a

New Economics of Science.” In it, they highlighted the importance of re-examining the
                                                                                        9



organizational structures as well as the institutions and policies of science. The paper

argues that science “is a system that remains an intricate and rather delicate piece of

social and institutional machinery” (p. 489), and emphasizes the importance of the norms

and general “institutions” governing the production of knowledge. In focusing on the less

tangible features of scientific work, Dasgupta and David build upon a long sociological

tradition examining the institutional arrangements found in Academia.

       Distinguished sociologist of science Robert Merton identified the central role of

credit and the informal norms regarding credit describing them as the “psychosocial

processes affect[ing] the allocation of rewards to scientists for their contributions- an

allocation which in turn affects the flow of ideas and findings through the communication

networks of science” (Merton 1968 p. 56). Merton also argued that credit could be “mis-

allocated” under some conditions noting, famously, that “[e]minent scientists get

proportionately great credit for their contributions to science while relatively unknown

scientists tend to get disproportionately little credit for comparable contributions”

(Merton 1968, p. 443) – a feature of scientific credit Merton dubbed the ‘Matthew Effect.’

       While the Matthew Effect emphasizes a specific instantiation of credit and its

(mis-)allocation, Merton’s other work and that of subsequent sociologists have explored a

variety of ways in which the scientific reward system and credit serve a key elements in

the institutional life of scientists. For example, in shaping the career trajectories of

scientists (most especially tenure), credit was traditionally allocated through processes

that take place within a small “inner circle” of scientists who adjudicate claims for

priority and, therefore, credit on the basis of close personal relationships (Crane 1969).
                                                                                       10



Beyond credit allocation within closed social contexts, Hagstrom (1969) recognized that

citations to prior publications by colleagues also provided an additional reward to

researchers as part of an exchange relationship whereby credit and recognition are placed

at the center of a system for knowledge disclosure with information provided in return for

credit in the form of citations (see Murray 2010 for an exploration of this process in the

context of patent rights). Cole and Cole (1973) further elaborated our understanding of

credit and rewards considering the different types of rewards scientists’ accrue:

professorships in leading departments, honorific titles, and wide citation being among the

most salient.

       Most recently, historians of science working in these institutional traditions have

sought to use the idea of credit as a way of explaining key historical events in the

scientific community. Perhaps the best example are the lengths to which Galileo went to

ensure that his novel telescope (and his unique access to its design and production)

became a means of receiving both financial and reputational credit from a variety of

patrons across Europe, carefully balancing his maintaining control of the telescope to

garner further credit, with sharing with others so as to ensure that his scientific claims

could be validated and thus given appropriate credit (Biagioli 2003, 2006).

       Dasgupta and David (1994) can be credited with incorporating this line of

thinking from the sociology of science into an economic framework. Their approach has

been to examine the reward system as a central element in science and argue that “an

individual’s reputation for ‘contributions’ acknowledged within their collegiate reference

groups is the fundamental ‘currency’ in the reward structure that governs the community
                                                                                         11



of academic scientists” (p. 498). This reference to credit as currency highlights the notion

of credit and currencies of credit as central both to the norms of science and to its

economic foundations. From the perspective of a social planner, the importance of

priority in credit speeds up discovery along research lines and ensures their disclosure.

From the perspective of a scientist organizing to pursue a given research line issues of

credit allocation shape their organizational choices. However, what remains to be

understood, and what serves as the central focus of the remainder of this paper is the way

in which credit and the changing nature of credit more precisely and more generally

shapes the organization of science.

       The notion that credit is a critical factor driving the organization of science is in

counterpoint to prior approaches taken in the academic literature. Traditionally, scholars

have examined two main determinants of the organization of research: the technology of

knowledge production and the burden of knowledge. With regards to the influence of

technological change, a significant body of knowledge has argued for the important

(albeit complex) role of new technologies in facilitating the pursuit of scientific progress

(see Mokyr 2002, 2010). From Boyle’s air pump (Shapin and Schaffer 1986) to Volta’s

pile (Pancaldi 2003), new technologies have enabled scientists to pursue more complex

and distinctive research lines.

       In the post-Vannevar Bush period, technology has been of particular importance

in areas such as biology and physics (Knorr-Cetina 1999). In biology, the invention and

automation of the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), DNA sequencing and DNA

synthesis have, among other technologies, opened a wealth of new biological research
                                                                                        12



lines and at least in part been the driving force behind new modes of organization (Huang

and Murray 2010). Likewise, in physics, the development of new, more powerful

telescopes and massive particle colliders (each with their attendant computing power)

have enabled the exploration of new knowledge frontiers while at the same time changing

the lives of physicists, and their ways of collaborating and organizing of research

(Galison 1997). Beyond the specific technologies of knowledge production, recent work

(e.g. Agrawal and Goldfarb 2008; Ding et al. 2010) has highlighted the ways in which the

coming of the Internet shaped the organization of research and the extent and nature of

collaboration versus integration. In particular, data (from engineering research) show that

faculty in middle-ranking universities have seen the greatest organizational change,

becoming more likely to be engaged in top-tier collaborations than prior to Bitnet

introduction.

       An alternative, or perhaps more accurately a complementary, perspective on the

changing organization of science is articulated by Ben Jones who outlined the importance

of the burden of knowledge on researcher’s organizational choices (Jones et al. 2008;

Jones 2009). His line of argument focuses on the growing length of scientific training as

scientists seek to accumulate an ever-growing body of knowledge in order to make

contributions at the frontier. As a corollary to the increasing requirement for training,

scientists are accordingly becoming narrower in their expertise and more highly

specialized – an effect he refers to as the death of the Renaissance man (Jones 2009).

According to the burden of knowledge argument, the combined need for more and more

specialized knowledge leads researchers into pursuing their chosen research lines through
                                                                                          13



higher levels of collaboration. In support of this perspective are data on the rise in

number of authors on scientific publication across all fields (Wutchy et al. 2007).

       Our argument is that changing the technology and specialization costs (and

benefits) of scientific knowledge production takes us only part way towards

understanding the organizational choices of researchers at any given moment in time.

Moreover, it fails to account for the fact that, while technology and specialization has

surely changed over the past fifty years, so too has the nature of credit. While less

observable in laboratories than the changing equipment and less immediate than the

growing shoulders of giants upon which all scholars must stand, credit too has likely

changed. In particular, with the expansion of the scientific community (both within the

United States and more globally), simple informal networks and scientific inner circles

are less likely to be effective at adjudicating questions of credit. Likewise, the observable

rise in collaboration challenges traditional institutions of credit and its allocation. Thus,

credit becomes central to the calculus of academic scientists. In what follows, we offer a

limited “credit history” of the past fifty years as a window into the changing credit

allocation process and the exchange rates in the currencies of credit.



III.   Credit History

       The intangible nature of credit and its allocation makes it challenging to trace and

demonstrate. To overcome this invisibility, we develop a short history of the debates

around credit and the scientific reward system as told by scientists themselves in the

pages of their journals: a window into a narrative we refer to as a credit history. This
                                                                                          14



history is basically gleamed from the issues that animated the editorial pages of major

research journals – Science and Nature as well as some medical journals, as well as the

Chronicle of Higher Education (CHE). While not comprehensive, our explication of the

credit arguments that animated scientists serve as a window into the challenges that they

confront as they wrestle with their autonomous credit system.

          Two debates of particular import can be traced through the historical record that

are salient to the link between credit and the organization of scientific knowledge

production: first, authorship conventions (including ordering and ghost authorship) which

link to trade-offs around credit and collaboration; second, salami slicing which speaks to

the role of credit in choices of integration versus citation markets.


A.        Authorship Conventions & Credit

          The most important debates that animate scientists as they consider the role of

credit are those that explicitly link authorship and credit allocation (Cawkell 1976).

Gaeta1 (1999) coined the term authorship “law and order” to connote not only the rules of

authorship i.e. the “law” but also the specific role of ordering of authorship (see Gans and

Murray 2013 for a more comprehensive theoretical treatment of author ordering and

credit and Engers et al. 1999 for a theoretical treatment). At its core the debate raises the

possibility that while some genuine changes in collaboration may be taking place (see

Price and Beaver 1966), driven by specialization, thus accounting for a rise in average

authorship, gratuitous authorship may also be increasing particularly from the 1970s

onwards (Alberts and Shine 1994).

1
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10230981
                                                                                         15



         To highlight this possibility, Broad provides an example in his 1981 article on the

topic. He notes: “The fellowship application for the American College of Physicians asks

a candidate to list per-cent participation in studies in which he is a listed author. Though

seemingly a workable solution, the accuracy of the resulting judgments has been called

into question. In at least one instance, when a whole research team applied for

fellowships, their total participation came to 300 percent.” (Broad 1981, p. 1138)

         Changing authorship norms (specifically norms adding further authors) place an

increased burden on the reward system of science; particularly in the evaluation of young

faculty at key career milestones. Over a fifty-year period when the number of researchers

(and their specialization) has increased, the evaluation of individual biographies (i.e.

published contributions) has grown increasingly complex. Even in 1981, an editor of the

New England Journal of Medicine noted that “You have to know the journals, and what

impact they have.... You have to know the institutions, the people, the meetings.... It’s a

ticklish matter” (quoted in Broad 1981, p 1139). Today, evaluative choices for promotion,

tenure, grant making and a wealth of other forms of scientific credit rely on publishing

records even while those records are increasingly murky and hard to interpret (see

Simcoe and Waguespack 2011 for an analysis of the impact of missing authors).

Likewise, scientists themselves must make organizational choices over collaboration,

integration or publishing in the shadow of a complex credit allocation process: one that is

beset with indeterminacy over credit and authorship norms (Haussler and Sauermann

2013).
                                                                                         16



       In responding to this debate, a number of scientific journals have taken the lead in

asking authors to carefully document their contributions to scholarly publications. Most

notably, on New Year’s Day 2010, Bruce Albert Editor-in-Chief at Science published

editorial promoting scientific standards, focused on authorship issues. In it, he described

a change in policy to discourage “honorary authorship” in which

       before acceptance, each author will be required to identify his or her contribution
       to the research (see www.sciencemag.org/about/authors). Science's policy is
       specifically designed to support the authorship requirements presented in On
       Being a Scientist: Third Edition, published by the U.S. National Academy of
       Sciences. That report emphasizes the importance of an intellectual contribution
       for authorship and states that “Just providing the laboratory space for a project
       or furnishing a sample used in the research is not sufficient to be included as an
       author” (Alberts 2010 p. 12).


This view was echoed in a 2012 column in Nature in which the author argued that

“[w]hen it comes to apportioning credit, science could learn from the movies” (Frische

2012, p.475)!

       In other instances faculty themselves have developed internal “lab norms” to

adjudicate authorship claims. As recently described in Science, Harvard Psychology

Professor Stephen Kosslyn has developed his own points system which he describes in

detail on the website for his laboratory. “Anyone who works with him on a project that

results in a paper can earn up to 1000 points, based on the extent of their contribution to

six different phases of the project: idea, design, implementation, conducting the

experiment, data analysis, and writing. The first and last phases -- idea and writing -- get

the most weight. Those who make a certain cutoff are granted authorship, and their score

determines their order on the list.” (Venkatramen 2010) While this example is unusual in
                                                                                            17



its specificity, local norms at the field level are continually evolving and fields such as

high energy physics have moved to norms that rely on alphabetical ordering of the many

hundreds of authors that are often part of a paper that relies on massively costly,

centralized technology for the production of knowledge.

       Not only an issue for credit, authorship conventions – rather than authorship that

simply reflects changes in underlying research organization – also raise questions of

responsibility and liability for research findings and for the potential ‘false science’

including fraud (see Furman, Jensen and Murray 2012 and Azoulay et al. 2013 for a

broader analysis of retractions in this context). To combat this challenge and the

liabilities (as well as the credit) that arises with publishing, Science, in the same editorial

noted above, also outline a policy in which senior authors record that they have

personally examined original data and attest to its appropriate presentation (Alberts 2010).


B.     Salami Slicing & Credit

       A second major theme that emerges in our credit history takes the colourful label

‘salami slicing.’ It describes an ongoing debate regarding the ‘size’ of the least

publishable unit (LPU) along a research line. This debate emphasizes the organizational

choices between integration (leading to a larger published slice) on the one hand and

publication (of a smaller slice of the research line) with follow on citation by other

researchers (or by self-citation by the research team). The question posed by scientists is

whether or not to publish the small step embodied in project 1 and wait for citation by

another researcher pursuing project 2 (or pursing self-citation) or to complete projects 1

and 2 before publishing a larger slice of research thus making a larger contribution.
                                                                                         18



           There is clear statistical evidence, from the 1970s onwards, to support the claim

that publication length, at least in the biological and physical sciences, is shortening

(although Card and DellaVigna 2013 show evidence that in contrast, publications in

economics are longer). While not conclusive evidence of the rise of LPUs, anecdotal

evidence supports the publishing dilemma of young faculty and the link between LPUs

and credit. One Dean of Science described the dilemma in an article in CHE as follows:

“In order to appear to have more publications on their CVs, young scholars are often

advised to break their research down into pieces and publish those pieces in multiple

articles -- i.e., LPU's.... Having a couple of LPU's will ensure that the bean counters

cannot assail her record. We both know that there are those among us who would easily

ignore her aggressive pursuit of grants and a single brilliant paper in Cell if her four

years here did not include the magic two papers.”2

           Far from being a new issue, discussions over LPUs and the link between

publication strategies and credit can be traced back through the editorial pages of Science

at least to 1981 (Broad 1981). In a provocative article, the careers of young scientists in

the 1980s - who typically had between 50 and 100 publications at the time of promotion -

were contrasted with scientists from the late 1950s such as James Watson who, when

being evaluated by peers had only 18 papers (albeit one that described the structure of

DNA!). Broad notes the emergence of the LPU and argues that “the increases stem not

from a sharp rise in productivity but rather from changes in the way people publish. Co-

authorship is on the rise, as is multiple publication of the same data” (p. 1137). He also



2
    http://chronicle.com/article/In-Defense-of-the-Least/44761
                                                                                            19



notes the challenge for credit allocation arguing that, in combination, LPU practices and

changing co-authorship obfuscate the effort made by young scholars making evaluation

and credit much more challenging.

           More recently, in 2005, the journal Nature Materials explored the impact on the

sustainability of scientific publishing of what it referred to as “fragmenting single

coherent bodies of research into as many publications as possible — the practice of

scientific salami slicing.”3 Scientists also speculate that salami slicing potentially leads to

a much greater likelihood that publications will be plagiarized (at least in part), be

overlapping or in other ways cross the boundary into false science. It also has important

implications for the effectiveness and capacity of scientists to engage in meaningful peer

review and credit allocation: As the editors of Nature Materials outlined, poor practices

associated with salami slicing “deny referees and editors the opportunity of assessing the

true extent of its contribution to the broader body of research” raising the question of

credit allocation for researchers selecting between integration and publishing.

           While incomplete in their coverage, these two examples of credit history highlight

both the central importance and the critical challenges associated with the role of credit in

the organization of science. Far from being a wrinkle in the changing tapestry of science,

scientists are making a range of organizational choices in the shadow of the complex and

changing beliefs about the nature and meaning of scientific credit. In what follows, we

bring clarity to these issues by developing a formal model that links credit with

technology and specialization.


3
    http://www.nature.com/nmat/journal/v4/n1/full/nmat1305.html
                                                                                                            20



IV.      Formal Model

         The combined elements of technology, knowledge burden and credit institutions

together shape the observable outputs of science – the number of publications, the

number of authors, the rate of progress and its direction. More importantly, they inform

the underlying organization of science: decisions made by scientists about ‘laboratory life’

as it pertains to any particular research line the laboratory is pursuing. With this in mind,

we provide a formal model of the drivers of the (optimal) choice of organizational form

for cumulative science and, in particular, how this choice is driven by institutions to

allocate credit to individual scientists for their role in knowledge production.


A.       Basic Set-Up

         We consider an environment whereby knowledge is created by cumulative

scientific research. Specifically, we focus on a pioneer scientist’s (P) decisions with

respect to an initial scientific project, 1. Following Green and Scotchmer (1995) (and also

Bresnahan (2011)), we assume that the (opportunity) cost to the scientist of pursuing 1 is

c1. The stand-alone quality of project 1 is x.4

         A follow-on project that builds on 1, project 2, may also be possible and can be

conducted by P or another follow-on scientist, F. For a scientist, i, with in-depth

knowledge of project 1, the probability that they perceive the project 2 opportunity is pi.

To acquire the necessary in-depth knowledge of project 1 costs a scientist, Ci, so long as



4
  It is useful to note that the publication and associated citation plays a similar role to ex post licensing in
the Green and Scotchmer (1995) model except that the key parameters are market determined rather than
determined through bilateral negotiation. That said, Green and Scotchmer (1995) do bring some of those
factors into play when they consider how a planner might set patent length as well as antitrust policy.
                                                                                            21



they have access to project 1’s knowledge in the first place. The idea here is that, while

project 1 knowledge may be disclosed (say through publication or communication),

understanding it in a way that leads to follow-on research takes additional effort (for

instance, by undertaking replication studies). That said, an alternative interpretation of Ci

is as a communication cost. If project 2 is possible, it comes with an expected quality, y,

and research (opportunity) cost, c2i.

        As noted in our discussion above, there are three ways research into projects 1

and 2 can be organized. First, under integration, P conducts both projects before

publishing their results under sole authorship. Second, under collaboration, P

collaborates with another scientist, F, over both projects. In this situation, each focuses

on aspects of the project they can do at least cost but pool their skills and communication

in understanding the implications of project 1 for the project 2 opportunity. Third, under

publication, P publishes project 1 results and then F conducts research into project 2,

citing back to P’s initial contribution. Under both collaboration and publication, the

market awards P and F with attribution regarding each scientist’s contributions. A key

focus here will be on how that attribution takes place.




Integration: In this option, P pursues both projects. Of key importance is that the entire

quality of research, should it take place, is attributed to P. Thus, P’s expected payoff is:

                      v PInt = max ⎡⎣ x − c1 + max ⎡⎣ pF ( y − c2 P ) − C P ,0 ⎤⎦ ,0 ⎤⎦    (1)

Note that it is entirely possible that project 1 has no stand-alone value (i.e., x = 0) and its

value rests solely on its ability to lead to research in project 2.
                                                                                                        22




Collaboration: Under collaboration, P identifies F ex ante, and they choose to pursue

both projects jointly.5 The first consequence of this is that the costs of understanding the

implications of project 1 for project 2 are shared across scientists. To this end, we assume

that these costs are CPF and can be allocated to P and F through internal bargaining with

P’s share being s. Similarly, we assume that the consequent probability that project 2’s

opportunity is perceived is pPF.

        The second consequence of collaboration is that co-authorship is formally given

to both P and F on projects 1 and 2. Of course, one can imagine a scenario whereby this

is only done with respect to project 2 but, as explained below, this does not necessarily

lead to different conclusions regarding whether collaboration is chosen. If both projects

are successful, the research quality of their collaborative effort is x + y. However, the

market – comprised of scientific peers – will award each with personal attribution of that

output. We assume that the attribution going to scientist i is αi rather than simply equal

sharing on the basis that the market may have some reason to assign differential weights

to each scientist. Otherwise we assume that attribution has to be the same in equilibrium;

i.e., α P = α F = α . Importantly, we make no assumption that α P + α F = 1 . Indeed, (as

observed in the example from medical research above) credit could be greater than 1

although we assume that the total quality from the projects can be no greater than x + y.

        Under collaboration, the expected payoffs to each scientist are:



5
 There is an issue associated with whether F can be simply identified or not. As we note below, publication
can work without this condition.
                                                                                              23



                      v PCol = max ⎡⎣α P x − c1 + max ⎡⎣ pPFα P y − sC PF ,0 ⎤⎦ ,0 ⎤⎦         (2)


                 v FCol = max ⎡⎣α F x + max ⎡⎣ pPF (α F y − c2 F ) − (1− s)C PF ,0 ⎤⎦ ,0 ⎤⎦   (3)

This reflects the notion that P has the lowest cost associated with conducting project 1

and that P and F choose the scientist with the lowest cost to conduct project 2. The

allocation of the costs, CPF, is assumed to be determined internally. To keep things

simple, it will be assumed that all of the internal bargaining rests with P and so s is the

minimal amount (if it exists) that will ensure that F collaborates.

        To see what s will be let us assume that it is jointly profitable for project 1 to be

investigated and, individually profitable for project 2 to proceed (i.e., α F y ≥ c2 F ). In this

case, from (3), the minimal s that allows F to earn a positive return is:

                                                   α F x+ pPF ( α F y−c2 F )
                                         ŝ = 1−            C PF
                                                                                              (4)

Thus, for P, its expected return is:


                         v PCol = (α P + α F )(x + pPF y) − c1 − C PF − pPF c2 F              (5)

        Note that the total surplus from collaboration is:


                         max ⎡⎣ x − c1 + max ⎡⎣ pPF ( y − c2 F ) − C PF ,0 ⎤⎦ ,0 ⎤⎦           (6)


Importantly, while the market can potentially award P and F a ‘free lunch’ if α P + α F > 1 ,

total surplus only involves the ‘real’ variables.
                                                                                           24



Publication: The third organizational option for cumulative science is for P to research

and publish the results of project 1 and then for another scientist, F, to investigate this

project outcome and (potentially) perceive and research project 2. For F, should P

publish their research from project 1, they will have a choice as to whether to conduct an

in-depth investigation of that research and, if that provides an opportunity, research and

publish project 2. It is assumed that if project 2 is published that it includes a citation to

P’s research in project 1. The market will then partially attribute credit for some of

project 2 to P as a share βP of y and attribute βF of y to F.

        Given this, F’s expected payoff following a publication by P is:


                             v FPub = max ⎡⎣ pF ( β F y − c2 F ) − C F ,0 ⎤⎦              (7)

If F’s expected payoff is negative, we assume here that publication is infeasible as, if

they are given the choice, P would prefer integration to publication. However, if F’s

expected payoff is positive and research into project 2 goes ahead, P’s expected payoff is:


                                v PPub = max ⎡⎣ x − c1 + pF β P y,0 ⎤⎦                    (8)

In this case, social surplus from publication is:


                             max ⎡⎣ x − c1 + pF ( y − c2 F ) − C F ,0 ⎤⎦                  (9)

Again, we assume that even if β P + β F ≠ 1 the social surplus from project 2 if it is

successful is y.

        Table 1 summarizes the value attributed to each scientist under each

organizational mode.
                                                                                                25



                        Table 1: Value Attributed to Each Scientist

                                                  P                                  F
         Integration                           1(x+y)                                0
        Collaboration                          αP(x+y)                            αF(x+y)
         Publication                           x + βPy                              βFy

B.      Equilibrium Choices

        We now turn to consider P’s organizational choice for research. While the

specification above allows for the possibility that under some organizational forms both

stages of research will be completed while under others one or neither will be completed,

this model can be more easily exposited if we assume that, regardless of organizational

mode, both stages of research are completed.

        To that end we assume the following:


        (A1) x − c1 + pF ( y − c2 P ) ≥ C P (both projects are undertaken under integration);

        (A2) (α P + α F )(x + pPF y) − c1 − c2 F ≥ C PF (both projects are undertaken under
             collaboration); and
        (A3) x − c1 + pF β P y ≥ 0 and pF ( β F y − c2 F ) ≥ C F (both projects are undertaken
             under publication).


Thus,


                                 v PInt = x − c1 + pP ( y − c2 P ) − C P                    (10)

                        v PCol = (α P + α F )(x + pPF y) − c1 − C PF − pPF c2 F             (11)

                                       v PPub = x − c1 + pF β P y                           (12)

                                   v FPub = pF ( β F y − c2 F ) − C F                       (13)
                                                                                                        26



In addition, we assume that:


              (A4) c2 F ≤ c2 P


That is, F has a comparative advantage in conducting stage 2 (e.g., P has a higher

opportunity     cost   of    their    time).    Under      these     assumptions,      P   will    choose

max{v PInt ,v PCol ,v PPub } . It is instructive to consider the pairwise choices between these

organizational forms.




Collaboration versus integration: Collaboration will be chosen by P if:


     v PCol ≥ v PInt ⇒ (α P + α F − 1)x + ( (α P + α F ) pPF − pP ) y ≥ pPF c2 F − pP c2 P + C PF − C P (14)

By contrast, collaboration is socially superior to integration if:

                        x + pPF ( y − c2 F ) − C PF ≥ x − c1 + pP ( y − c2 P ) − C P
                                                                                                      (15)
                       ⇒ ( pPF − pP ) y ≥ pPF c2 F − pP c2 P + C PF − C P

It is clear that in our modelling set up, the social choice and P’s choice will coincide if

and only if α P + α F = 1 , a result that sharply contrasts to scientists own discussions and

informal evidence which, as we outlined, suggest that may scientists believe that

α P + α F > 1 . Based on our model, if collaboration allows knowledge transfer costs (CPF)

to be shared between both scientists, overweighting the collaboration rewards would

encourage over-collaboration.




Publication versus integration: Publication will be chosen by P if:
                                                                                                      27



                                v PPub ≥ v PInt ⇒ pF β P y ≥ pP ( y − c2 P ) − C P                   (16)

In this case, publication is socially preferable to integration if:


                        x − c1 + pF ( y − c2 F ) − C F ≥ x − c1 + pP ( y − c2 P ) − C P
                                                                                                     (17)
                        ⇒ ( pP − pF ) y + pF c2 F + C F ≤ pP c2 P + C P

Note, however, that because we assume that, under publication, F will choose to conduct

the project 2, pF β F y ≥ pF c2 F + C F . Thus, if publication is chosen by P we know that:

                        ( pP − pF β P ) y − pP c2 P − C P ≤ pF β F y − pF c2 F − C F
                                                                                                     (18)
                        ⇒ ( pP − pF ( β P + β F )) y + pF c2 F + C F ≤ pP c2 P + C P

This is a necessary condition for publication to be chosen by P. Thus, if β P + β F ≤ 1 , if

publication is chosen in equilibrium then it is socially preferable to integration. However,

if β P + β F > 1 , it is possible that publication will be chosen in equilibrium when it is not

socially preferable to integration. Specifically, (18) may hold when (17) does not.



Publication versus collaboration: Publication will be chosen by P over collaboration if:

             v PPub ≥ v PCol ⇒ (1− α P − α F )x + ((α P + α F ) pPF − pF β P ) y ≤ pPF c2 F + C PF   (19)

In this case, publication is socially preferable to collaboration if:

                              ( pPF − pF ) y + pF c2 F + C F ≤ pPF c2 F + C PF                       (20)

As above recall that, pF β F y ≥ pF c2 F + C F . Thus, if publication is chosen in equilibrium

by P, then

     (1− α P − α F )x + (α P + α F ) pPF y − pF β P y ≤ pPF c2 F + C F
     ⇒ (1− α P − α F )x + (α P + α F ) pPF y − pF β P y − pF β F y + pF c2 F + C F ≤ pPF c2 F + C F (21)
                                                        
                                                                           <0
                                                                                               28



This is a necessary condition for publication to be chosen by P. Thus, if α F + α P = 1 and

β P + β F ≤ 1 then, if publication is chosen by P, it will also be socially preferred to

collaboration. However, if β P + β F > 1 , then it is possible that publication will be chosen

in equilibrium when it is not socially preferable to collaboration. Specifically, (21) may

hold even when (20) does not hold.


C.      Optimal Attribution

        The above analysis suggests that setting α F + α P = 1 and β P + β F = 1 may have

some desirable properties. However, it also demonstrated that inefficient outcomes can

arise involving each of the three evaluated organizational choices. Consequently, we

consider what levels of (α F ,α P , β F , β P ) might generate an efficient outcome, the idea

being to imagine that these parameters were chosen by a planner and to evaluate their

properties exploring how this is in accordance (or discordance) with what actually

happens in science. To this end, we follow Green and Scotchmer (1995) considering

situations where the follow-on scientist, F, may earn no surplus as a convenient means of

avoiding having to deal with the potential range of parameters that may give rise to an

efficient outcome. The idea here being that since P’s choice determines the outcome, it

makes sense to ensure that as much of the surplus goes to P as possible.


Proposition 1. There exists (α P ,α F , β P , β F ) such that α F + α P = 1 and β P + β F = 1 that
results in an equilibrium choice for P that is efficient.

The proposition is easily proved by finding the β̂ F such that v FPub = 0 and letting

β̂ P = 1− β̂ F and substituting α F + α P = 1 so that:
                                                                                              29



                   v PCol ≥ v PInt ⇒ ( pPF − pP ) y ≥ pPF c2 F − pP c2 P + C PF − C P


                     v PPub ≥ v PInt ⇒ ( pP − pF ) y + pF c2 F + C F ≤ pP c2 P + C P


                   v PPub ≥ v PCol ⇒ ( pPF − pF ) y + pF c2 F + C F ≤ pPF c2 F + C PF

These are identical to conditions (15), (17) and (20). This demonstrates that the choices

among each of the organizational forms are driven by the same conditions as the socially

optimal choices.

        Specifically, note that:


                                 (β̂ , β̂ ) = (
                                    P   F
                                                  pF ( y−c2 F )−C F
                                                        pF y
                                                                      ,
                                                                          pF c2 F +C F
                                                                              pF y       )   (22)

such that so long as they sum to 1 it is arbitrary what αF and αP are. The reason for this is

quite intuitive: With collaboration, we allowed P and F to negotiate cost sharing but

given the structure this allowed them to transfer utility. Thus, the decision was driven

wholly by the joint market reward to collaboration rather than the precise division. No

such instrument existed for publication and hence, the market rewards needed to

determine division as well as overall value in order to generate a socially optimal

outcome.

        It is useful to consider how Proposition 1 might change if, in fact, s (the share of

costs accruing to P under collaboration) was fixed and non-negotiable.


Proposition 2. When s is fixed, there exists (α P ,α F , β P , β F ) such that α F + α P = 1 and
β P + β F = 1 that results in an equilibrium choice for P that is efficient.
                                                                                                                 30



The proof proceeds using the same method as Proposition 1. In this case, the range of βi

remains as in (22) above. By contrast, the market weights for collaboration become:


                          (α̂   P
                                    ,α̂ F ) =   (   x+ pPF ( y−c2 F )−(1−s)C PF
                                                              x+ pPF y
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                      pPF c2 F +(1−s)C PF
                                                                                           x+ pPF y         )   (23)

In this case, it can easily be demonstrated that the payoffs realized are the same as in

Proposition 1.


D.      A note on social surplus

        Thus far we have been somewhat loose in our consideration of socially optimal

outcomes. The propositions focus on efficiency which is the expected difference between

research quality realised and the costs incurred under the chosen organizational form.

However, this is distinct from social efficiency that would take into account the broader

impact of the research. For a very significant medical breakthrough, for example, the

social surplus from that research may vastly exceed the assessed quality of that research

accruing to scientists. In this case, the costs realized by these scientists would be very

small relative to social outcomes. Thus, to generate a socially efficient outcome would

require giving scientists kudos well above 1 even for integrated research lines.

        Given this, how should we interpret Propositions 1 and 2? The first reasonable

assumption is that a research paper has an assessed quality that is independent of the

organizational form of the team that generated it. This is what the parameters x and y

capture. As a result, we interpret x + y as the maximum kudos that can be given to a

research line that is sole authored. Given this, the shares, (α P ,α F , β P , β F ) , represent the

relative shares given to collaboration or publication compared with that for a sole
                                                                                           31



authored paper. Thus, Propositions 1 and 2 ask if it is efficient to give collaboration or

publication a different weight to integrated paper kudos that is fixed. We find that such a

distinct weight is not warranted. However, that is a distinct weight relative to the level of

kudos under integration. If that kudos could be aligned with social value then that could

generate a socially optimal outcome. For the moment, an interpretation as a relative

weight is as far as we can go here.



V.     Some Implications

       Having constructed a model of organizational choice for cumulative science, we

now turn to consider a number of issues raised in our credit history and discuss what

insights the model gives us into how these may be reasonably resolved. We must

emphasize that this analysis is suggestive rather than conclusive. Specifically, we do not

know what determines the allocation of credit in science. Our formal model tells us what

that allocation might look like if it was indeed efficient but, in fact, the processes by

which these actually arise have likely been changing over time and are subject to various

informational limitations that will lead to allocation being an inferred outcome rather than

a precise one.


A.     Collaborative bias

       The first element of our credit history explored the relationship between credit

and decisions to collaborate. In particular we illustrated the concerns scientists have

expressed over rising collaboration and the attendant difficulties in credit allocation. This

is particularly troublesome if there are trends that lead to over collaboration. Specifically,
                                                                                          32



it has been claimed that the market weights on a collaborative research project are greater

than the weights that would arise if that project were not collaborative. This goes beyond

the potential higher quality of such projects to whether, in fact, the market does and

should divide the quality of collaborative project by the number of authors when

assigning attribution of credit. In other words, what are the implications of an inflated

assessment of α P + α F on the overall organizational form chosen?

       As it turns out, if α P + α F is set exogenously (assumed here to be > 1), then only

one market weight remains to be determined: β P . This is because β F is determined as

the value that leaves v PPub = 0 and so is unchanged from Propositions 1 and 2. The issue

becomes that β P must do two things. It must continue to balance P’s incentives with

respect to publication versus integration. And it must now re-balance P’s incentives with

respect to publication and collaboration. It is easy to see that that latter task means that

the optimal attribution, β̂ P , will lie above the levels in Propositions 1 and 2. Thus, as a

result of a bias to market weights on collaboration, not only will we observe socially sub-

optimal over-collaboration but also over-publication as well. The point here is that these

decisions interact and so any analysis of patterns must take into account all of the

organizational form options facing scientists.


B.     Blurred Contributions & Salami Slicing
       Both with regards to the link between collaboration and credit, and in considering

salami slicing, scientists have argued that a major challenge lies in the increasingly

blurred relationship between actual observable effort in knowledge production and credit
                                                                                         33



allocation. Among other things, this blurring arises because of the rise and increased

geographic dispersion of the scientific community. More specifically, this likely means

that the roles of individual scientists in collaborative endeavours have become

increasingly blurred. Propositions 1 and 2 both suggested that optimal attribution would

depend on factors specific to the project but importantly specific to the scientists

themselves and their roles (as pioneer and follower respectively).

        If these factors are less known in more recent science compared to that in the past,

what impact might this have on the choice of organizational form for cumulative science?

The challenge here is to consider whether blurring will systematically bias organizational

choices. To that end, we focus here on the new prominence given to citation counts.

Basically, the value of a given research output is increasingly measured by the number of

citations it receives above and beyond other factors. Within the context of our model here

that means that there a systematic increase in β P if there is follow-on research while

there is no necessary trade-off between the level of β P and the level of β F .


        The direct impact of this, as predicted by the model, would appear to be an

increasing bias towards publication as an organizational choice at the expense of

collaboration and integration that may be more efficient. In other words, this result

provides a direct link between blurring of credit, a rise in the use of citations and the

move to ‘salami slicing’ that has been so widely documented and discussed among

scientists.
                                                                                           34



C.     The Matthew Effect

       A third issue that has animated scholars of science more than scientists

themselves is the Matthew Effect which, as noted above, argues that more famous

scientists (in terms of their past achievements or positions at elite institutions) receive

more credit - in citations and kudos in collaborative projects. The issue is whether such

credit is proportionate to their actual contribution (which may be high for the same

reasons they are famous) or disproportionate. There is, to our knowledge, no formal

model that derives the Matthew Effect in its disproportionate form as an equilibrium

phenomenon. It is instructive, therefore, to discuss this in the context of the model

presented here. Specifically, if the market weights to collaboration and publication are

determined optimally, what does this say about the Matthew Effect?

       To consider this, let us focus on the pioneer scientist (P). There are several

parameters that relate to P’s ability to contribute to project 2. There is pP, the probability

that P has an insight that perceives the opportunity of project 2. There is CP, the costs

associated with understanding project 1 that will generate that insight. There is cP2, P’s

costs associated with carrying out project 2. Finally, in a situation where it is exogenous,

there is s, P’s contribution to insight in a collaborative venture. The only time a

contributive driver for P impacts a market weight is for s, when it is exogenous in a

collaborative venture. In this case, if s is higher, P will receive more of the weight in

kudos associated with collaboration. However, the implication is that F will receive too

little weight in such collaborations and so collaboration will be infeasible. This will lead

to more publication/integration than is efficient. However, in both those organizational
                                                                                            35



forms there is no Matthew effect distortion realized. The conclusion here is that for a

pioneer scientist, the Matthew Effect is not a clear prediction of this model.

       When it comes to a famous scientist’s role as a follow-on researcher (F), there is

more impact. If that scientist finds it less costly to engage in project 2 research (cF2), then

the market weights F receives under publication and collaboration both rise. Otherwise,

drivers that are specific to F only impact the weight a scientist receives under publication;

specifically, the higher are pF and CF, the more diminished is the market kudos flowing

back to P for a citation. Note here, however, that while it is often said that the Matthew

Effect works to provide a famous scientist with more citations here it is operating to deny

kudos flowing back to earlier researchers.

       That said, the market weights for publication and collaboration are, in reality,

given by market assessments of the underlying drivers as in (22) and (23). If, because of

fame, these assessments are distorted upwards for one scientist, this may have an impact

on the relative choices of organizational forms. In particular, a market bias in favour of P

that is understood by both scientists may render project 2 under publication infeasible for

F (as their expected surplus was zero based on real variables and with a diminished

market weight it will be negative). This would rule out publication as a choice for P. In

addition, unless they can internally negotiate taking into account such biases, a

diminished weight for F will render their participation in collaboration infeasible. Thus, a

disproportionate weight on a famous P would have the effect of pushing organizational

choice outcomes towards integration. Ironically, if this were done, the Matthew Effect

would not be observable at all as it only arises under non-integrated organizational forms.
                                                                                         36



VI.    Conclusions and Future Directions

       In October 2013, Francois Englert and Peter Higgs were awarded the Nobel prize

for what is known as the “Higgs mechanism” that fills empty space that absorbs forces

that were missing from observations. Robert Brout, who collaborated with Englert had

passed away but would have otherwise shared in the prize. As it turns out that was just

the beginning. There was a set of follow-on research that took the initial idea and built up

the theory. Some of this was done very quickly but also independent of the initial

contributions. Then the research program was ‘completed’ by a very large team operating

the Large Hadron Collider in Switzerland. This example shows not only how credit can

be allocated but also how follow-on contributions enable to the value of initial

contributions. Not surprisingly, this has given rise to debate as to whether Nobel prizes

should include teams of research – both formal or part of a research line. Of course, in

this case, the credit went to the pioneers or Stage 1 researchers.

       Our paper suggests that the experience in particle physics is common-place and

also that how credit is allocated will impact upon whether research lines are undertaken

by formal teams or through a publication mechanism. Our formal model suggests that

such choices have become important and have efficiency consequences. In addition, we

suggest that the allocation of credit needs to reflect the balance of incentives in the

organizational choices facing scientists.

       However, this is just the beginning. What we have not addressed is how credit

allocation arises in reality. While one can imagine institutions that may allocate credit to

foster efficiency, it is not clear how existing credit allocations mechanisms including

citations, collaboration, name ordering, careers, tenure, prestige, prizes and phenomena
                                                                                     37



naming, actually function and what ends they do promote. In another paper (Gans and

Murray, 2013) we consider how a market might evaluate the contribution of individual

researchers when there is ‘team output’ and show that the processes and mechanisms for

credit allocation interact with market inferences and hence, overall efficiency. But

broader themes still remain including the impact of quantitative counts of credit (i.e.,

citation-based metrics) and the on-going issue of the Matthew effect. These theoretical

and empirical developments remain a task for follow-on research and the continuation of

scientific investigation that we have continued here in this essay.
                                                                                       38



VII. References

Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., & Stein, J. 2009. Academic freedom, private-sector focus
      and the process of innovation. RAND Journal of Economics, 39(3): 617-635.
Agrawal, A. & Avi Goldfarb, 2008. Restructuring Research: Communication Costs and
      the Democratization of University Innovation. American Economic Review, 98(4),
      pages 1578-90.
Alberts, Bruce. 2010. Promoting Scientific Standards. 1:327, p.12.
Arrow, K. 1962. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention. R.
      Nelson, ed. The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton University
      Press, Princeton, NJ, 609-25.
Azoulay, P., Graff Zivin and Manzo 2010. Incentives and Creativity: Evidence from the
      Academic Life Sciences. RAND Journal of Economics, 42(3), pp. 527-554, 2011
Azoulay, P., J. Furman, J. Krieger and F. Murray. 2013. Retractions. NBER Working
      Paper #18499.
Biagioli, M., 2003. Rights or Rewards. In Scientific Authorship: credit and intellectual
       property in science. pp. 253–279.
Biagioli, M. 2006. Galileo’s Instruments of Credit: Telescopes, Instruments, Secrecy.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bikard, M., F. Murray & J.S. Gans 2013. Exploring Tradeoffs in the Organization of
       Scientific Work: Collaboration and Scientific Reward. Working Paper.
Broad, W. 1981. The Publishing Game: Getting more for Less. Science. Mar. 13, 1981,
       Vol. 211, Issue 4487, p1137-1139
Card, David and Stefano DellaVigna. “Nine Facts about Top Journals in Economics”,
       Journal of Economic Literature, March 2013.
Cawkell, A.E., 1976. Citations, obsolescence, enduring articles, and multiple authorships.
      Journal of Documentation, 32(1).
Cole, Jonathan R., and Stephen Cole. Social Stratification in Science. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press, 1973.
Crane, Diana. 1969. “Social Structure in a Group of Scientists: A Test of the “Invisible
       College" Hypothesis.” American Sociological Review 34, 335-352.
Dasgupta, P. & David, P.A. 1994. Towards a new economics of science. Research Policy,
      23, pp.487-521.
David, P.A. 2008. The Historical Origins of ‘Open Science’: An Essay on Patronage,
       Reputation and Common Agency Contracting in the Scientific Revolution.
       Capitalism and Society. 3(2): Article 5.
                                                                                          39



Ding, W.W. et al., 2010. The Impact of Information Technology on Academic Scientists’
       Productivity and Collaboration Patterns. Management Science, 56(9), pp.1439 –
       1461.
Engers, M., Gans, J.S., Grant, S. & King, S.P., 1999. First Author Conditions. Journal of
       Political Economy, 107 (4), pp.859-883.
Frische, Sebastian. 2012. It is time for full disclosure of author contributions. Nature 489,
       475 (27 September 2012)
Furman, J., K. Jensen & F. Murray (2012). “Governing Knowledge Production in the
      Scientific Community: Quantifying the Impact of Retractions”. Research Policy.
      41:276– 290.
Furman, J. & Stern, S., 2011. Climbing atop the shoulders of giants: The impact of
      institutions on cumulative research. American Economic Review, 101(5),
      pp.1933–1963.
Galison, Peter. 1997. Image and Logic: a Material Culture of Microphysics. Chicago:
       Chicago University Press.
Gans, J.S. & Murray, F. 2013. Markets for Scientific Attribution. mimeo., MIT.
Green, J. & S. Scotchmer (1995), On the Division of Profit in Sequential Innovation,
       RAND Journal of Economics, 26 (1), pp.20-33.
Hagström, Warren O. 1965. The Scientific Community. New York: Basic Books.
Häussler, C. & Sauermann, H., 2013. Credit Where Credit is Due? The Impact of Project
       Contribution and Social Factors on Authorship and Inventorship. Research Policy,
       42(3), pp.688-703.
Huang, Kenneth, & Murray, F.. 2009. Does Patent Strategy Shape The Long-Run Supply
      Of Public Knowledge? Evidence from the Human Genome. Academy of
      Management Journal 52(6).
Jones, B., 2009. The Burden of Knowledge and the “Death of the Renaissance Man”: Is
       Innovation Getting Harder? Review of Economic Studies, 76(1), pp.283–317.
Jones, B., Wuchty, S. & Uzzi, B., 2008. Multi-University Research Teams: Shifting
       Impact, Geography, and Stratification in Science. Science, 322(5905), p.1259.
Knorr-Cetina, K., 1999. Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge,
      Harvard University Press Cambridge, MA.
Merton, Robert. 1957. “Priorities in Scientific Discovery.”American Sociological Review,
      22:6 pp. 635-659.
Merton, R.K., 1968. The Matthew Effect in Science The reward and communication
      systems of science are considered. Science, 159(3810), p.56.
Mokyr, Joel. 2002. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy.
      Princeton: Princeton University Press.
                                                                                      40



Mokyr, J. 2010. The Enlightened Economy. An Economic History of Britain, 1700-
      1850. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Murray, F. 2010. The Oncomouse that Roared: Hybrid Exchange Strategies as a Source
      of Productive Tension at the Boundary of Overlapping Institutions. American
      Journal of Sociology. Vol 116(2): 341-388.
Murray, F., Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., Kolev, J. and Stern, S. 2009. Of Mice and
      Academics: Examining the Effect of Openness on Innovation. NBER Working
      Paper No. w14819.
Murray, F., Gans, J.S. and Craven, M. 2010. How does the Republic of Science shape the
      Patent System? Broadening the Institutional Analysis of Policy Levers for
      Innovation and Knowledge Disclosure. UC Irvine Law Review, forthcoming.
Murray, F., & Stern, S. 2007. Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow
      of scientific knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis.
      Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 63(4), 648-687.
Nelson, R.R. 1959. The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research. Journal of
       Political Economy 67(3), 297-306.
Pancaldi, G. 2005. Volta: Science and Culture in the Age of Enlightenment. Princeton:
       Princeton University Press.
Price, D.J. & Beaver, D.B., 1966. Collaboration in an invisible college. American
       Psychologist, 1966, pp.1011–8.
Rosenberg, N. 1990. Why Do Firms Do Basic Research (with Their Own Money)?
      Research Policy 19(2), pp.165-174.
Shapin, Steven and Simon Schaffer, Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle and the
       Experimental Life, Princeton; Princeton University Press, 1985
Simcoe, T.S. & Waguespack, D.M., 2011. Status, Quality, and Attention: What’s in a
      (Missing) Name? Management Science, 57(2), pp.274 –290.
Subramanyam, K., 1983. Bibliometric studies of research collaboration: A review.
      Journal of information Science, 6(1), p.33.
Venkatramen, Vijaysree. 2010. Conventions of Authorship. Science Careers 2010.
Von Hippel, E.A., 2003. Democratizing Innovation. MIT Press Book
Wuchty, S., Jones, B. & Uzzi, B., 2007. The Increasing Dominance of Teams in
      Production of Knowledge. Science, 316(5827), p.1036.
