                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WASTE OF EFFORT? INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENTS

                                           Derek Kellenberg
                                            Arik Levinson

                                         Working Paper 19533
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19533


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




The authors are grateful to Jen Baggs for sharing her compilation of Basel data, and to Matilde Bombardini
and numerous participants at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, the University of Bologna,
the 2011 University of British Columbia Workshop on Environmental Economics and Climate Change,
and the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics 2013 Summer Workshop for constructive suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Derek Kellenberg and Arik Levinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Waste of Effort? International Environmental Agreements
Derek Kellenberg and Arik Levinson
NBER Working Paper No. 19533
October 2013
JEL No. F13,F18,Q53,Q56

                                              ABSTRACT

Many of the world's environmental problems cross international borders, and to address those problems
approximately 1,000 different International Environmental Agreements (IEAs) are in operation today.
Most evidence, however suggests that those IEAs are ineffectual, merely ratifying business-as-usual
outcomes and doing little to improve the environment. But much of that empirical analysis faces two
obstacles: (1) limited data from before the IEAs were enacted and thus an inability to make before-and-
after comparisons; and (2) difficulty estimating the counterfactual outcomes – what would have happened
absent the agreements. In this paper we test the effectiveness of one particular IEA – the Basel Convention
on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal. In this special
case we have data on international waste shipments from both before and after countries ratify the
agreement, along with a unique approach to identifying the treaty's effect using annual bilateral waste
shipments among countries before and after one of the trading partners signs the agreement. Despite
the strengths of this approach, we find almost no evidence that the Convention has resulted in less
waste being shipped among countries.


Derek Kellenberg
Economics Department
University of Montana
32 Campus Dr. #5472
Missoula, MT 59812-5472
derek.kellenberg@mso.umt.edu

Arik Levinson
Department of Economics ICC 571
Georgetown University
3700 O St., NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
aml6@georgetown.edu
               Waste of Effort? International Environmental Agreements


I.        Introduction

          Many of the worlds’ pressing environmental problems are international, from endangered

species, to the hole in the ozone layer, to greenhouse gas emissions and climate change. Attempts

to address these problems have involved international cooperation – in some cases on an

unprecedented scale. However, economic research has so far yielded little evidence that

international environmental agreements (IEAs) can meet these global challenges. Economic

theories demonstrate that due to free ridership problems IEAs can achieve little more than what

individual countries would volunteer without the agreements, and far less than what would be

globally optimal. Most empirical work supports the theories, finding that IEAs result in no

improvements beyond what would have occurred in their absence.

          Are IEAs effective? The empirical work to date has faced two obstacles to answering that

question. First, IEAs typically require member countries, as a first step towards compliance, to

begin reporting data on their contributions to the relevant environmental problem. The Montreal

Protocol required countries to report their production and consumption of ozone-depleting

substances, but only signatories report, and only after they join the treaty. It is hard to know what

countries were doing before they joined, or to compare signatories to non-signatories.1 More

importantly and more generally, researchers have a hard time differentiating countries' actions

after signing IEAs from what they would have done absent the IEAs. If an environmental

problem worsens after member countries enact an IEA, but worsens less than if the countries had

not acted, the agreement might be falsely deemed a failure despite its success in slowing


1
    See, for example, Murdock, et al. (1997a and 1997b), Cole et al. (1997), Auffhammer et al. (2005).

                                                      1
pollution growth. Conversely, if countries expecting emissions reductions are more likely to sign

an IEA, the agreement might be falsely deemed successful despite merely ratifying business-as-

usual practices.

          In this paper we examine one particular IEA that enables us to address both problems: the

Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Waste and their

Disposal. The Convention was adopted in the context of growing international shipments of

hazardous waste – so-called "toxic trade" – from industrialized countries to parts of the world

where disposal was less expensive and presumably less safe. The Convention’s central goal is

"restriction of transboundary movements of hazardous waste except where it is perceived to be in

accordance with the principles of environmentally sound management."2 Starting in the early

1990s, the Basel Convention required member countries to publicly report details about their

exports and imports of hazardous and other waste. Then in 1995, the Convention’s Ban

Amendment prohibited all exports of hazardous waste from countries listed in Annex VII (all

OECD and European Union countries plus Liechtenstein) to all other countries not listed in

Annex VII (henceforth A7 and non-A7 countries).

          At the simplest level, international hazardous waste trade would not appear to fit the

standard characteristics of an environmental problem requiring international cooperation. If

waste is improperly handled, that creates local pollution, not cross-border externalities or open-

access "tragedy of the commons" overuse problems. If every country regulates hazardous waste

disposal appropriately within its borders, international waste trade is efficient and welfare-

improving just like trade in any good or service. All the usual comparative advantage arguments

for free trade apply. But as has long been recognized, if some countries cannot appropriately

regulate natural resources or pollution emissions within their borders, trade restrictions may be a
2
    http://www.basel.int/TheConvention/Overview/tabid/1271/Default.aspx, accessed July 17, 2013.

                                                    2
second-best policy.3 Throughout this paper we assume that to be the fundamental motivation for

the Basel Convention and Ban – the concern that some countries' institutions are incapable of

providing their citizens with their desired level of "environmentally sound management" of

hazardous waste, and that those countries are better off limiting their imports through

international treaties.

          To assess whether the Basel Convention or the Ban succeeds in achieving that second-

best policy and alters waste shipments beyond what would have occurred anyway, we use a

variant of the gravity model of international trade, 60 six-digit Harmonized System (HS) tariff

codes describing bilateral shipments of various types of waste among 124 countries over 17

years, and data on if and when those countries ratified the Basel Convention or its Ban

Amendment. We pose two basic questions.

          First, we ask whether the Basel Convention, independent of the Ban Amendment, did

anything to reduce waste flows among ratifying countries. Descriptive statistics suggest that

countries ratifying the Convention were those countries with slower-than-average growth in

hazardous waste trade, and that the Convention did nothing to alter that pattern. Controlling for

other country characteristics, those that signed the Convention did export less hazardous waste,

but our inference is that they would have done so anyway.

          Second, we ask whether the subsequent Ban Amendment had any effect. This is where

our unique identification strategy has power, because the Ban Amendment restricts one

particular type of waste trade – shipments from A7 to non-A7 countries. While controlling for

other country characteristics, we interact controls for Ban ratification with controls for A7-to-

non-A7 shipments. We find that although A7 countries signing the Ban do appear to export less

waste to non-A7 countries, that effect disappears once we include country-year fixed effects or
3
    See Brander and Taylor (1997), Copeland (1991), and Chichilnisky (1994).

                                                    3
country-pair fixed effects, suggesting that signing the Ban, like the Convention itself, merely

ratified existing trends in waste trade for A7 ratifying countries. One possible explanation for the

treaty's lack of apparent effect on A7 exports is trade diversion. Countries banned from shipping

waste to non-A7 importers may transship that waste via non-signatories. We explore this

possibility but find no aggregate evidence that trade diversion has circumvented the treaty's

intents.

           Although we had expected that the empirical advantages of our approach might help us to

overcome the obstacles faced by earlier research and yield results consistent with an IEA

improving environmental outcomes, we find no evidence that A7 countries that signed the Ban

slowed their exports to non-A7 countries as the agreement requires. We do find limited evidence

that non-A7 countries that signed the Ban have slowed their imports of the most toxic waste from

A7 countries, a result consistent with Copeland’s (1991) finding that trade restrictions may be

welfare improving for small countries that are unable to enforce domestic environmental

regulations. After controlling for a number of empirical issues, including endogeneity and

unobserved country characteristics, this is the only effect we find in terms of the Ban reducing

bilateral waste trade.

           Before describing our model and data in detail, we begin with some background on IEAs

in general, and the details of international hazardous waste trade and the Basel Convention.



II.        Background

           IEAs have been proliferating. From 1951 to 1980, 216 new multilateral IEAs or protocols

were enacted worldwide; in the following 30 years, through 2010, 398 new multilateral IEAs and




                                                  4
protocols were enacted (Mitchell, 2002-2011). Today, more than 1,000 multilateral IEAs are in

operation.4

The Economics of IEAs

       According to most theoretical economic models, all these new IEAs will have been

largely ineffective. Typical theoretical results show that IEAs can do little to improve the

environment beyond non-cooperative outcomes (Barrett, 1994 and 1997a; Carraro and

Siniscalco, 1993). Due to the obvious free-rider problem, models demonstrate that equilibrium

participation in IEAs will be small, or that larger coalitions can only be supported if the

abatement targets are far less than the social optimum (Finus and Maus, 2008). Of course, game

theoretic models do not necessarily predict behavior, and IEAs might be effective despite

theories to the contrary.

       The few empirical examinations of this issue have also failed to find significant effects of

IEA participation on pollution. These have included studies of sulfur emissions and the Helsinki

Protocol, ozone-depleting substances and the Montreal Protocol, and sulfur emissions again

under the Oslo Protocol.5 The lone paper finding statistically significant consequences of an IEA

is Bratberg, Tjøtta, and Øines (2005) who find that countries ratifying the Sofia Protocol reduced

their nitrogen oxide emissions relative to non-ratifying countries. But even this result is

consistent with Finus and Maus's (2008) theoretical finding that any IEA gains will be small and

far from the social optimum.

       Given the lack of theoretical and empirical evidence that voluntary IEAs can solve

international environmental issues, their growing prevalence remains a puzzle. Rose and Spiegel

(2009) provide evidence for one plausible explanation: that participation in noneconomic

4
 International Environmental Agreements Database Project website (iea.uoregon.edu).
5
 See Murdoch and Sandler (1997, 2007b), Ringquist and Kostadinova (2005), and Finus and Tjøtta
(2003).

                                                  5
international partnerships such as IEAs facilitates spillovers to other potentially more meaningful

economic sectors, such as international lending. In other words, countries join IEAs and comply

with their stipulations in order to gain the benefits of other international cooperation.

       Whatever the reason for their prevalence, IEAs are the primary mechanism for efforts to

solve global environmental problems. It is therefore critical that we try to understand whether

IEAs can succeed. For that we turn to one particular IEA, the Basel Convention, with two

distinct advantages. It governs international waste trade, about which we have data for countries

before and after they join the agreement; and countries trade with multiple partners, providing

numerous sources of identification that can potentially solve the problems associated with

countries' endogenous decisions to join.

The Basel Convention and Ban Amendment

       International hazardous waste trade has been growing exponentially. Between 1992 and

2008, the total physical volume of waste traded internationally grew 500 percent, from 45 to 221

million tons. For context, the total weight of all passenger automobiles shipped internationally in

2008 was 48 million tons—one-fifth the weight of the waste traded that year. To the extent that

waste is exported to countries with safe and environmentally responsible recycling or disposal

capacity, then waste trade may be seen as economically efficient in the same sense as goods

trade. But if waste is exported to less developed countries with lax safety or environmental

regulations, then waste trade may be creating substantial environmental problems in the

importing countries. Indeed, Puckett and Smith (2002), Puckett (2005), and Pellow (2007) have

all documented drastic environmental degradation occurring in Asia and North Africa where

hazardous waste – especially used electronics – is being imported from developed countries. In




                                                  6
that case, an IEA might help by enlisting the cooperation of exporters limiting their shipments to

countries struggling to limit their imports.

          The Basel Convention came into force in 1992, and aims to “protect human health and

the environment against the adverse effects resulting from the generation, management,

transboundary movements and disposal of hazardous and other wastes.” It is the most

comprehensive IEA governing hazardous and other wastes, and it had 175 participants by 2011.

While the Convention has a number of goals and objectives for reducing the generation and

management of waste, its primary policy tool is a ban on shipping waste across country borders.

Article 4 of the convention stipulates, among other things, that: (i) countries may ban hazardous

waste imports; (ii) waste-exporting countries must honor bans by waste importers; (iii) importers

must be alerted to shipments and must approve the shipments in writing; and (iv) ratified

countries may not ship waste to or from countries that have not ratified the Convention.6

          All else equal, points (i) and (ii) above should lead to a reduction in international waste

trade if importing countries announce a ban and exporting countries enforce the prohibition on

exports to those countries. However, the effects of points (iii) and (iv) are less clear. Although

they were likely intended to increase transparency and to create an incentive for countries to join

the convention, critics argued that these components of the Basel Convention did more to

legitimize international waste trade than to reduce it. A non-ratified country that was previously

unable to trade with a ratified member (point iv. above), could simply ratify their membership in

the convention and then choose to accept properly announced waste shipments (point iii. above).

In this case, once both countries have ratified the Basel Convention we could see an increase,

rather than a decrease, in waste trade between them.



6
    See Article 4 of the Convention, Sections 1(a), 1(b), 1(c) and 2(f); and Article 5.

                                                        7
        To be clear, this may be more of a concern about empirical strategies than about real

effects. Taking the Convention as given, if one member of a pair of trading countries signs,

waste shipments to and from the non-signing member should drop. If the second country then

signs, waste shipments can increase relative to when only one member had signed. In our

analysis, we must be careful to distinguish two effects: the effect of the Convention and Ban on

signatory countries relative to non-participants; and the overall effect of the Convention and Ban

relative to a world without those IEAs.

        In response to concerns about the Convention legitimizing toxic trade, in 1995 the Ban

Amendment prohibited A7 countries from exporting hazardous and other waste to non-A7

countries, whether or not the importers are Basel signatories. The Ban first went into force for

ratified countries in 1998.7 If the Ban has been effective then we should expect a reduction of

waste exports from ratifying A7 countries to non-A7 countries.

        The Basel Convention and Ban Amendment are in some ways ideal circumstances in

which to assess empirically the effect of IEAs. The stated environmental goals of the Convention

(restricting the movements of waste products to countries ill equipped to safely handle them) are

directly linked to patterns of international trade, about which there are abundant data. Moreover,

those trade flows are measureable across time and countries. And finally, most countries trade

waste with numerous other countries, providing multiple sources of identification. We can assess

the effect of the Convention and Ban across countries in a given year, over time for a given

country, across trading partners for a given country in a single year, and even within pairs of

countries over time before and after they sign the IEAs.



7
  The Ban Amendment is not yet officially part of the Basel Convention as there is still legal uncertainty
about how many countries must ratify the Ban for it to take effect. However, most countries that have
ratified the Ban did so as part of their domestic law regarding waste exports.

                                                     8
          We combine information about countries' ratifications of the Convention and Ban with

detailed bilateral international waste trade data based on the Harmonized Commodity

Description and Coding System (HS), yielding a comprehensive panel dataset covering 124

countries over 21 years. Using variants of the standard gravity model of trade, we explicitly test

the effectiveness of the Basel Convention and the Ban Amendment, while controlling for

endogenous selection into the agreements by comparing the effects of countries over time and

across pairs of countries. This allows us to test specifically whether the trade restrictions had any

significant effects on international waste trade by participating members relative to what would

have happened without the restrictions.



III.      International Waste Trade Data and Trends

          The Basel Convention requires members to report their hazardous waste imports and

exports, but those data cannot be used to compare members to non-members, or to study

members before and after signing the Convention. As a consequence, we use a close proxy for

the waste trade governed by Basel: the United Nations Comtrade database and 60 six-digit

Harmonized System (HS6) tariff codes for which the product description lists “waste”, “scrap”,

“slag”, “residue”, or “ash” as the primary descriptor of the product.8 Appendix Table A1 lists

each of the 60 waste categories, along with their HS6 codes. Data were collected for all bilateral

trading pairs of 124 countries with at least some positive quantity of trade from 1988 to 2008.

Our main unit of observation is the aggregate annual tonnage of waste traded between countries,

summed across the 60 waste classifications in Table A1. Each country pair potentially appears

twice per year: once for each direction of waste flows. In total, there are 640,584 possible



8
    The UN Comtrade database can be found at http://comtrade.un.org/.

                                                    9
observations.9 After omitting country pairs with zero waste trade, or for which GDP data were

unavailable, we are left with 46,149 observations.

       The Convention's definition of "hazardous" relies on the waste's characteristics (eco-

toxic, corrosive, flammable, poisonous, infectious, oxidizing, toxic, etc.), while the HS6 data we

used to assemble Table A1 are based on product descriptions.10 Each of the 60 categories in

Table A1 can have both hazardous and non-hazardous components. As an example, consider

HS6 code 720449 for ferrous waste or scrap metal – one of the largest components of waste trade

by weight. A crushed car would be in this HS code, and so we classify it as waste trade, but

whether the Convention would classify that car as hazardous depends on whether its oil,

transmission fluid, and antifreeze had been removed before it was crushed. Even product

categories whose descriptions may appear safe can be hazardous under the convention. Scrap

glass (HS6 711210) is hazardous if it is from computer monitors containing lead; sawdust

(400400) is hazardous if it has been used to absorb industrial solvents. As a consequence, our

Comtrade waste data do not perfectly match the Convention's definition of hazardous waste, but

they do allow us to compare Convention and Ban signatories to non-signatories before and after

the agreements were in force.

       As a check on this proxy, we also create a second definition of hazardous trade using 20

of our original 60 waste categories where the description in the Basel Conventions’ Annex VIII

list of hazardous waste products match closely to the product descriptions in the HS code. These

are listed in Appendix Table A2. Each of these 20 product categories are certain to contain




9
  Two directions × 124 exporters × 123 importers × 21 years.
10
  Annex II and Annex VIII of the Basel Convention describe waste streams and categories of products
that are considered hazardous, while Annex IV describes wastes considered non-hazardous.

                                                  10
products that are completely, or nearly completely, composed of wastes considered hazardous

under the Basel Convention.11

        Finally, we can compare our Comtrade proxy to the actual voluntarily reported hazardous

waste trade data collected under the auspices of the Basel Convention, for those countries that

have ratified the Convention and for the years following their ratification. Table 1 presents these

correlations, including official Basel data for 1994-2003. The two types of waste shipments

listed in Tables A1 and A2 are positively correlated but not completely collinear (ρ=0.403). And

both Comtrade proxies are correlated with the official Basel Convention data (ρ=0.507 and

0.367).12

        The complex annual data on waste volumes shipped in each direction between each pair

of countries, differentiated by A7 status, provides a number of different ways to identify the

treaty's effects. Figure 1 diagrams the possibilities. There are four types of exporters (A7 and

non-A7 signatories and non-signatories) and four types of importers, yielding sixteen different

types of annual waste shipments. The Convention's objective is to restrict international shipments

in general, though it was motivated by the growth in shipments to developing (non-A7)

countries. Accordingly, if the Convention is successful, we should see a decline in exports by

signatories, especially to non-A7 countries. This could be identified from a number of

differences in the data: smaller exports from A and C than from B and D; smaller exports from C

to E and F than from D to E and F; or smaller shipments among signatories A, E, C, and G than

among non-signatories. Each of these differences can be examined across countries, or within

countries or country-pairs over time, when one country ratifies the Convention or the Ban. I.e.

11
   These are not official concordances, but are concordances made by us based on the commodity
descriptions in both the HS6 code and the codes in Annex VIII of the Basel Convention.
12
   Under the Convention, both exporters and importers report waste shipments, and so there are two
separate measures. Here we report the import-based data, though correlations with the export-based data
are similar.

                                                  11
we should see shipments from an A7 to a non-A7 country decline, or at least increase less

relative to other country pairs, when the A7 country signs the Ban.

       Table 2 begins to describe these data. From 1988 to 2008, 2.2 billion tons of waste was

shipped among countries. More than half of this waste was shipped among A7 countries (A7 to

A7). Shipments from A7 to non-A7 countries make up the second largest component of waste

trade. These developed-to-developing country shipments are the primary target of the Basel

Convention and Ban. By weight, shipments from non-A7 countries, in columns (4) and (5) make

up only a small part of international waste trade. Column (1) also shows that the average annual

shipment among countries in our data was 47 thousand tons, and that the average annual

shipment between pairs of A7 countries (96 thousand tons) was more than twice as large as the

average annual shipment from A7 to non-A7 countries.

       Table 3 examines the two key categories – A7 to A7 and A7 to non-A7 – broken down

into groups according to whether the importer, the exporter, or both countries have ratified the

Basel Convention or the Ban.13 The top panel focuses on the Convention. Relatively few

countries trading waste were not signatories. Of the 13,561 A7-to-A7 shipments and the 10,083

A7-to-nonA7, most involve both countries having signed onto the Convention. This suggests it

may be difficult to identify the effect of the Convention on waste trade.

       The Ban, however, presents a sharper contrast in the bottom panel of Table 2. For one

third of the annual country-pairs, neither country had signed the Ban. But in most of the

comparisons, regardless of whether either party signed the Ban, it remains true that the average

annual shipment among A7 countries remains much larger than the average from A7 to non-A7

countries. The notable exception is in row 7, when the waste importer has signed the Ban. Here


13
 Data for Basel Convention and Ban Amendment ratification dates comes from the "Status of
Ratifications" tab on the Basel Convention website www.basel.int.

                                                12
waste shipments to non-A7 importers are larger, though not significantly so. In other words,

precisely those shipments prohibited by the Ban are largest when the waste importer is a

signatory.

       There are two likely explanations for the odd difference of means in row 7 of Table 3,

each with its own implications for our attempt to estimate the efficacy of the Ban. First, non-A7

countries may have limited enforcement capacity, and the Ban may therefore be ineffectual

unless the A7 exporter signs on. This first explanation simply suggests that we need to examine

separately the effects of the importer and exporter's signatory status. Given the large number of

countries involved and our 21-year panel, parsing the analysis in this way poses no problem.

However, other counterintuitive differences in Table 3 suggest there is more going on here than

simple differences of means can explain. For example, when the exporter signs the Ban, waste

shipments to non-A7 countries (row 6, 27 thousand tons) are smaller than when neither country

signs (row 5, 34 thousand tons), which makes sense, but lower than when both countries sign

(row 8, 57 thousand tons). In other words, when the importer signs the Ban waste imports are

larger, even when we limit the comparison to country-pairs where the exporter has signed.

       This raises a second possible explanation for the odd result in row (7), that treaty

signatory status may be endogenous. Non-A7 importers that find themselves receiving large

quantities of hazardous waste may be more likely to sign the Ban. This second explanation

motivates the empirical strategy we employ, with interacted fixed effects by time and country-

pair. Including country or country-pair fixed effects means we identify the effect of the

Convention or Ban based on changes to signatory status within countries or country-pairs over

time, rather than from comparisons across signatories and non-signatories in any given year.




                                                13
       In fact, waste volumes among all countries have been growing so much that these cross-

section differences in Table 3 may be obscured by overall growth. Figure 2 shows that between

1988 and 2008, waste trade has grown by many multiples, and that waste imported into non-A7

countries accounts for nearly half of that growth. Notably, shipments from A7 to non-A7

countries – the shipments prohibited by the Ban – account for more than a quarter of the overall

growth in waste trade. Given that the number of countries that ratified the Convention and the

Ban grew significantly over the period, it seems likely that signatory status is endogenous with

changes in waste trade – non-A7 countries experiencing large increases in imports, for example,

may be more likely to sign the Ban.

       To get a better idea of the importance of shipments from A7 to non-A7 countries, in

Figure 3 we plot average bilateral waste flows conditional on Basel ratification status. The result

is striking. When the A7 and non-A7 countries have both ratified the Convention, average

bilateral waste shipments remain fairly constant over the 21 year period. However, when one or

both are not ratified members of the Convention, the average volume of bilateral waste flows

between countries increases by a factor of five. This is consistent with the top panel of Table 3,

where in column (2) annual A7 to non-A7 shipments from Basel signatories (rows 2 and 4) are

far smaller than shipments from exporters that have not signed (rows 1 and 3), and makes it seem

as though the Convention succeeded in reducing international waste shipments to non-A7

countries.

       Although Figure 3 looks as though Basel has succeeded, that could be an artifact of the

composition of countries signing the Convention. The growing difference between the waste

shipments among Basel signatories and non-signatories depicted in Figure 3 combines two

possible changes: (i) a real effect of the Convention on participants, reducing waste shipped



                                                14
among participants relative to waste shipped among non-participants; and (ii) a change in the

composition of participants over time. This second effect is a form of selection bias. If countries

trading the most waste ratify Basel first, and if over time the countries joining the Convention are

those trading relatively less, then the average annual waste shipped among signatories might be

declining, even if countries maintain the same patterns of trade regardless of their participation.

In other words, the growing difference between signatories and non-signatories may be

explained by the uneven sample of countries ratifying the Convention, rather than the effect of

the convention on participants.

       Figure 4 demonstrates this selection bias. It reports the average annual waste exports and

imports over the entire 21-year period, plotted against the year in which the countries signed the

Convention. Countries that joined Basel in 1992 exported an average of 1.5 million tons per year

between 1988 and 2008. But countries that signed in 2000 exported an average of only 390

thousand tons. The average waste exports of Basel signatories are shrinking in part because the

countries that joined the Convention later export less waste. The same is true for imports –

average waste imported by signatories declines because later signatories are lower-volume

importers. A figure drawn for countries ratifying the Ban looks similar: those ratifying the Ban

most recently export and import the least. If we are not careful, we could mistake this selection

of countries into the Convention and Ban for the causal effect of those agreements.

       To address this selection problem, Table 4 presents averages for country pairs where at

some point between 1988 and 2008 one of the countries ratified the Convention. For example,

the first row presents average annual waste shipments between countries where the exporter

signed the Convention. After exporters signed it, exports to both A7 and non-A7 countries rose.

The same is true for country pairs where the importer signed the Convention, and also in row (3)



                                                 15
where at some point during the 21-year period the second of the two countries signed the

convention.

       Comparing Figure 3 and Table 4 reveals a stark fact. Figure 3 shows that from 1988 to

2008, waste shipments from A7 to non-A7 were smaller and grew less quickly when both of the

countries were Basel signatories, seemingly in accordance with the agreement's intent. But Table

4 shows that this difference is driven in large part by the timing and selection of countries

signing the Convention. Whether or not the importer, the exporter, or both signed the

Convention, waste shipments were larger after signing than before, seemingly in violation of the

agreement's intent.

       Recall, however, that very few countries trading waste during this period were not Basel

signatories, and that international waste trade in general increased steeply. Because of that, we

also examine the Ban amendment. Rows (4)-(6) of Table 4 provide similar evidence suggesting

the Ban has been ineffective. After A7 exporters signed the Ban, average waste exports to non-

A7 countries doubled (to 34 thousand tons); after non-A7 waste importers signed the Ban,

average waste imports more than tripled (to 136 thousand tons).

       What's going on here? The most plausible explanation is that the overall growth in

worldwide waste trade depicted in Figure 2 swamps any effect of the agreements. To identify the

effect of the Basel Convention or Ban, we need to know whether the growth in A7 to non-A7

waste shipments was lower among signatories than it would have been absent their participation,

not whether it was lower in absolute terms. That is a much more difficult question to answer, but

one that our rich panel of waste-trade data can help address.

       As a final piece of descriptive evidence, examine Figure 5, which plots average annual

waste shipments from A7 to non-A7 countries. Instead of calendar years on the bottom axis,



                                                 16
however, we have plotted the years relative to the year in which Basel or the Ban was signed.

Figure 5a plots data for exporters. During the four years before A7 exporters signed the Ban,

total waste shipments to non-A7 countries grew steadily, and during the four years after A7

exporters signed the Ban, waste shipments to non-A7 countries continued to grow steadily at

approximately the same rate. Figure 5b plots those same series for importers. Imports of waste

rose steadily both before and after the importing country signed the Ban.

       All of this descriptive material might be taken as evidence that the Basel Convention and

Ban did not reduce waste shipments from developed to developing countries. This would be

consistent with most of the theoretical and existing empirical research on IEAs. Any such

conclusions, however, must be tempered by two caveats. First the descriptive evidence controls

for nothing about countries aside from whether or not they join the Convention or the Ban. We

know from the large empirical trade literature that countries’ characteristics such as their

distance from one another and the size of their populations and economies are highly correlated

with international trade. Second, and perhaps more importantly, participation in these IEAs

seems likely to be endogenous. If countries receiving or expecting to receive growing quantities

of waste respond by signing Basel or the Ban, that may mask the effect of those IEAs on what

waste trade would have been absent their participation.

       As a consequence, the next step is to estimate the effect of the Basel Convention and Ban

on waste trade holding those other country characteristics constant, and attempting to control for

the potential endogeneity of countries’ participation in the treaty.




                                                 17
IV.     Gravity-Model Tests of the Basel Convention and Ban Amendment

        To examine the effects of the Basel Convention and Ban on international waste

shipments, we estimate a version of the standard "gravity" model of international trade, where

instead of goods trade we substitute our measure of waste shipments.14

        ln X ijt  β t  1 (ln GDPit )   2 (ln GDPjt )   3 (ln Distanceij )   4 ( Borderij )
                    5 ( Languageij )   6 (Colony ij )   7 ( Baselit )   8 ( Basel jt )   9 ( Baselijt )
                   10 ( FTAijt )  11 (WTOijt )  12 (nonA7toA7 ij )  13 ( A7toA7 ij )
                                                                                                                    (1)
                  14 ( A7tononA7 ij )  15 ( Banit )  16 ( Ban jt )  17 ( Banijt )
                   18 ( A7tononA7 ij x Ban jt )  19 ( A7tononA7 ij x Banit )
                  β20(A7tononA7 ij x Banijt )   ijt ,

The dependent variable is the log of waste shipments, in tons, from country i to country j in year

t (Xijt). Each country pair can appear twice per year, once each for shipments in both directions.

This is regressed on exporter fixed effects ( β i ), importer fixed effects ( β j ), and year fixed effects

( β t ); the log of the real GDP of countries i and j in year t, the log of the distance between

countries i and j , and whether countries i and j share a border, a common official language, or

have ever had colonial ties; dummy variables indicating if countries i and j were ratified

members of the Basel Convention or the Ban Amendment in year t (Baselit, Baseljt, Banit, Banjt),

as well as the interactions (Baselijt, Banijt), indicating that both countries were ratified members;

and dummy variables indicating whether countries i and j are members of the WTO or some

other Free Trade Area or Customs Union in year t (WTOijt, FTAijt). Table 5 presents descriptive

statistics for the right-hand-side variables in equation (1).


14
   The model is grounded in the theoretical monopolistic competition models first developed by Anderson
(1979) and Bergstrand (1985) and later extended to account for multilateral resistance terms (Anderson
and van Wincoop, 2003) and heterogeneous firms (Helpman, Melitz, and Rubenstein, 2008). Our
approach extends Baggs’ (2009) panel application of the Helpman et al. (2008) model to international
trade in hazardous waste by explicitly accounting for endogeneity concerns arising from a variety of
unobserved omitted variable biases.

                                                         18
        To account for differences in general bilateral trade flows among and between A7 and

non-A7countries, we also include three additional dummy variables: A7toA7ij; A7tononA7ij; and

nonA7toA7ij. Shipments among non-A7 countries are the omitted category. We capture the effect

of ratification of the Ban Amendment on A7 to non-A7 waste flows by interacting the

A7tononA7ij dummy with the Banit dummy to get A7BtononA7ijt. Notice that this dummy

variable is time-varying and country-pair-specific. The coefficient β20 tells us whether there is

any difference in bilateral waste trade from A7 countries to non-A7 countries when the A7

exporting country has ratified the Ban Amendment relative to when the A7 country has not

ratified the Ban Amendment, controlling for other country characteristics.

        Table 6 presents estimates of different versions of equation (1). Columns (1) and (2)

include only the time fixed effects – no country-specific fixed effects. The results confirm that in

this new context of waste shipments, the gravity model has explanatory power typical of

empirical models of trade in goods. More waste is shipped among countries that have higher

GDP, are closer together, share a common border or colonial history, and are members of the

WTO or other trade agreements.

        Columns (1) and (2) also contain indicator variables for annual country pairs where the

exporter, the importer, or both countries have signed the Basel Convention or the Ban. The Basel

indicators are all negative and statistically significant in the cases where the exporter is a

signatory. Interpreted literally, the point estimates (-0.403 and -0.421) mean that trade flows are

33 percent lower when the exporting country has signed the Basel Convention.15 Similarly, the

coefficient in column (1) on the indicator for the exporting country having ratified the Ban

Amendment (-0.494) suggests that in those cases, waste exports are 39 percent lower. Column

15
  This interpretation of dummy coefficients in semilog equations is from Kennedy (1981). The
percentage change can be approximated as 100[exp(c-½v)) -1], where c is the estimated coefficient on the
dummy variable and v is that estimate's variance.

                                                  19
(2) differs from column (1) in that it includes an interaction between the Ban indicator variables

and cases where the observation involves a shipment from an A7 exporter to a non-A7 importer.

That coefficient (-0.401) is also large and statistically significant, implying that the Ban is

associated with a 33 percent drop in waste trade in that prohibited situation.

           These results in columns (1) and (2) mirror the descriptive statistics in Table 3. They

cannot be interpreted as a causal effect of the Convention or the Ban on international waste

shipments, because we know that waste trade grew voluminously during this period, that large

exporters and importers were among the first to sign the Convention and the Ban, and that

countries decisions to ratify either treaty were likely endogenous with respect to their waste

shipments. In fact, there are signs of this endogeneity in columns (1) and (2). The coefficient on

"Ban both" – a dummy equal to one if both the exporter and importer have ratified the Ban – is

positive and statistically significant, and suggests that when both countries have signed, waste

shipments are one-third larger, exactly the opposite of the treaty's intent. It could be that waste

exporters are more likely to sign the Ban if they know their waste exports are declining anyway,

or that waste importers are more likely to sign if they experience large increases. In other words,

we don’t know whether the percent declines were caused by the treaty or if they would have

occurred without it – we don’t know the counterfactual. For those reasons, in columns (3)-(6) of

Table 6 we attempt to address those sources of bias with country-year and country-pair fixed

effects.

           More formally, the error term εijt in equation (1) may include unobserved time-varying

exporter and importer characteristics that influence bilateral trade from country i to country j,

                                                                .




                                                    20
The terms ωit and ωjt would include any unobserved characteristics that are country-specific and

change over time, but are not specific to a bilateral trading pair ij. Examples might include time-

varying importer and exporter-specific multilateral price terms (Anderson and van Wincoop,

2003), environmental regulations and recycling costs (Kellenberg, 2012), capital-labor ratios

(Baggs, 2009), political environments (Grossman and Helpman, 1994), or firm-level

heterogeneity due to the fixed costs of exporting (Helpman, Meltiz, and Rubenstein, 2008).

These are all potentially correlated with both waste trade flows among country-pairs and the

probability that countries ratify the Convention or Ban, and therefore represent a possible source

of omitted variable bias.

Exporter and Importer-Year Fixed Effects

        To account for time-varying, country-specific omitted variables (ωit and ωjt), columns (3)

and (4) of Table 6 add importer-year and exporter-year fixed effects

                                             ln X ijt  βθit  βθjt  ...                            (2)

where all time-varying exporter and importer-specific characteristics in year t are now captured
                               θ
by the coefficients β θit and β jt . Any country-year-specific variables drop out, including GDP

and membership in the Basel and Ban agreements, because they are collinear with the fixed

          θ       θ
effects β it and β jt . What remains are characteristics that are bilateral-specific, such as distance,

common language, and whether both countries are members of the Convention16 and Ban.

        In column (3) of Table 6 the Basel both coefficient is small and statistically insignificant,

and the Ban both coefficient (0.218) retains its counterintuitive positive sign, suggesting that

when both countries ratify the Ban waste shipments are 25 percent larger. Column (4) adds the

16
  For example, France’s ratification of the Convention is perfectly collinear with France's importer-year
and exporter-year dummies, but in any given year France may ship waste to and from countries that may
or may not also be members of the Convention, so the dummy “Basel both” remains identified.

                                                    21
interaction term with the indicator for A7-to-non-A7 shipments. Here we include the interacted

term with indicators for whether the exporter or importer has signed the Ban. The fixed effects

don't absorb that variation, because exporters ship to both A7 and non-A7 countries in any given

year, and so the interaction term varies within country-years. The key coefficient for when the

exporter signs the Ban (-0.409) remains large and statistically significant, suggesting a waste

decline of 33 percent. Meanwhile the counterintuitive coefficient on both countries signing the

Ban (0.140) has declined significantly, implying a 15 percent waste increase, and that coefficient

is tiny and insignificant for the A7-to-non-A7 shipments.17

        Despite the addition of country-year-specific fixed effects, the negative interaction

coefficient of the Ban exporter indicator could still be spurious if countries are more likely to

sign the Ban if they have shrinking relative waste shipments to non-A7 countries. The reason

countries join the Convention or ratify the Ban may involve their historical relationships with

particular trading partners, rather than their own country characteristics. In that case unobserved

bilateral relationships in the error term are correlated with waste shipments and IEA membership

and may bias our estimates. In other words, columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 are still open to

concerns about omitted variable bias, in which case they would still not answer our central

question – whether countries that sign the Convention or the Ban experience declines in waste

trade relative to what they otherwise would have experienced. To answer that question, we need

an empirical strategy that identifies the relevant coefficients before and after one of the parties

signs the Convention or Ban.

        Columns (5) and (6) of Table 6 address this last concern by including country-pair

specific fixed effects in equation (2),

17
 One possible explanation for these counterintuitive coefficients involves waste being rerouted from A7
Ban signatories to non-A7 countries via third-parties – other A7 countries that have not signed the Ban.
We explore evidence for that in the penultimate section of the paper.

                                                   22
                     ln X ijt  β θit  β θjt  β θij   9 ( Basel ijt )  12 (WTOijt )  13 ( FTAijt )
                                                                                                             (3)
                                 19 ( Banijt )   20 ( A7 BtononA7 ijt )   ijt .

This is the approach taken by Baier and Bergstrand (2007), and in this context it controls for all

characteristics that could possibly be correlated with annual waste shipments among countries,

other than those that are both time-varying and country-pair-specific.

       The general idea behind these country-pair fixed effects is illustrated by the bottom half

of Table 4, discussed earlier. The first cell in row (4) contains the average bilateral waste

shipments (Xijt) from A7 to other A7 countries where the exporter has not yet signed the Ban (88

thousand tons). Column (3) contains those pre-ratification shipments to non-A7 countries. The

difference is 71,222 (not shown in the table), which is large and statistically significant. Columns

(2) and (4) contain those same figures after the exporting A7 country has signed the Ban. That

difference (70,983) is also large and significant, but only insignificantly smaller. That difference-

in-differences is not only statistically insignificant, but goes in the wrong direction. The Ban

should have increased the difference between shipments to A7 and non-A7 countries, not

decreased it. Looked at differently, row (4) shows that after exporters signed the Ban, shipments

to A7 countries grew by 17,051 tons, while shipments to non-A7 countries grew by 17,290 tons.

In fact, in percentage terms the shipments to non-A7 countries grew by much more than

shipments to A7 countries. Again, if the Ban were effective, we would expect shipments to non-

A7 countries to have gone down relative to A7 countries, not up. It may be that Table 4 simply

does not account for other covariates also correlated with waste trade and Ban participation. To

estimate that difference-in-differences conditional on covariates, we run various versions of

equation (3) in the last two columns of Table 6.

       In columns (5) and (6) of Table 6 we estimate equation (3). Here any variables that either

vary over time for a single country (GDP, treaty ratification) or are fixed over time for a single
                                                        23
country-pair (distance, A7 or non-A7 status) are absorbed by the combination of country-year

and country-pair fixed effects. None of the policy variables are statistically significant. The

coefficient on both countries signing the Ban (0.059) implies that the average waste shipped

among countries that both sign is 6 percent higher relative to that same country-pair before both

had signed, consistent with the difference-in-difference calculations from Table 4. Column (6)

adds the interaction with A7-to-non-A7 shipments (β20). That coefficient (-0.167) is negative, as

expected, but it is small and statistically insignificant.

          Before we can be certain that neither the Basel Convention nor the Ban Amendment

affected international waste shipments, we must be certain that our proxy for waste trade – the

UN Comtrade data – does not contain too many categories of waste not deemed hazardous by the

treaty.

Alternative measures of waste shipments

          One potential explanation for why the Basel Convention and the Ban Amendment does

not entirely eliminate waste shipments is the discrepancy between wastes categorized as

“hazardous” by the Basel Convention, and trade listed as “waste” by the tariff system. As an

alternative, we use the narrower definition of hazardous trade in Table A2, 20 product categories

that are more likely than our original 60 categories in Table A1 to be completely composed of

wastes considered hazardous under the Basel Convention.

          The qualitative results in Table 7 are very much in line with those using the broader

measure of waste trade. In columns (1) and (2), where we include only the year fixed effects, the

coefficients on the indicators for when the exporter has signed the Basel Convention (-0.470 and

-0.487) are again large, negative, and significant. But this time the coefficients on the indicators

for when the importers sign Basel are also large, positive, and significant. Combined with the



                                                   24
large coefficient on the indicator for both countries signing the Ban Amendment, this suggests

that signing the treaty is an endogenous consequence of waste trade. Recall that in Table 3, there

was no systematic pattern in average waste flows among countries that did and did not sign the

Convention or the Ban.

        Columns (3) and (4) of Table 7 add the importer-year and exporter-year fixed effects, as

was done in Table 6. The Basel coefficients are insignificant and small, and the Ban coefficients

are positive for both countries signing (0.476 and 0.422), and negative for trade between A7 and

non-A7 countries when the exporter signs the Ban (-0.433). As in Table 6, one possibility is that

treaty ratification is still endogenous; countries expecting to increase waste shipments are less

likely to participate.

        Columns (5) and (6) of Table 7 add the bilateral country-pair fixed effects, identifying the

effects of the treaty from changes in participation within country-pairs when one or both of the

countries signs. The coefficient on both countries participating in the Convention (0.384 and

0.375), are positive and significant, implying that waste shipments are 48 percent higher when

both countries have signed. One possible explanation for this outcome is that the Convention

restricts signatories from trading with non-signatories. So within country-pairs, when only one

member is a Basel signatory, waste trade is restricted. When the second member joins, and the

"Basel Both" indicator switches from zero to one, waste trade is unrestricted. In that sense, the

outcome may be the intentional consequence of the treaty – increasing waste trade among

signatories where it is monitored and regulated while decreasing trade among non-signatories

where it is not.

        Column (6) adds the interaction of the Ban Amendment with the indicator for A7-to-non-

A7 shipments. This offers one small piece of evidence supporting the efficacy of this treaty. The



                                                 25
coefficient on importers signing the Ban (-0.618) implies that waste shipments to non-A7

countries are 44 percent lower when the non-A7 importer has signed the Ban. This finding

however, is not necessarily evidence of cooperative behavior among countries participating in an

IEA. If it were, we should have found the strongest declines in bilateral waste trade occurring

when both countries were members of the Ban. However, we found no evidence that

participation by A7 countries, who are the largest waste exporters, had any effect on waste flows

to developing countries. Rather, this result merely reflects non-cooperative behavior, where non-

A7 countries make decisions regarding what’s best for their own local environmental quality.

When a non-A7 country commits to the Ban, highly toxic waste imports from A7 countries

decline to that country. This result is consistent with Copeland (1991), who demonstrated that a

small country that is unable or unwilling to enforce its own first best domestic environmental

regulations, may make themselves better off by imposing an import ban on waste as a second

best policy. It is not obvious, however, why an IEA such as the Ban would be necessary for that

to happen.



V.     Trade Diversion: Waste Transshipped to non-A7 Countries

       One explanation for the lack of a decline in waste shipments in aggregate, or the decline

in A7-to-non-A7 shipments in some cases, might be trade diversion. The Ban Amendment

prohibits A7 signatories from shipping hazardous waste to any country outside of the A7

countries. Signatories can, however, ship waste to other A7 countries, whether or not the

recipient has signed the Ban. If those shipments are in turn re-exported to non-A7 countries, that

diversion would circumvent the intent of the Ban. The data we have enables us to examine




                                                26
whether hazardous waste is leaking from developed to developing countries through this

loophole in the Ban.

        Two trade patterns would betray evidence of waste being re-exported to circumvent the

Ban. First, consider the originators of the waste. If there is diversion, A7 countries signing the

Ban would ship more waste to A7 non-signatories than to A7 signatories, because the former

would have the ability to re-export. Looking at the left side of Figure 6, shipments of type (iii)

would be larger than type (i), or the difference between (iii) and (i) would be larger than the

difference between (iv) and (ii), or that difference-in-differences would be larger after country A

signs the Ban than before.

        A second piece of evidence for trade diversion would involve the countries trans-shipping

the waste through intermediary countries. If there is diversion, A7 countries that do not sign the

Ban and that serve as trans-shippers would ship more waste to non-A7 countries the higher their

imports of waste from A7 countries that did sign the Ban. Looking at the right side of Figure 6,

shipments of type (vii) would be higher for countries of type D, the larger are its imports of type

(iii) relative to imports of type (iv).

        Start with the first pattern, shipments to trade-diverting countries. Figure 7 plots the share

of waste shipped from A7 countries to A7 countries that have not ratified the Ban and are

therefore possible intermediaries for shipments to non-A7 countries. The top line plots that share

from A7 countries that signed the Ban at some point during the 21 year period; the bottom line

represents countries that hadn't signed the Ban by 2008.18 The figure clearly shows that countries

signing the Ban shipped a higher fraction of their waste to A7 countries that never signed the


18
  Note that we distinguish countries by whether they "ever" or "never" signed the Ban. If instead we
distinguished countries by their current status, the percent waste would change over time for two reasons:
the effect of the Ban and the composition of countries. Also, since the Ban did not exist before 1998, the
top line would be 1.0 and the bottom line 0.0 for every year before then.

                                                    27
Ban, but that they did so always, from before the Ban existed to after they signed. Moreover, for

both groups – the ever-signed and the never-signed – the fraction shipped to non-ratifiers

declines over time. If anything, the fraction shipped to non-ratifiers declines faster from the

group signing the Ban. There seems to be no evidence in Figure 7 that ratifiers are circumventing

the Ban by shipping more waste to the non-ratifying A7 countries.

        What about the second pattern, shipments from trade-diverting countries? Figure 8

contains two scatterplots. The left-hand graph plots the percent of waste shipped to non-A7

countries against the percent of imports from non-ratifying A7 countries, for A7 countries that

have not ratified the Ban. Using the scheme outlined in Figure 6, the left graph in Figure 8 plots

shipments to and from country D, which hasn't signed the Ban. Each point represents exports of

type (vii) divided by the sum of (vii) and (viii), on the left axis, against imports of type (iii)

divided by the sum of (iii) and (iv), on the bottom axis. If non-ratifying A7 countries like D are

serving as a loophole in the Ban, re-exporting waste from A7 ratifiers like A to non-A7 countries

like E, we should see the percentage of waste shipped to non-A7 countries increase with the

percentage of imports from ratifying A7 countries. Figure 8 shows that is not happening. If

anything, the higher the share of imports from ratifying A7 countries, the lower the share of

exports to non-A7 countries.

        To double-check, on the right-hand side of Figure 8 we have drawn that same plot for A7

countries that have ratified the Ban. To be clear, exports by A7 ratifiers should be zero, but recall

that our measure of trade merely proxies for hazardous waste as defined by Basel. So there are

many positive observations, but there is also a mass of observations around (1,0); when most of

all imports come from A7 ratifiers, little or no waste is exported to non-A7 countries.




                                                   28
       In sum, the evidence based on patterns of imports by Ban signatories, and their exports to

non-A7 countries, suggests there has been no significant circumvention of the Ban by non-

signers re-exporting waste to non-A7 countries. The treaty's apparent lack of effect is not the

result of countries circumventing the treaty's intent by transshipping waste; it is the result of the

treaty having had no effect at all on A7 exporters.

       .

VI.    Conclusions and Implications

       The theoretical and empirical economics literature to date is almost entirely skeptical

about the efficacy of the IEAs that have proliferated worldwide over the past 30 years. Our

results do not controvert that skepticism: IEAs appear to do little more than ratify what countries

would have done absent the agreements. Before embarking on this study, we believed that

empirical drawbacks in the existing studies might explain their failure to find that IEAs are

effective. Data on international environmental problems are scarce for countries that do not

participate in treaties, making before-and-after comparisons difficult, and existing work has a

difficult time ascertaining what countries that ratify IEAs would have done absent the

agreements. We address those problems by examining the Basel Convention using Comtrade

data on international waste trade as a close approximation of the types of hazardous waste

governed by Basel, and comparing waste exports before and after each country signs the Ban,

holding constant existing trends and country characteristics with country-year and country-pair

fixed effects. But despite the empirical advantages of our approach, we find almost no evidence

to contradict that conventional skepticism. The Basel Convention and Ban seem to have had no

effect on the growth of international hazardous waste, and almost no effect on shipments from

developed to developing countries.



                                                 29
       Might our results have broader implications for other international problems? In some

regards, global environmental issues such as climate change pose starkly different problems than

hazardous waste trade. Climate change involves a global pollutant emitted at the location where

goods are produced, whereas hazardous wastes are local pollutants that can be separated from the

point of consumption or production and shipped globally. On one hand, that difference means

that the world's hazardous waste problems are potentially solvable without international

agreements, while the same is not true for climate change or other transboundary global

pollutants. If all countries had efficient local environmental and waste disposal regulations, there

might be no need for treaties like the Basel Convention and Ban. International waste trade would

be efficient like any other imported or exported good. But transboundary pollution such as

greenhouse gas emissions imposes a global externality, and so local governments will always

have incentives to free-ride on other countries' abatement efforts. The fact that voluntary IEAs

appear ineffective suggests that alternative policy mechanisms and strategies may need to be

developed to solve large international environmental problems.




                                                 30
References
Anderson, J., and E. van Wincoop, 2003, Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle,
        American Economic Review, 93, 170-192.
Auffhammer, Maximilian , Bernard Morzuch, and John Stranlund. 2005. "Production of
        Chloroflurocarbons in Anticipation of the Montreal Protocol" Environmental and
        Resource Economics 2005 30(4), 377-391.
Baggs, Jen, 2009, International Trade in Hazardous Waste, Review of International Economics,
        17(1), 1-16.
Baier, Scott and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand, 2007, Do free trade agreements actually increase
        members’ international trade?, Journal of International Economics, 71(1), 72—95.
Barrett, Scott, 1994, Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements, Oxford Economic
        Papers, 46, 878-894.
Barrett, Scott, 1997a, Heterogeneous international environmental agreements, in C. Carraro (ed.)
        International Environmental Negotiations. Strategic Policy Issues, Edward Elgar,
        Cheltenham.
Barrett, Scott, 1997b, The strategy of trade sanctions in international environmental agreements,
        Resource and Energy Economics, 19, 345-361.
Brander, James and M. Scott Taylor, 1997. “International Trade and Open Access Renewable
        Resources: the small open economy case” Canadian Journal of Economics, 30: 526-552.
Bratberg, Espen, Sigve Tjøtta, and Torgeir Øines, 2005, Do voluntary international
        environmental agreements work?, Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management, 50, 583-597.
Carraro, Carlo and Domenico Siniscalco, 1993, Strategies for the international protection of the
        environment, Journal of Public Economics, 52, 309-28.
Charnovitz, Steve, 2007, The WTO’s Environmental Progress, Journal of International
        Economic Law, 10(3), 685-706.
Chichilnisky, Graciela, 1994. "North-South Trade and the Global Environment" American
        Economic Review, 84(4):851-874.
Cole, M.A., A.J. Rayner, and J.M. Bates. 1997. "The Environment Kuznetz Curve: An Empirical
        Analysis" Environment and Development Economics 2(4), 401-416.
Copeland, Brian, 1991. "International Trade in Waste Products in the Presence of Illegal
        Disposal," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 20: 143-162.
Ederington, Josh and Jenny Minier, 2003, Is Environmental Policy a Secondary Trade Barrier?
        An Empirical Analysis, Canadian Journal of Economics, 36(1), 137-154.
Finus, Michael and Stefan Maus, 2008, Modesty May Pay!, Journal of Public Economic Theory,
        10(5), 801-826.
Finus, Michael and Sifve Tjøtta, 2003, The Oslo Protocol on sulfur reduction: the great leap
        forward?, Journal of Public Economics, 87, 2031-2048.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, 2008, Estimating Trade Flows: Trading
        Partners and Trading Volumes, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 441-87.
Kellenberg, Derek, 2012, "Trading Wastes" Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management, 64(1), 68-87.
Kennedy, Peter E. 1981. "Estimation with Correctly Interpreted Dummy Variables in
        Semilogarithmic Equations" American Economic Review, 71(4), 801
Levinson, Arik, 1999, "NIMBY Taxes Matter: The Case of State Hazardous Waste Disposal
        Taxes" Journal of Public Economics, 74(1).

                                               31
Levinson, Arik, 2000, "State Taxes and Interstate Hazardous Waste Shipments" American
       Economic Review , 89(3) June 1999.
Martin, Will and Patrick Messerlin, 2007, Why is it so difficult? Trade Liberalization under the
       Doha Agenda, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 23(3), 347-66.
McGinty, Matthew, 2007, International environmental agreements among asymmetric nations,
       Oxford Economic Papers, 59, 45-62.
Mitchell, Ronald B., 2002-2011, International Environmental Agreements Database Project
       (Version 2010.3). Available at: http://iea.uoregon.edu/. Date accessed: 5 April 2011.
Murdoch, James C. and Todd Sandler, 1997a, Voluntary Cutbacks and Pretreaty Behavior: The
       Helsinki Protocol and Sulfer Emissions, Public Finance Review, 25, 139-62.
Murdoch, James C. and Todd Sandler, 1997b, The voluntary provision of a pure public good:
       The case of reduced CFC emissions and the Montreal Protocol, Journal of Public
       Economics, 63, 31-349.
Pellow, David Naguib, 2007, Resisting Global Toxics: Transnational Movements for
       Environmental Justice, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Puckett, Jim & Ted Smith, Eds., 2002, Exporting Harm: The High-Tech Trashing of Asia,
       http://www.ban.org/E-waste/technotrashfinalcomp.pdf.
Puckett, Jim, Ed., 2005, The Digital Dump: Exporting Re-use and Abuse to Africa,
       http://www.ban.org/BANreports/10-24-05/documents/TheDigitalDump_Print.pdf.
Ringquist, Evan J. and Tatiana Kostadinova, 2005, Assessing the Effectiveness of International
       Environmental Agreements: The Case of the 1985 Helsinki Protocol, American Journal
       of Political Science, 49(1), 86-102.
Rose, Andrew K. and Mark M. Spiegel, 2009, Noneconomic Engagement and International
       Exchange: The Case of Environmental Treaties, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,
       41(2-3), 337-363.
Shahin, Magda, 2009, To What Extent Should Labor and Environmental Standards Be Linked to
       Trade?, The Law and Development Review, 2(1), Article 2.




                                               32
                     Table 1: Correlations among categories of waste

                                             All            Highly
                                          Comtrade        hazardous          Basel data
            All Comtrade waste              1.00            0.403              0.507
            (Table A1)                                    n=14,194             n=906
            Highly hazardous                                 1.00              0.367
            Comtrade (Table A2)                                                n=706
            Basel data                                                          1.00

            Source: Authors' calculations from United Nations Comtrade data 1988-2008 and
            Basel Convention data 1994-2003.




                 Table 2: Hazardous Waste Shipped Among Countries:
                                              1988-2008

                                                A7               A7          Non-A7          Non-A7
                                 All           to A7         to non-A7        to A7         to non-A7
                                (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)              (5)
Total (million tons)             2,163           1,295              456           202              211
Annual country-pairs            46,149          13,531          10,083         11,864          10,671
Average annual (tons)           46,865          95,670          45,178         17,001          19,775
(std. dev.)                   (304,563)       (420,143)       (363,328)      (121,229)       (177,567)
Source: Authors' calculations from United Nations Comtrade data.
Note: "A7" refers to countries defined in Annex VII of the Basel Convention (all OECD and European
Union countries plus Liechtenstein). Excludes 1241 observations where an importer or exporter only
traded with one other country in a given year or where a pair of countries only traded in one year.




                                                  33
      Table 3: Tons of Hazardous Waste Shipped: By Basel Status 1988-2008

                                          A7 to A7                          A7 to non-A7
                                             (1)                                 (2)

By Basel Signatory Status
1) Neither signs Basel                       93,738                                 58,966*
      (std. dev.)                          (411,744)                              (176,232)
       country-pairs                        n=1224                                   n=666
2) Exporter signs Basel                      80,666                                 29,623*
                                           (346,402)                             (211,062)
                                           n=11,589                               n=8,654
3)   Importer signs Basel                    94,021                                 46,669*
                                           (411,193)                             (395,194)
                                           n=11,518                               n=8,325
4)   Both sign Basel                         77,592                                 30,231*
                                           (327,172)                             (222,908)
                                           n=10,800                               n=7,561

By Ban Signatory Status
5) Neither signs Ban                         107,218                               34,166*
                                            (486,610)                            (157,623)
                                             n=6,864                              n=5,434
6)   Exporter signs Ban                       99,089                               26,744*
                                            (367,869)                            (156,542)
                                             n=4,749                              n=3,787
7)   Importer signs Ban                       96,597                              116,742
                                            (373,636)                            (766,546)
                                             n=4,705                              n=1,991
8)   Both sign Ban                           131,501                               56,546*
                                            (437,559)                            (263,246)
                                             n=2,787                              n=1,129
*Means in columns (1) and (2) statistically significantly different at 5 percent.
Note: The four categories in each panel are not mutually exclusive, and so do not sum to the totals in
Table 1. Excludes 1241 observations where an importer or exporter only traded with one other country in
a given year or where a pair of countries only traded in one year.




                                                  34
                       Table 4: Tons of Hazardous Waste Shipped:
                    Before and After Change in Basel Status 1988-2008

                                         A7 to A7                               A7 to non-A7
                                Before                 After               Before           After
                                 (1)                    (2)                 (3)              (4)

By Basel Signatory Status
1) Exporter signs         61,502                     105,826*               25,924                63,640*
    Basel               (273,188)                   (402,563)              (69,509)             (332,765)
                         n=1,356                     n=5,741                n=665                n=3,110
2) Importer signs         88,779                     118,690*               24,361                35,702*
    Basel               (387,287)                   (482,552)              (94,547)             (129,617)
                         n=1,451                     n=5,714               n=1,233               n=3,765
3) Both sign              61,579                      90,837*               16,740                50,286*
    Basel               (264,983)                   (344,226)              (55,484)             (303,406)
                         n=1,583                     n=6,026               n=1,253               n=3,754

By Ban Signatory Status
4) Exporter signs         88,053                     105,104*               16,831                34,121*
    Ban                 (335,767)                   (378,181)              (58,036)             (178,634)
                         n=4,546                     n=4,474               n=2,522               n=2,869
5) Importer signs         82,920                     102,527*               42,009               135,781*
    Ban                 (327,320)                   (384,231)             (205,640)             (826,537)
                         n=4,288                     n=4,431               n=1,813               n=1,706
6) Both sign Ban         103,313                     137,006*               23,061                65,162*
                        (362,361)                   (445,873)              (81,988)             (282,270)
                         n=3,589                     n=2,674               n=1,269                n=975
Each row contains only those bilateral pairs for which the row description is relevant.
For example, row 1 (“Exporter signs Basel”) contains only bilateral pairs for which at some point during
the 17 years, the Exporter signed Basel. Similarly, row 3 contains only bilateral pairs for which at some
point the second of the two trading partners signed Basel.
*Means in columns (2) and (4) statistically significantly different from columns (1) and (3), respectively, at
5 percent.




                                                      35
                                Table 5. Descriptive statistics

                                           A7               A7       Non-A7       Non-A7
                                         to A7          to non-A7     to A7      to non-A7
                                           (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)
Average annual waste shipped            95,670            45,178      17,001       19,775
(tons)                                (420,142)        (363,328)    (121,229)    (177,567)
Average high hazard waste                4,768             2,509          639        1,394
(tons)                                 (20,371)          (21,210)      (1,887)      (6,597)
Importer GDP (billion 2000 $)              996               225        1,471          265
                                        (2,050)             (403)      (2,414)        (449)
Exporter GDP (billion 2000 $)              947             1,455          187          210
                                        (2,057)           (2,628)        (379)        (428)
Distance (km)                            4,140             6,687        6,273        5,596
                                        (4,498)           (3,971)      (4,028)      (4,788)
Shared border                             0.092             0.035       0.035        0.165
Shared language                           0.086             0.142       0.129        0.315
Colonial ties                             0.056             0.067       0.074        0.017
Importer ratified Basel                   0.851             0.826       0.838        0.830
Exporter ratified Basel                   0.856             0.858       0.784        0.856
Importer ratified Ban
Amendment                                0.348             0.197       0.322        0.207
Exporter ratified Ban
Amendment                                0.351             0.376       0.175        0.212
Importer WTO member                      0.987             0.788       0.995        0.850
Exporter WTO member                      0.975             0.995       0.728        0.794

Number of annual country pairs         13,531           10,083        11,864       10,671
Country pairs with highly               5,971            2,650         2,892        2,681
hazardous waste
Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                  36
                                Table 6: Basic Waste Regressions
Dependent variable:           Year fixed effects     Country-year fixed effects   Bilateral fixed effects
ln(annual waste)              (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)        (5)               (6)
ln(GDP exporter)            0.372*         0.369*
                            (0.008)       (0.008)
ln(GDP importer)            0.784*         0.785*
                            (0.009)       (0.009)
Non A7 to A7                -1.318*       -1.326*        9.89*         9.90*
                            (0.040)       (0.040)       (1.20)         (1.20)
A7 to A7                    -0.683*       -0.701*      15.70*         15.60*
                            (0.046)       (0.046)       (0.97)         (0.97)
A7 to Non-A7                -0.199*        -0.004        5.86*         5.87*
                            (0.043)       (0.053)       (0.81)         (0.81)
ln(distance)                -1.001*       -1.000*       -1.799        -1.793*
                            (0.017)       (0.017)      (0.020)        (0.020)
Common border               1.348*         1.350*      1.201*         1.210*
                           (0.0535)      (0.0535)     (0.0485)       (0.0486)
Common language             -0.170*       -0.178*      0.150*         0.151*
                            (0.037)       (0.037)      (0.037)        (0.037)
Colony                      0.722*         0.747*      0.939*         0.946*
                            (0.057)       (0.057)      (0.050)        (0.050)
FTA                         0.153*         0.139*        0.073         0.058       0.018          0.017
                            (0.036)       (0.036)      (0.042)        (0.042)     (0.053)        (0.053)
WTO                         0.236*         0.229*        0.201         0.200      0.0911         0.0852
                            (0.036)       (0.036)      (0.118)        (0.118)     (0.130)        (0.130)
Basel importer               -0.119        -0.119
                            (0.093)       (0.093)
Basel exporter              -0.403*       -0.421*
                            (0.092)       (0.091)
Basel both                   -0.195        -0.174        0.044         0.049       0.111          0.113
                            (0.101)       (0.100)      (0.109)        (0.109)     (0.095)        (0.095)
Ban importer                 -0.050        -0.015
                            (0.043)       (0.044)
(Ban imp) X (A7tononA7)                    -0.135                      0.123                      0.130
                                          (0.122)                     (0.108)                    (0.117)
Ban exporter                 -0.494*      -0.375*
                             (0.041)      (0.046)
(Ban exp)X(A7tononA7)                     -0.401*                     -0.409*                      0.022
                                          (0.080)                     (0.079)                    (0.081)
Ban both                     0.286*        0.310*      0.218*         0.140*       0.059           0.086
                             (0.062)      (0.068)      (0.056)        (0.063)     (0.056)        (0.062)
(Ban both)X(A7tononA7)                     -0.300                      0.021                      -0.167
                                          (0.171)                     (0.137)                    (0.139)
Constant                      9.15*         9.15*      11.71*         11.62*       7.40*           7.69*
                              (0.21)       (0.21)       (0.91)         (0.91)     (1.00)          (1.24)
Year f.e.’s                    yes           yes           no            no         no               no
Imp and exp-year f.e.’s         no            no          yes           yes         yes             yes
Bilateral f.e.’s                no            no           no            no         yes             yes
Observations                 46,149       46,149       46,149         46,149      46,149         46,149
R-squared                     0.265         0.267        0.576         0.576      0.814            0.814
Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.05.
Source: UN Comtrade Data, classified according to Appendix Table A1.




                                                    37
                                    Table 7: High Hazard Waste Regressions
Dependent variable:                Year fixed effects         Country-year fixed effects    Bilateral fixed effects
ln(annual waste)                   (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)               (6)
ln(GDP exporter)                  0.431*       0.429*
                                 (0.014)      (0.014)
ln(GDP importer)                  0.890*       0.886*
                                 (0.017)      (0.017)
Non-A7 to A7                     -1.166*      -1.200*           8.260*        8.308*
                                 (0.080)      (0.080)          (2.476)       (2.467)
A7 to A7                         -0.863*      -0.924*          12.26*        12.23*
                                 (0.080)      (0.079)          (2.48)        (2.47)
A7 to Non-A7                      0.0363       0.514*           4.369*        4.497*
                                 (0.087)      (0.106)          (0.470)       (0.486)
ln(distance)                     -1.198*      -1.205*          -1.726*       -1.713*
                                 (0.029)      (0.028)          (0.0340)      (0.034)
Common border                     1.299*       1.278*           1.142*        1.156*
                                 (0.071)      (0.070)          (0.066)       (0.066)
Common language                   -0.002      -0.024            0.180*        0.165*
                                 (0.060)      (0.059)          (0.061)       (0.062)
Colony                            0.352*       0.449*           0.768*        0.794*
                                 (0.085)      (0.085)          (0.073)       (0.073)
FTA                               -0.025      -0.057           -0.128        -0.144        -0.277*         -0.284*
                                 (0.058)      (0.057)          (0.077)       (0.077)       (0.087)         (0.087)
WTO                               0.507*       0.510*           1.512*        1.564*       -0.778          -0.770
                                 (0.078)      (0.078)          (0.352)       (0.352)       (0.449)         (0.449)
Basel importer                    0.468*       0.397*
                                 (0.186)      (0.181)
Basel exporter                   -0.470*      -0.487*
                                 (0.182)      (0.176)
Basel both                        -0.100      -0.033             0.230         0.206        0.384*          0.375*
                                 (0.197)      (0.191)           (0.196)       (0.196)      (0.162)         (0.162)
Ban importer                     -0.326*      -0.209*
                                 (0.077)      (0.077)
(Ban imp)X(A7tononA7)                         -0.536*                         -0.392                       -0.618*
                                              (0.246)                         (0.225)                      (0.249)
Ban exporter                     -0.549*      -0.333*
                                 (0.072)      (0.076)
(Ban exp)X(A7tononA7)                         -0.899*                         -0.433*                      -0.123
                                              (0.156)                         (0.149)                      (0.142)
Ban both                          0.596*       0.580*            0.476*        0.422*      -0.083          -0.128
                                 (0.103)      (0.105)           (0.100)       (0.107)      (0.087)         (0.092)
(Ban both)X(A7tononA7)                        -0.750*                         -0.003                        0.452
                                              (0.342)                         (0.278)                      (0.288)
Constant                         11.79*        11.83*           13.65*         13.40*       8.39*            8.92*
                                  (0.32)       (0.32)           (2.42)         (2.41)      (0.57)           (0.82)
Year f.e.’s                        yes           yes               no             no          no               no
Imp and exp-year f.e.’s            no             no              yes            yes         yes              yes
Bilateral f.e.’s                   no             no               no             no         yes              yes
Observations                    12,802         12,802           12,802         12,802      12,802           12,802
R-squared                       0.392           0.400            0.724          0.724       0.922            0.923
Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.05
Source: UN Comtrade Data, classified according to Appendix Table A2.




                                                              38
Figure 1




                                       Non‐A7 Countries                   Non‐A7 Countries

                                         Signs      A                          E     Signs


                                       Does not      B                          F    Does not


                                        A7 Countries                           A7 Countries

                                         Signs       C                          G    Signs


                                       Does not      D                          H    Does not




Figure 2



                                            Total Annual Waste Shipments
                    200




                                           Total
                                           Non-A7 imports
                                           A7 to non-A7
                          150
           Millions of Tons
                100 50
                    0




                                1988     1992               1996        2000            2004    2008



                                                                   39
Figure 3

                                                           Average Annual Shipments
                               300                           From A7 to non-A7 Countries


                                                     One or both not ratified
                                                     Both ratified Basel
           Thousands of Tons
           100           200   0




                                      1988          1992              1996            2000          2004              2008


Figure 4

                                             Average Annual Total Waste Shipments
                                                             By Year of Treaty Ratification
                               6000
                               4000
           Thousands of Tons




                                                                                                    Exporter signs Basel
                                                                                                    Importer signs Basel
                               2000
                               0




                                      1992   1994          1996            1998      2000    2002        2004         2006




                                                                                40
Figure 5a

                                      Average Annual A7 to non-A7 Shipments
                                           Before and After Exporter Signs Basel and Ban
                   2000
                                           Exporter signs Basel

                                           Exporter signs Ban
                          1500



                                           Exporter to non-A7 countries signs Ban
          Thousands of Tons
        500     1000
                   0




                                 -4   -3             -2         -1        0           1        2   3   4
                                                             Years before/after ratification


Figure 5b

                                      Average Annual A7 to non-A7 Shipments
                                           Before and After Importer Signs Basel and Ban
                   3000




                                           Importer signs Basel

                                           Importer signs Ban

                                           Non-A7 importer signs Ban
         Thousands of Tons
        1000       02000




                                 -4   -3             -2         -1        0           1        2   3   4
                                                             Years before/after ratification




                                                                             41
Figure 6: Rerouted Waste




                                         A7 Countries                        Non‐A7 Countries
                             Signs Ban                   Signs Ban
                                               (i)                   (v)           E
                                A                            C
                                               (ii)                  (vi)

                                               (iii)                           A7 Countries
                                                                     (vii)
                                B                            D
                                               (iv)                 (viii)          F
                         Does not sign Ban           Does not sign Ban




Figure 7
                               Share of Waste Shipped from Annex VIII to Ban Non‐Ratifiers
                   1.0                                                                          60



                                                                                                50
                   0.8


                                           From countries that ever signed Ban                  40




                                                                                                     Countries signing
                   0.6
  Share of waste




                                           From countries that never signed Ban
                                                                                                30
                                           Number of signatories
                   0.4
                                                                                                20


                   0.2
                                                                                                10



                   0.0                                                                          ‐




                                                                     42
Figure 8



                      Rerouted Waste to non-A7 Countries via Ban non-Signers
                                                            Exporter Has Not Signed Ban                Exporter Has Signed Ban
                                  1
           Share of Waste Shipped to non-A7 Countries
              .2         .4       0 .6        .8




                                                        0       .2      .4   .6    .8     1        0    .2    .4    .6     .8    1

                                                                     Share of Imports from Non-Signing A7 Exporters




                                                                                              43
    Appendix Table A1: HS 6 Code Classifications and Waste Commodity Descriptions
HS6 Code Commodity Description                              HS6 Code Commodity Description
         Vegetable mats./waste/residues/by-prods.,
 230800                                                      520210   Cotton yarn waste (including thread waste)
         whether or not in pellets

 262011   Ash or residues containing hard zinc spelter       700100   Glass cullet, waste or scrap, glass in the mass

          Ash & residues, containing zinc other than hard             Waste or scrap containing gold as sole
 262019                                                      711210
          zinc spelter                                                precious metal
                                                                      Waste/scrap containing platinum as sole
 262020   Ash or residues containing mainly lead             711220
                                                                      precious metal
                                                                      Waste/scrap, precious metals except pure
 262030   Ash or residues containing mainly copper           711290
                                                                      gold/platinum

 262040   Ash or residues containing mainly aluminium        720410   Waste & scrap of cast iron

 262050   Ash or residues containing mainly vanadium         720421   Waste or scrap, of stainless steel

                                                                      Waste & scrap of alloy steel other than
 262100   Slag and ash nes, including seaweed ash (kelp)     720429
                                                                      stainless steel
          Ash & residues from the incineration of
 262110                                                      720430   Waste or scrap, of tinned iron or steel
          municipal waste
          Slag & ash, other than from the incineration of             Waste from the mechanical working of iron or
 262190                                                      720441
          municipal waste                                             steel nes
 382510   Municipal waste                                    720449   Ferrous waste or scrap, nes
 382520   Sewage sludge                                      740400   Copper/copper alloy waste or scrap
 382530   Clinical waste                                     750300   Nickel waste or scrap
 382541   Halogenated waste organic solvents                 760200   Aluminium waste & scrap
          Waste organic solvents other than halogenated
 382549                                                      780200   Lead waste & scrap
          waste organic solvents
          Wastes of metal pickling liquors, hydraulic
 382550                                                      790200   Zinc waste & scrap
          fluids, brake fluids & anti-freeze fluids

          Wastes from chemical/allied industries, mainly
 382561                                                      800200   Tin waste & scrap
          containing organic constituents, n.e.s.

 382569   Wastes from chemical/allied industries, n.e.s.     810197   Tungsten (wolfram) waste & scrap

          Residual products of the chemical/allied
 382590                                                      810297   Molybdenum waste & scrap
          industries, n.e.s.
 391510   Polyethylene waste or scrap                        810330   Tantalum waste & scrap
 391520   Polystyrene waste or scrap                         810420   Magnesium waste & scrap
 391530   Polyvinyl chloride waste or scrap                  810530   Cobalt waste & scrap
 391590   Plastics waste or scrap nes                        810730   Cadmium waste & scrap
          Rubber waste, parings and scrap (except hard
 400400                                                      810830   Titanium waste & scrap
          rubber)
 440130   Sawdust, wood waste or scrap                       810930   Zirconium waste & scrap
          Pulps of fibres derived from recovered (waste &
 470620                                                      811020   Antimony waste & scrap
          scrap) paper/paperboard
          Waste or scrap of unbleached kraft or
 470710                                                      811213   Beryllium waste & scrap
          paperboard
          Waste, scrap of paper, board of bleached
 470720                                                      811222   Chromium waste & scrap
          chemical pulp
          Waste or scrap of paper or board of
 470730                                                      811252   Thallium waste & scrap
          mechanical pulp
          Waste, scrap of paper, board, nes (including                Waste & scrap of primary cells, primary
 470790                                                      854810
          unsorted)                                                   batteries & electric accumulators




                                                             44
Appendix Table A2: Concordances Between HS6 codes and Basel Annex VIII Codes For Waste
                       With a High Probability of Being Hazardous
HS6 Code Commodity Description                    Basel Code HS6 Code Commodity Description                       Basel Code
                                                                      Wastes of metal pickling liquors,
            Ash or residues containing hard
  262011                                         A1070, A1080 382550 hydraulic fluids, brake fluids & anti-          A1060
            zinc spelter
                                                                      freeze fluids
                                                                            Wastes from chemical/allied
            Ash or residues, containing zinc
  262019                                         A1070, A1080     382561    industries, mainly containing        A3130, A3140
            other than hard zinc spelter
                                                                            organic constituents, n.e.s.
            Ash or residues containing mainly                               Wastes from chemical/allied
  262030                                            A1090         382569                                         A4140, A4150
            copper                                                          industries, n.e.s.

            Ash or residues containing mainly                               Residual products of the
  262020                                             A1080        382590                                         A4140, A4150
            lead                                                            chemical/allied industries, n.e.s.

            Ash & residues from the
  262110                                             Y47*         810730    Cadmium waste & scrap                    A1010
            incineration of municipal waste
  382510    Municipal waste                          Y46*         811020    Antimony waste & scrap                   A1010
  382520    Sewage sludge                       Y3, Y23, Y41**    811213    Beryllium waste & scrap                  A1010
  382530    Clinical waste                           A4020        780200    Lead waste & scrap                       A1010
             Halogenated waste organic
  382541                                             A3150          811252 Thallium waste & scrap                       A1010
             solvents
             Waste organic solvents other than                                 Waste & scrap of primary cells,
                                                                                                                       A1160,
  382549 halogenated waste organic               A3130, A3140 854810 primary batteries & electric
                                                                                                                    A1170, A1180
             solvents                                                          accumulators
* Municipal waste and its residues from incineration are not listed specifically in Annex VIII of the Basel Convention. However,
Annex II of the Convention does list Basel Codes Y46 and Y47 as household waste and its incineration as requiring special
consideration as hazardous waste.
** Sewage sludge is also not listed specifically in Annex VIII of the Basel Convention. However, Annex I of the Convention
does list categories of hazardous waste streams to be controlled that include waste from pharmacueticals (Y3), zinc waste
(Y23), and halogenated organic solvents (Y41) among many others that have been demonstrated (Stokstad [2009]) to be
present in biosolids from sewage sludge.




                                                                 45
