                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE CANADA-U.S. AUTO PACT OF 1965:
                        AN EXPERIMENT IN
                 SELECTIVE TRADE LIBERALIZATION




                          Melvyn Fuss


                        Leonard Waverman




                     Working Paper No. 1953




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1986




An earlier version of this paper was presented at a Conference on
Trade and Industrial Organization, Merida, Mexico, December 16-18,
1985. This research was funded under grants from the Ontario
Economic Council, the Donner Canadian Foundation, and the National
Science Foundation (Grant No. SES-8420937). We thank Richard Knabl
for sterling research assistance. We have also benefited from the
comments of E. Berndt and M. Denny. The views expressed herein are
solely those of the authors; any errors or omissions are our own.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              WDrking Paper #1953
                                              June 1986




                    The Canada—U.S. Auto Pact of 1965:
              An Experiment in Selective Trade Liberalization




                                ABSTRACT




     In this paper we analyse the Canada-U.S. Auto Pact, a selective
trade liberalization agreement which created a duty-free North American
market for the major U.S. multinational automobile producers, but
continued to protect them from offshore producers. The new international
trade/I.O. literature predicts that, given the probable unexploited
economics of scale and specialization in the tariff—protected small
Canadian economy prior to 1965, rationalization leading to large
efficiency gains in Canadian production vis a vis U.S. production would
occur in a free trade environment. We estimate that the Auto Pact did
not induce a substantial improvement in Canadian relative production
efficiency. The missing ingredient seems to have been the
competition-increasing effects of free trade in an oligopolistic setting
that is emphasized by the new trade/I.O. literature. The Auto Pact did
not increase the number of rivals in the oligopolistic Canadian industry
since the major players in the industry had production facilities on both
sides of the Canada-U.S. border before 1965, and no significant new entry
into Canada occurred.

     In the 1962-64 period, Canadian automotive production was 27% less
efficient than U.S. production. By 1970-72 this deficiency had been
reduced to 19%, but was not further reduced by the end of the 1970's. Of
the 8 percentage points reduction in the Canadian disadvantage, we
attribute only 3 percentage points to the rationalization process induced
specifically by the Auto Pact.




Melvyn Fuss                                  Leonard Waverman
Department of Economics                      Department of Economics
University of Toronto                        University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada                              Toronto, Canada
M5S lAl                                      M5S 1A1
I.   Introduction
     Manufacturing industries in small economies, such as Canada, which
are protected by tariffs generally are believed to be inefficient

relative to corresponding industries in large economies such as the

United States. The reason given is that in a protected small market,

consumer preference for diversity implies that there will be too many

firms producing too many products, so that rationalization will not occur

because economies of scale and specialization will remain unexploited.

In addition, output price differentials between small and large economies

may be even higher than unit cost differentials if protection facilitates

oligopolistic coordination. In recent years there has been renewed

interest in the integration of industrial organization features such as

economies of scale and imperfect competition with the analysis of

international trade. Examples of theoretical contributions include

Brander (1981), Helpman (1981), Krugman (1980) and Helpman and Krugman

(1985). Recently, Harris (1984a,b) and Cox and Harris (1985) have

developed a numerical general equilibrium model of a small open economy

and used this model to estimate the effects for Canada of trade

liberalization policies. They find large gains in manufacturing

efficiency due to rationalization and output price reductions from a

movement to free trade, either unilateral or multilateral. Of particular

importance to this study is the fact that the transportation equipment

industry is a big winner, even when the tariff is removed unilaterally in

that industry alone.

     In common with other numerical general equilibrium exercises,

Harris's results are based on a hypothetical experiment using crucial

parameter values which are not estimated from the data employed in the
                                        2

experiment. However, there exists an actual experiment in trade

liberalization -   the   Canada—U.S. Automotive Products Trade Agreement of

1965 (better known as the Canada-U.S. Auto Pact) which eliminated some,

but by no means all, features of protectionism with respect to North

American trade in automobile products.1 The Auto Pact was designed to

permit North American (primarily U.S. multinational) producers to

rationalize production facilities by removing, for these firms, the

Canadian and U.S. tariffs on transborder shipments of completed vehicles

and original equipment parts. The Pact thus opened up on a duty-free

basis the complete North American market to automotive products

originating in Canada.      It was expected that, with tariff barriers

removed, producers in the small economy (Canada), who also were the

primary producers in the large economy (United States), would achieve

substantial relative efficiency gains by rationalizing production

facilities in Canada to take advantage of any economies of scale and

specialization that existed. It is important to note that tariff

protection from off—shore (e.g. European and Japanese) producers remained

and only "designated" manufacturers in Canada and the U.S. could take

advantage of the provisions of the Auto Pact - hence the term selective

trade liberalization in the title of this paper. For example,

manufacturers in the U.S. had to achieve a certain minimum level of

production in Canada in order to achieve designated (i.e. duty-free)

status.2 The opportunity to rationalize was created by the Auto Pact,

but the oligopolistic industry in Canada3 was not forced to rationalize

by the cold wind of competition, as assumed in the Harris computations.

In fact, it could be argued (Johnson (1963)) that the Auto Pact increased
                                    3

effective protection for North American producers to the extent that

costs could be reduced behind an unchanged nominal tariff barrier applied

to offshore manufacturers.

     In this paper, we analyse, using an econometric cost function

methodology in which the crucial parameters are estimated internally

from the historical data, the rationalization effects of the Auto Pact.

Since the automobile industry in Canada prior to 1965 was a classic case

of an industry with apparently unexploited economies of scale and

specialization producing exclusively for a small domestic market, one

would expect, if the Auto Pact were effective, to observe a substantial

narrowing of the Canada-U.S. production efficiency gap. During the

1962-64 period (prior to the Auto Pact), we estimate that Canadian

producers were 27% less efficient than their counterparts in the U.S.,

confirming the small, protected economy hypothesis stated earlier. By

1970-72, Canadian producers were still 19% less efficient than

U.S. producers, and by 1979 the gap had grown slightly to 20%.   In

addition, of the 8 percentage points relative improvement in Canadian

efficiency by 1970-1972, only 3 percentage points could be attributed to

the rationalization process induced specifically by the Auto Pact. The

selective trade liberalization did not substantially improve Canadian

automobile production efficiency.

     We also estimate that the Auto Pact induced a price decline in

Canada relative to the U.S. of only 3% by 1970-72. This is considerably

less than what would have been expected from the elimination of a

Canadian tariff of 17 1/2%, had the benefits of trade liberalization been

extended beyond North American manufacturers so that arbitrage
                                    4

possibilities could be exploited by individual retailers or consumers.

The selective nature of the trade liberalization appears to have

protected the oligopolistic automobile industry from the competitive

pressures that a policy of fuller trade liberalization would have brought

forth.

     The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section II we present a

description of the Auto Pact and a discussion of the expected effects on

production costs of the provisions of the Pact. Section Ill provides an

outline of the econometric cost function model used in the analysis. The

extent and sources of unit production cost differences between Canadian

and U.S. producers over the 1962-80 period are presented in Section IV.

Section V analyses the Auto Pact per se through a counter-factual

experiment. We construct a set of production flows which we estimate

would have occurred in the absence of the Auto Pact and determine the

unit cost implications had the historical experience been altered. In

Section VI we provide concluding remarks and discuss the implications of

our results for trade policy strategy.
                                    5

 II. THE CANADA-U.S. AUTO PACT OF 1965

     The Canadian automobile industry is dominated by U.S. multinational

firms. Prior to 1965, as noted in the Introduction, both Canada and the

U.S. imposed substantial tariffs on the entry of assembled vehicles and

parts. The Auto Pact eliminated these tariffs for manufacturers of

completed vehicles and original equipment parts, conditional on these

manufacturers maintaining certain minimum production levels in Canada and

domestic content in North America. Hence the Auto Pact provided a

mixture of trade liberalization and protection. On the one hand, vehicle

manufacturers in both countries had potential duty-free access to

Canadian and U.S. markets. On the other hand, since only designated

manufacturers had this access opportunity, the production and domestic

content provisions required for designation might be expected to protect,

at least to some extent, the inefficient Canadian industry.5

     The Auto Pact stipulated the following content and production

requirements for manufacturers:



1.   For tariff-free entry of Canadian automobiles or original equipment

     parts into the U.S. market, these automobiles must contain at least

     50% North American (U.S. or Canada) content.



2.   For tariff-free entry of U.S. finished vehicles or original

     equipment parts into Canada, manufacturers in Canada must satisfy

     the following criteria:
                                    6


          a)    Manufacturers must maintain a certain ratio between the

                net sales value of vehicles made in Canada and the net

                sales value of vehicles sold in Canada.

           b)   The amount of Canadian value added for all classes of

                vehicles made in Canada must be at least as great as the

                amount which was achieved in the base year (1964).

           c)   In each model year, the value added in Canada should

                amount to at least 60% of the growth in the value of cars

                sold in the base year (1964); for commercial vehicles

                (e.g. trucks), the value added should amount to at least

                50% of the growth in the value of commercial vehicles

                sold in the base year.

           d)   Vehicle manufacturers were collectively to increase the

                amount of value added in Canada between 1965 and 1968 by

                a further $260 million beyond the requirements under (c).



     All the above constraints potentially interfere with trade

liberalization and provide protection. Provision 1 protects North

American parts manufacturers from world—wide competitors. Provision 2

provides protection for Canadian parts producers and vehicle assemblers

vis a vis U.S. producers. Provision 2(a) biases production in Canada

toward assembly and away from parts production.

    An observer of the provisions of the Auto Pact would be tempted to

conclude that there exists an obvious reason why manufacturing efficiency

did not improve substantially in Canada relative to the U.S. -   the
provisions of the Pact prevented North American rationalization to the
                                      7

fullest extent desired by manufacturers. This conclusion would imply

that manufacturers were constrained by the content provisions of the

Pact — an implication which is contrary to the evidence. At no time

during the period 1965—80 have constraints 1, 2(b), (c) or (d) been

binding constraints. In most years manufacturers have exceeded the

minimum requirements by wide margins. Provision 2(a) was binding in 1980

and possibly 1968, but in all other years, manufacturers comfortably

exceeded the minimum requirements.6

     Hence it would appear that the "safeguards for Canada" built into

the Auto Pact did not appreciably constrain the North American allocation

of production facilities or the amount of value added produced in

Canada. This fact would seem to contradict our result that Canadian

production has remained inefficient relative to U.S. production. However

it is not relative efficiency which matters in the competition for

production activity but rather relative costs. As we demonstrate in

Section IV, Canadian producers have remained cost competitive primarily

due to lower factor prices, and in the latter part of the period, due to

a devaluing currency.
                                     8

III. THE ECONOMETRIC COST FUNCTION MODEL

     In order to analyse empirically the relative unit costs of

production for Canadian and U.S. producers and the impact of the Auto

Pact on Canadian production, we have estimated the cost function

specified below utilizing 3 digit data (vehicle assembly +     parts
production) drawn from the automobile sectors of Canada (1961—80), the

U.S. (1961-80) and Japan (1968-80). The model is developed in detail

elsewhere (Fuss and Waverman (1985, 1986, 1987) and will only be

summarized here due to space limitations.

     Utilizing the duality between cost and production under the

assumption of cost-minimizing behaviour7, we specify that the automobile

production process can be represented indirectly by the cost function

                     =
                         Gt(wt,   pit' T)                                   (1)

where C1t is the total cost of production in country       i   at time t,

it is a vector of factor prices, 0it is a scalar of output and it

is a vector of technological conditions which could be viewed as the

'characteristics" of the production process. Characteristics used in

this study are an index of Research and Development expenditures (a proxy

for technical change), capacity utilization, and an index of the size mix

of vehicles produced. The use of this characteristics approach was

proposed by McFadden (1978) and has been applied to telecommunications

[Denny, et al. (1981a,b)], trucking [Spady and Friedlaender (1978), Kim

(1984)] and U.S. automobile production [Friedlaender, Winston and Wang

(1983)]. The logarithm of the cost function (1) is approximated by a

function in the logarithms of w,            Tft and   D; (where D is a
vector of country-specific dummy variables) of the form:
                                               9

                                      V
  log   C1, =        +            +
                                           + aD)log Wkit

               + (        +
                              11D)log

               +
                     (01 + 0D)log T1t

               +
                                      wkit) + p11(log Q)2


               +
                     (log Tt)2]

               +
                               log Wkit log Wmit
                   k<m

               +
                               log T1t log T1t
                   2<p


                         Akl log Wkit log Q.


               +
                         A log     Wkit log T1t


                     t1 log Q log         Tt
               +                                                (2)
                              kll log Wkit (log T1t)2

where      i       indexes the country

           t indexes the time period

         k,m index the factors of production

         9.,p index characteristics

    D. = 1         if the observation is in country i       0

        = 0        otherwise

and country 0 is the "reference" or "base" country.
                                                          10

       Specification (2) is a translog cost function with the exception of

the last (3rd order) row which has been added to insure that envelope

consistency between short- and long-run average costs (Viner (1952)) is

maintained within a suitably flexible functional form. The inclusion of

the dummy variable vector permits parameters associated with zero order

and first order terms of the cost function to differ across countries.

Utilizing Shephard's Lemma results in the cost share equations


                                                                V
          =
  Skit            ak + aklDl + ókk log Wkit + mk ók                     log




                  + Aki log Q + A log Tit +                                   P(l0g T1t)2
                                                                                                  (3)



Estimates of the parameters of the system are obtained by estimating

simultaneously (using maximum likelihood techniques) the cost function

(2) and K-l equations from (3), imposing the standard constraints


   V                   V                      V
       czk = 1,            aki =    0,            ómk =    0,       6mk =




       kl         o     Ak     0,            ak_ 0,             kll = 0,                    (4)




and the envelope consistency constraints (see Fuss and Waverman (1985a)

for a detailed derivation):8



          =


    011
              =
                  li
              =
                  Tl                     1
                                        11

    'kl = Akl
        =
                                                                             (5)

The exogenous variables contained in (2) were specified as follows:

      input prices (K=3) -    capital   (1); materials (2); labour (3)

      output —   constant   dollar capacity (normal or designed) production

                       of vehicles and parts

      technological conditions (L=3) —       capacity   utilization (1);

                       technological change proxy index -       index   of

                       real stock of R & 0 expenditures (2);

                       index of product mix (3)



A description of the data used to construct these variables is contained

in Fuss and Waverman (1985, 1986) and especially in Fuss and Waverman

(1987, chapter 4).

     The cost function was estimated subject to the regularity conditions

(e.g. monotonicity, concavity, linear homogeneity in prices) being

satisfied. Details of the estimation procedure can be found in Fuss and

Waverman (1985).

     The lengthy list of parameter estimates are not presented due to

space limitations. These parameter estimates, along with asymptotic

standard errors and the usual diagnostic summary statistics also can be

found in Fuss and Waverman (1985). However, in order that the reader

have some feel for the estimated production structure, Tables 1 and 2

present estimates of factor price elasticities, elasticities of

substitution and other elasticities of interest.
                                          12

     Table 2 demonstrates that production in both the U.S. and Canada is

subject to increasing returns to scale at the mean data point.

Surprisingly, Canada has the lower mean scale elasticity.9 The capacity

utilization elasticity shows that costs increase proportionately less

than actual output, so that there are short-run economies of fill.

Technical change appears to have approximately the same cost-reducing

impact in both countries.

     The cost—product mix elasticities are very small. This is not

surprising since the output variable has been calculated from value and

price data so that it is denominated in "standard" units (see Fuss and

Waverman (1987) for details concerning the construction). If the

long—run marginal cost of producing a vehicle is proportional to weight,

then the cost-product mix elasticity would be zero. If there are

economies of scale (i.e., non—proportionality) in producing larger

(heavier) automobiles then the elasticity would be negative.

     Applying a Taylor's series expansion generalization of the Quadratic

Lemma1° introduced by Denny and Fuss (1983), the following decomposition

of the inter—country unit production cost percentage difference at time

t can be obtained (Fuss and Waverman (1985)):


       log (C1/Q1) -   log    (C0/Q0) =   log       (C/Q)

                 =
                              [Ski   ÷ Sko]         [log wki -    log   WkO]

                +      [ECQ1 + ECQ0 -     2]    .    [log   Q -   log   Q0J


                +            [ECT + ECT0] . [log T1- log T0]
                                                 13



                      +
                                   k1l [log Wki -       log w0].[log Ti - log     T10]2

                      + e.                                                                (6)
                          10

where the time subscript            t has been suppressed for simplicity, and

where


                - 1 FaG             +
            8io — 2                                    [D1 - D0]
                    aD         I
        ECQ =   elasticity   of cost with respect to output

        ECT =   elasticity   of      cost with respect to the

                technologi cal      characteristic



Following Denny and Fuss (1980), the index of cost efficiency difference

between countries i and o at any point in time is given by



         CED10 = Alog (C/Q) —
                                         lv            + S0][log w.j - log wkO]
                                            L [Ski                                        (7)



        The expression for CED in equation (7) is just the dual formulation

of the translog index of interspatial productivity difference introduced

by Jorgenson and Nishimizu (1978).

        Rearranging equation (7), we obtain an alternative equation for

Alog (C/Q):



        slog (C/Q) =           [Ski     + Sko]        [log Wki -   log wko] + CED1Q       (8)




Combining (7) and (8) we obtain an expression for CED in terms of

efficiency sources:


                CED10 =      [ECQ1 + ECQ0 -       2]      [log Q1 -   log   Q0]
                                       14


                  +
                           [ECT1
                                   +
                                       ECT0]   .
                                                   [log T - log   T]
                  +                            log w0][log T1 - log
                           k1l   [log Wki -



                      io                                                     (9)



Equations (6), (8) and (9) provide the formulas for decomposing unit cost

differences and efficiency differences into their various sources.

     Consider equation (6). The left hand side is the average cost

difference between two countries at a point in time. This difference is

due to differences in factor prices (the first row on the right hand

side), the effects of scale economies (the second row), the effects of

technological characteristics (the third row), the interaction between

factor prices and characteristics (the fourth row), and           e0 (the fifth
row). The term        measures any systematic cost difference between

the two countries not accounted for by factor prices, scale, and

technology. It will be called the country-specific efficiency effect,

and is presumably a combination of managerial and environmental effects.

     Now consider equation (8). The average cost difference between

the two countries is due to differences in factor prices (the first

term), and differences in cost efficiency (the second term). Finally

consider equation (9). The cost efficiency difference between two

countries is due to scale effects (the first row), technological effects

(the second row), the interaction effect (the third row), and the

country-specific efficiency effect (the fourth row).
                                      15

IV. THE EXTENT AND   SOURCES   OF COST AND EFFICIENCY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN

    U.S. AND CANADIAN PRODUCERS, 1961-80

     In this section we present the empirical results on cost and

efficiency level comparisons between the United States and Canada using

equations (6), (8) and (9). The results are presented in Tables 3 and

4. Table 3 contains the unit production cost differentials for a number

of years and periods. The contribution" of each source is measured as

the percentage difference in unit production cost which would result if

the only difference between the two countries were that particular

source. In this calculation all other sources are held constant at their

geometric mean levels for both countries1 observations combined. Hence

the interaction effect will disappear as an explicit source of

difference. For example, the second element in the first row indicates

that if all that differed between Canadian and U.S. producers in the

1962-64 period was the price of labour, and all other variables affecting

costs were equal in the two countries at the geometric average of their

values in the two countries in the years 1962 through 1964, then unit

production cost would have been 6.0% lower in Canada than in the

U.S. (both costs measured in Canadian dollars).

     Somewhat surprisingly, the data indicate that in the years preceding

the Auto Pact there was little significant unit production cost

difference between Canada and the U.S. as measured in Canadian dollars.

However the respective tariffs in the two countries were sufficiently

high to discourage inter—country trade. In 1962-64, considering only

factors affecting cost efficiency differences (CED) between U.S. and

Canadian producers, unit production costs would have been 26.9% higher in
                                   16

Canada than in the U.S. Over the fifteen year period to 1979 the

Canadian CED disadvantage diminished, but by only 6.7 percentage points.

We find that in 1962—64, scale differences alone would have accounted for

21.1% higher unit production costs in Canada than in the U.S., (where all

other variables are held at their mean levels). Wonnacott and Wonnacott

(1967) estimated that inefficient scale increased costs in Canada by

13%. Our calculations based on an estimated cost function show this

effect to have been some 50% greater than that calculated by the

Wonnacotts. Scale is measured in our model by the level of aggregate

output which could be produced when there is no underutilization of

capacity.

     Besides the disadvantage in scale, we also find two other sources

of inefficiency in Canada in this earlier period -   underutilization   of

capacity and the "country specific efficiency effect" (CSE). For

1962-64, unit production cost would have been 2.2% higher in Canada than

in the U.S. due to underutilization of capacity. The CSE effect has

been specified to include any differential effect due to unequal rates of

technical change, and hence includes the contribution of the R&D proxy

variable to unit cost differences. In essence, this effect is a

residual category which will include any systematic influence on

Canada-U.S. relative efficiency other than scale, capacity utilization,

and product mix. It will include any cost-reducing effects of increased

specialization (aggregate output held constant) not captured by the

product mix variable. For 1962-64, unit production cost would have been

2.2% higher in Canada than the U.S. due to CSE.
                                     17


    The sources of inefficiency in Canada (scale, CSE and capacity

utilization) would have led to a substantially higher unit production

cost in Canada than in the U.S. in 1962-64 except for the favourable

impact of lower factor prices in Canada.

     As we view the Canadian automobile industry vis a vis the U.S. in

1962-64 we see substantial 'scale' (or aggregate output) disadvantages in

Canada offset by lower factor prices —    suggesting that improvements in
scale, ceteris paribus, would potentially improve the industry's relative

performance.

     Between 1965 and 1972, the Canadian auto producers apparently

rationalized their assembly production,and the scale of aggregate output

in Canada also increased substantially. By 1970-72, the scale

disadvantage to Canada had fallen by 45% from its 1962-64 level (from

21.1% in row 1 to 12.1% in row 2).

     The reduction in the scale disadvantage was due to the faster growth

in Canadian production relative to U.S. production in the post 1965

period. Was this faster growth due to the Auto Pact? In Section V we

examine a counter-factual case -   holding   auto trade between Canada and

the U.S. at its 1962-64 level and allowing the domestic Canadian market

to expand at the actual rate experienced over the 1966-1980 period in

order to answer this question.

     We expected that unit production cost would have fallen

substantially in Canada as compared to the U.S. between 1962-64 and

1970-72 due to the narrowing of the scale disadvantage. In fact Canadian

relative unit production cost rose by 5.5 percentage points. Now do we

explain this surprising result, especially when movements in capacity
                                     18

utilization also favoured Canada over this period? First, Canada's

relative CSE, already at a disadvantage with respect to the U.S. in

1962-64, continued to deteriorate (by 3.5 percentage points in unit

production cost terms over the period). Recall that the scale effect

captures the reduction in unit cost resulting from the increase in

aggregate output. If rationalization of Canadian production

substantially reduced unit production cost in Canada, then the CSE term

should have shown a relative improvement for Canada over the 1962-64 to

1970-72 period. It does not. Of course, rationalization in the auto

industry could have improved CSE in Canada as compared to what would have

occurred in the absence of the Auto Pact, i.e., the CSE term might have

changed even more to Canada's disadvantage in other industries. We

consider this issue in more detail on page 27, where we demonstrate that

the Canadian automobile industry's CSE experience over the period from

1966 to 1972 was unlikely to have differed substantially from the

experience in total manufacturing.

     An additional factor leading to an increased relative unit

production cost in Canada over this period is the deterioration in

Canada's very favourable factor price regime of 1962-64. The major

component of this deterioration was the price of capital services. In

1962-64, differences between the price of capital in the two countries

alone yielded 12.6% lower production costs in Canada than in the U.S. By

1970-72, this advantage to Canada had diminished to a 3% advantage in

unit production costs.

     After 1965 intra—industry trade between Canada and U.S. expanded

rapidly even though Canada's average relative cost position
                                    19

 deteriorated. A pattern developed (that has continued to the present

 time) in which Canada generated a trade surplus in completed vehicles and

 a deficit in original equipment parts. Since our data consist of

 aggregated vehicle assembly and parts, they presumably mask (during

 1970—72) a Canadian cost advantage in assembled vehicles (on average) and

 a cost disadvantage in parts production.

      Between 1970-72 and 1977-79, substantial changes occurred in the

 relative unit production cost between the two countries. While the unit

 production cost in 1970-72 was 6.9% higher in Canada than in the U.S.,

 by 1977-79 it was 2.9% lower in Canada; in 1979 alone, 8.9% lower.

This reversal in relative cost between the two countries occurred because

of a substantial relative improvement in the price of materials in

Canada's favour12 and because of a continued increase in the scale of

Canadian automobile production. Note, however, the substantial relative

decline in the Canadian CSE between the 1970—72 and 1977-79 periods. If

the only difference between the costs of automobile production in the two

countries was the CSE, then Canadian unit production costs in 1979 would

have been 11.5% higher than costs in the U.S. This deterioration in CSE

occurs despite the rationalization of the Canadian auto industry.

     Between 1979 and 1980, unit production costs fell 5.6 percentage

points in Canada relative to the U.S. This large one year change was

almost entirely due to the relative decline in capacity utilization in

the U.S.13

     To summarize Table 3, in the fifteen years between 1962-64 and

1977-79, unit production costs fell in Canada relative to the U.S., so

that in the latter period, Canadian unit production costs were well below
                                   20

that of the U.S. This overall relative decline in Canadian unit

production costs was itself the result of several conflicting movements.

First was the substantial improvement in the scale of Canadian automobile

production — a result that some would attribute to the Auto Pact.

Second, the Canadian CSE declined relative to the U.S. Removing scale

effects, the efficiency level of Canadian automobile production declined

relative to U.S. production in the period following the Auto Pact.

Third, relative price changes between the U.S. and Canada occurred over

the fifteen year period, some to Canada's advantage and some to the

advantage of the U.S. Relative changes in product mix and in capacity

utilization had no major impact over this period.



The Depreciation of the Canadian Dollar

     In Table 4, we reproduce the results of Table 3 except that exchange

rate movements in excess of changes in purchasing power parity (PPP) are

separated out as a distinct source of unit cost differences.14 From

Table 4, we see that the lower price of labour in Canada would have

created a 4.6% to 6.6% Canadian cost advantage (at PPP exchange rates)

over the U.S. throughout the period l962_80.15 The price of capital

services rose considerably in Canada relative to the U.S. so that the

Canadian advantage in capital costs fell sharply by 1970—72. The price

of materials changed substantially in favour of Canada over the period

from a 3% disadvantage (in terms of unit production costs) in 1962-64

to a 10% advantage in 1980.16

     Movements in exchange rates relative to PPP accounted for the

worsening of Canada's relative unit production cost from the 1962-64 to
                                    21

 1970—72 period in the sense that, had the exchange rate been at its PPP

 level in 1962-64, Canadian unit production cost would have been 10%

 higher than the U.S. cost; which should be compared with a 7%

differential in 1970-72 when the exchange rate was at its PPP level.

Only part of the improvement in the Canadian relative unit production

cost in the 1977 to 1980 period can be attributed to depreciation of

the Canadian dollar relative to its PPP level.'7



Output Price and Marginal Cost Differences

     The second column of Table 5 gives the output price differences

between automobile wholesale prices in Canada and those in the U.S.

In 1962-64, wholesale prices in Canada were 4.8% above those in the

U.S. (in Canadian dollars). By way of contrast, in those same years

long-run marginal cost (i.e., marginal cost assuming full utilization of

capacity) was 2.6% higher in Canada, whereas short-run marginal cost was

7.1% lower in Canada due to relative underutilization of capacity. In

our model underutilization of capacity raises unit (average) cost and

lowers marginal cost in the short run. From 1962-64 to 1970-72, the

difference between Canadian and U.S. wholesale prices increased. The

difference between both short—run and long—run marginal costs also

increased, and marginal cost differences increased more substantially

than wholesale price differences. Between 1970-72 and 1977-79, wholesale

prices as well as marginal costs fell in Canada relative to the U.S, with

the reductions in marginal costs being more pronounced. In 1979 the

differential between Canadian and U.S. wholesale prices was less than the

differential between either short—run or long-run marginal costs. In
                                   22

1980, a year of relative underutilization of U.S. capacity, the Canadian

output price advantage was less than its advantage in long-run marginal

cost. Short-run marginal cost was higher in Canada than in the U.S.

     From Table 5 it is obvious that swings in marginal costs were much

more pronounced than swings in prices. This suggests that automobile

firms were probably using pricing rules which involved a markup over

average variable cost that is only partially adjusted in the face of

changing market conditions, and that these firms have sufficient market

power to sustain this behaviour even when confronted by low levels of

capacity utilization and hence low levels of short—run marginal cost.
                                    23

 V.   A COUNTER-FACTUAL EXAMPLE - COST CHARACTERISTICS OF CANADIAN

      AUTOMOBILE PRODUCTION IN THE ABSENCE OF THE AUTO PACT

      From Table 6 we see that, following the Auto Pact of 1965, motor

 vehicle output grew more quickly in Canada than in the U.S. leading to

 increased relative efficiency and reduced unit production cost in

 Canada. But the output of the Canadian automobile industry may have

 grown as quickly without the Auto Pact, given the fast growth of income

 and population and changing demographics of Canada in the post-1965

period. In order to examine a hypothetical world which did not include

the Auto Pact, we made the following calculations.   First, we calculated

that, in the 1962—64 period, the ratio of U.S. imports to Canadian

domestic production (parts and completed vehicles) was 26% and that 2% of

Canadian output was exported to the U.S. For the years 1966 to 1980 we

assumed that in a no Auto Pact (NAP) hypothetical world net imports

from the U.S. to Canada would remain at these percentage levels. We also

assumed that exports from Canada to the U.S. above the 1962-64 percentage

level would not have occurred and therefore we deducted the value of

these exports from the value of domestic Canadian production.18
                                                                    Finally,
we assumed that imports from the U.S. to Canada above the 1962—64

percentage level would have been produced in Canada (we therefore added

these imports to the value of domestic Canadian production).19     In this

hypothetical world, Canadian firms produce for the domestic market rather

than being integrated into the North American market. We incorporated

one other effect in making these hypothetical calculations. The

differential between wholesale prices in Canada and those in the

U.S. narrowed after the introduction of the Auto Pact. We hypothesized
                                   24

that in the absence of the Auto Pact, Canadian wholesale prices would

have remained at their 1962-64 ratio to U.S. wholesale prices (in

Canadian dollars). This calculation raises the wholesale price in Canada

in the post-1965 period by 3% in the absence of the Auto Pact. Assuming

a unitary elasticity of demand, we reduced Canadian output

correspondingly by 3%.

     Using these hypothetical output data, we recalculated unit

production cost differences and their sources from equations 2 and 6,

assuming all other exogenous variables were unaffected by the

introduction of the Auto Pact. Table 6 presents the differences between

this hypothetical NAP world and actual experience.20

     By 1970-72, we calculate that the Auto Pact had reduced unit

production cost in Canada by 3.1% over what it would have been during

those years in the absence of the Pact. This improvement in unit

production cost comes about primarily through improvements in scale and

CSE. If all that differed between the U.S. and Canada were scale (all

other variables held at their mean levels) then the increase in the

level of Canadian aggregate output due to the Auto Pact reduced unit

costs by 2.0%. As noted previously, rationalization of facilities should

influence the CSE effect.2' The Auto Pact led to a 0.6% improvement in

CSE. Directionally, these values are as expected. They are, however,

considerably lower than the proponents of the Auto Pact believe. Our

results suggest that most of the reduction in unit cost post—1965

relative to the U.S. was due to increases in aggregate output. The

majority of the output expansion which actually occurred over the 1962-64
                                        25

 to 1970-72 period would have occurred anyway through the growth of the

 domestic Canadian market.

      Between 1970-72 and 1977-79, the improvements in Canadian unit

 production costs vis a   vis   those in the U.S. in our NAP world mimicked

 the improvements that actually occurred. We estimate that in the absence

 of the Auto Pact, unit production cost would have been 1.7% higher in

 Canada in 1977-79. Economies of scale attributable to the Auto Pact

 result in a small decrease in cost (0.6% of unit production cost in

 1977—79). The Auto Pact also reduced unit cost in Canada by improving

 CSE over what it would have been in the absence of the Pact; this

 improvement (rationalization) increases slightly over time and accounts

 for a 0.9% lower unit production cost in 1979.     Again, directionally the
effect is as expected but lower than the proponents of the Pact would

suggest.

     Our empirical results demonstrate that the Auto Pact was but one of

a number of forces impinging on the Canadian auto industry. The Auto

Pact had its most significant effect by 1970—72, reducing unit production

cost in Canada by 3.1%; in later years this cost reduction diminishes.

The impact of the Auto Pact was less than commonly believed for two

reasons. First, aggregate sales in the domestic Canadian market

increased substantially leading to the realization of scale economies by

domestic producers. Second, the data suggest that after accounting for

scale, the technical efficiency of Canadian auto production fell

relative to that experienced in the U.S.; the Auto Pact did improve

Canadian CSE over what it would have been but not substantially.
                                  26

    Can these rather surprising results (at least in terms of the

conventional wisdom) be correct? We now proceed to demonstrate that our

results are consistent with auxiliary information which is not

conditional on our modelling activities. First, had the Auto Pact

eliminated efficiency differences, one would have expected by 1979 an

overwhelming Canadian cost advantage in automobile production, given

lower wage rates and the depreciation of the Canadian dollar. We

estimate that, given equal efficiency in the two countries, the Canadian

unit cost in 1979 would have been 20%-35% less than the U.S. cost. The

wholesale price was however only 4% lower in Canada. In addition, during

1979 Canada had a net deficit of $2.7 billion in trade in automobile

products with the U.S. under the Auto Pact. Neither output price

differentials nor trade patterns are consistent with a large Canadian

cost advantage.22

     Second, our results are not in fact surprising when one considers

total factor productivity (TFP) growth in the two countries. The actual

growth rates in TFP are shown in Table 7. These rates are not computed

from the cost function model, but rather from the actual data using the

Tornqvist aggregation procedure. Hence the rates are independent of the

parameter estimates.

     During the 1966—72 period the TFP growth rate was higher in Canada

than in the U.S. (1.5% versus 1.0%). However, if the 27% Canadian

efficiency disadvantage (see Table 3) were to be eliminated by 1972, the

Canadian TFP annual growth rate during the 1966-72 period would have had

to be 5%, over 3 times the actual rate! Over the longer 1966-79 period,

TFP growth in Canada is not substantially faster than in the U.S. These
                                    27

 data on TFP growth rates underline our basic results —   the   Auto Pact does

 not appear to have greatly improved the efficiency of Canadian automobile

 production.

      We are now in a position to consider the question posed earlier as

 to whether the deterioration in the Canadian relative CSE during 1966-72

would have been substantially worse without the Auto Pact.      Berndt and

 Fuss (1986) estimate that TFP in U.S. total manufacturing grew at a rate

of 0.6% per annum over the 1965—73 period. For Canada, the corresponding

rate has also been estimated as 0.6% over this period (Denny and Fuss

(1980)). The similarity in relative Canada—U.S. TFP growth rates in

total manufacturing during 1965-73 suggests that the Canadian CSE in

manufacturing in general did not deteriorate to a significantly greater

extent than occurred in automotive production. The much more rapid

output growth rate in automobile production (12.8% versus 4.7% in total

manufacturing during 1966—72) meant that economies of scale were

exploited to a greater extent in automobile manufacturing than in

manufacturing in general. This fact, only partially attributable to the

Auto Pact, accounts for the narrowing of the efficiency gap in automobile

manufacturing, whereas no such narrowing occurred in total

manufacturing.23

     Most previous analysts of the Auto Pact (Beigie (1970), Wilton

(1976)) have been misled by equating labour productivity (LP) gains with

efficiency gains. LP grew much more rapidly in Canada than in the U.S.,

both after the Auto Pact agreement (1966—72) and during the longer period

(1966-79) (Table 7). In fact, from Table 8 we can see that a Canadian

LP disadvantage of 29% in 1966 had been eliminated by 1972, and had been
                                   28

replaced by a 23% advantage by 1979. But LP gains are not synonymous

with efficiency (TFP) gains. The growth in LP is equal to the growth in

TFP plus a factor substitution effect (due to changes in relative input

prices) plus a bias effect.24 This bias effect measures the differential

impact on labour demand relative to other factors of production of events

which can yield efficiency gains through TFP growth (e.g. scale

expansion, technical change, increases in capacity utilization), but is

not itself a measure of efficiency gains.

    Table 9 demonstrates that less than 20% of the growth in LP is due

to efficiency gains (TFP growth). The remainder is due to substitution

away from labour (primarily towards materials) in response to a higher

wage rate relative to other factor prices, and the net labour saving

bias of increases in scale and technical change.25
                                    29

 VI. CONCLUSIONS

      The major finding of this study is that the Canada—U.S. Auto Pact's

 selective trade liberalization provisions did not substantially improve

 the efficiency of Canadian automobile production relative to

 U.S. production. This finding is consistent with Cox and Harris's (1985)

 computational results that, as of 1976, the transportation equipment

 industry in Canada would be the big winner from unilateral or

multilateral free trade primarily because "the possibility of substantial

 rationalization exists".26 Nevertheless, our empirical results are

surprising, since profit maximizing firms pursuing cost-minimizing

strategies would rationalize if permitted to do so, and the Auto Pact

provided the needed mechanism.

     There exist several possible explanations for our result. First,

economies of scale and specialization disadvantages in small economies

may be less than previously thought. Our estimated "actual" scale

elasticity for Canadian auto production for 1968 is 1.04, well below

the estimate of 1.25 used by Cox and Harris.27   But, if unexploited

economies of rationalization are not present, how does one explain the

persistent 20% Canadian efficiency disadvantage? Second, the Canadian

domestic content provisions of the Auto Pact may have prevented a high

degree of rationalization. This explanation appears unlikely, since as

noted in Section II, manufacturers have consistently exceeded the content

requirements by wide margins. Finally, and perhaps most likely, the

oligopolistic structure of the automobile industry in Canada during the

period l966_7228 probably meant that competitive pressures for cost
                                  30

reducing rationalization were minimal, and the Auto Pact did nothing

to increase them.

     If the automobile industry in Canada is typical of oligopolistic

industries in small economies with unexploited opportunities for

rationalization, half—way measures such as the selective trade

liberalization policy represented by the Auto Pact are unlikely to

improve efficiency substantially. The existence of the opportunity to

rationalize appears inadequate compared to the competitive pressures

which can be unleashed by unrestricted trade liberalization.29
                                    31

                                 FOOTNOTES



1.   The three digit (SIC) automobile products industry (vehicle assembly

     plus parts production) comprised 85% of the value of shipments in

     the two digit transportation equipment industry in 1976, the year

     from which data were drawn to calibrate the Harris model.

2.   Duty free entry was conditional on manufacturers maintaining minimum

     assembly and value-added levels in Canada. Details of these

     provisions are presented in the next section. Manufacturers who did

     not qualify under the Auto Pact faced, as of 1965, Canadian tariffs

     of 17.5% on completed vehicles and 0 to 25% on parts. U.S. tariffs

     ranged from 6.5% to 8.5% on completed vehicles and parts.

3.   In 1966 the "Big Three" U.S. manufacturers (G.M., Ford and Chrysler)

     controlled 86% of Canadian sales of new vehicles. In 1971, these

     three companies controlled 75% of new vehicle sales.

4.   The new trade/I.0. literature emphasizes that in an oligopolistic

     setting one of the main gains from trade liberalization for the

     small country is that the small country's producers, after

     liberalization, will be faced with a larger market and more rivals

     so that their perceived demand curves will become more elastic and

     output prices will decline (Markusen (1981), Helpman and Krugman

     (1985)). However in this case the bulk of the automotive industry

     was controlled by the same firms on both sides of the

     Canada—U.S. border. After liberalization, these firms did not face

     new markets, and the number of major rivals in Canada remained the

     same since only Volvo entered (as a small producer) as a result of
                                   32

     the Auto Pact. Hence there is no reason to believe that the

     perceived demand elasticities of the dominant firms were altered by

     the Auto Pact.

5.   Johnson (1963) reviewing the recommendations of the Bladen Royal

     Commission Inquiry into the Canadian automobile industry, an inquiry

     which preceded the Auto Pact, emphasized the protectionism inherent

     in the type of content provisions contained in the Pact.

6.   For details see Federal Task Force (1983) and Fuss and Waverman

     (1987).

7.   It might appear that the cost function model utilized would be

     misspecified due to the content and production provisions of the

     Auto Pact detailed in Section II. However, since these provisions

     did not constrain the activities of the producers to any appreciable

     extent, a provision-restricted cost function formulation would be

     observationally equivalent to the unrestricted version that was

     actually estimated. While we do not know whether the content

     provisions in force in Canada prior to 1965 were binding, deleting

     these observations from the sample yielded parameter estimates which

     were not statistically significantly different from the parameter

     estimates obtained using the complete sample. Neither the U.S. nor

     Japan had domestic content or production provisions during the

     sample period.

8.   One additional set of constraints was imposed on the parameters. As

     described in more detail in Fuss and Waverman (1987), the product

     mix variable (13) was computed as an index where typical weights are

     assigned to different classes of automobiles (sub-compact, compact,
                                   33

     intermediate, etc.) and an average weight for actual production

     computed. This variable fluctuated fairly tightly around 2500 for

     Japan and 3500 for Canada and the U.S. Hence it almost served as a

     dichotomous dummy variable for Japan versus North America. From

     initial estimation results it became clear that second order

     parameters involving T3 could not be estimated and were set to

     zero. This had the effect of constraining the cost-product mix

     elasticity to be a constant over time for each country, although the

     elasticity could differ among countries.

9.   Our estimates of the scale elasticity for the Canadian automobile

     industry suggest only modest returns to increasing aggregate output

     (1.08 in 1961 falling to 1.03 in 1980). Other econometric studies

     report similar results. For example Fuss and Gupta (1981), using

     establishment data divided into 6 aggregate size classes, estimate a

     mean scale elasticity for 1965-68 of approximately one. Robidoux

     and Lester (1986), using individual establishment data, estimate a

     scale elasticity for 1979 which is slightly less than one. However,

     even if aggregate output scale elasticities are close to unity,

     substantial efficiency gains may be possible through reduction in

     product lines to exploit economies of specialization. We will

     consider this issue in more detail in Sections IV and V.

10. For a description of the Quadratic Lemma see Diewert (1976) and

     Denny and Fuss (1983).

11. See Fuss and Waverman (1985, Data Appendix) for the rationale behind

     this aggregation procedure.
                                    34

12. This substantial relative improvement in the price of materials is

      somewhat puzzling. Below we distinguish between movements in the

      value of the Canadian dollar and changes in factor prices in each

      country. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar explains most of

      the factor price effect. However, since materials are largely

      semi-finished components, there is a possibility that if net imports

      into Canada from the U.S. are an important component of materials

      costs, transfer price changes could account for the observed changes

      in relative materials costs. With higher tax rates in Canada than

      the U.S., transnational automobile firms could raise the transfer

      price of materials into Canadian production, thus transferring

      profits to the lower tax regime -    the U.S. This difference in tax
      rates would explain relative increases in Canadian materials costs,

      the opposite of actual experience.

13. The oil crisis of 1979 did not affect consumer demand in Canada for

      North American produced automobiles to the same extent as in the

      U.S., because actual shortages of gasoline did not occur in Canada

      and the federal government subsidized the price of crude oil in

      order to maintain a price below world levels.

14. The purchasing power parity calculations underlying this

      decomposition and the decomposition formulas can be found in Fuss

      and Waverman (1987).

15.   If the wage rate were constant in both countries over a two year

      period, but the Canadian dollar appreciated by 5% relative to its

      purchasing power parity rate in that period, then it would appear in

      the results of Table 3 that the Canadian wage rate rose by 5%
                                    35

      relative to the U.S. rate.   In Table 4 this change in relative wage

      rates caused by exchange rate fluctuations is allocated to an

      exchange rate effect. By using this convention we are implicitly

      adopting a partial equilibrium framework since we assume, for the

      purposes of this discussion, that exchange rate changes have no

      effect on factor prices measured in a country's own currency.

16.   If net imports of materials into Canada from the United States form

      an important component of material costs then the exchange rate

      effect could be overestimated and the materials price effect

      underestimated. This may occur because, while, for example, a

      devaluation of the Canadian dollar makes inputs into U.S. production

      purchased in the U.S. more expensive as measured in Canadian

      dollars, inputs into Canadian production purchased in the

      U.S. (presumably materials) will also be more expensive in Canadian

      dollars. Hence, some of the apparent factor price advantage to

      Canadian producers from devaluation will cancel out. Similarly, the

      corresponding appreciation of the U.S. dollar will not lead to an

      increase in material prices (in Canadian dollars) for those

      materials imported from Canada. The evidence from Table 4 is that

      this complication is probably not of importance empirically. The

      Canadian advantage due to lower material prices increased

      considerably during 1977—80, the period of substantial devaluation

      of the Canadian dollar.

17. From a different perspective, the depreciation of the Canadian

      dollar relative to par value with the U.S. dollar (which existed

      in the mid 1970's) is the main reason for the Canadian cost
                                  36

    advantage as of 1980. The further depreciation of the Canadian

    dollar during the l980s has probably increased the Canadian cost

    advantage.

18. We also deducted from the value of Canadian output the materials

     inputs which would have been used to produce these finished vehicle

    exports. The materials input to assembly output ratio was held at

     its average 1962-64 value.

19. Offsetting changes were made to the value of U.S. production to

    ensure that total output matched actual values.

20. It is possible that the Canadian wage rate would have been lower

    without the Auto Pact since the United Auto Workers may have been

     less successful in pressing for nominal wage parity in vehicle

    manufacturing. However this effect, if operative, would further

     reduce the cost-savings attributable to the Auto Pact. The

     hypothetical exercise described in this section is theoretically

     susceptible to the Lucas Critique since the cost function parameters

    might not be invariant to the variation in policies, as assumed.

     We expect this issue to be unimportant empirically since, as

     discussed in Section II, the domestic content provisions introduced

     by the Auto Pact did not become binding constraints.

21. We did not change the product mix variable to take account of the

     fact that a reversal of rationalization would influence this

     variable. The actual effect of this variable on unit cost

     differences is minimal and any change in the variable could also be

     expected to have a minimal effect.
                                    37

22. Since 1982 Canada has been in a surplus position with respect to

      trade with the U.S. under the Auto Pact. This fact does not

     diminish our argument since by 1982 a further (and continuing)

     substantial devaluation of the Canadian dollar had occurred.

23. The thrust of this section is supported by Baldwin and Gorecki's

      (1986) Canada-U.S. value-added TFP level comparisons which utilize

     disaggregated Canadian individual establishment data. They find

     that for the two digit transportation equipment industry (consisting

     of 8 four digit sub-industries), the Canadian industry was only 72%

     as efficient as its U.S. counterpart in 1970, and only 67% as

     efficient in 1979. After eliminating the effect of scale economies,

     Baldwin and Gorecki estimate, that the Canadian CSE disadvantage (in

     terms of productivity rather than cost efficiency) was 23% in 1970

     and 22% in 1979.

24. For a derivation of this result see Fuss and Waverman (1987).

25. The fact that LP grew more rapidly than TFP in this industry also

     holds for value-added measures of productivity. Sharpe (1983)

     obtained the following results on a value—added basis:


                  Productivity         1961—73               1973-79
Industry            Measure       (average % growth)    (average % growth)
                                    U.S.   CANADA         U.S.   CANADA

transportation          LP          3.6      6.4          1.0        3.3
equi pment

                        TFP         2.9      2.4          0.3        0.7


motor vehicles          LP          4.3      8.5          1.6        1.5
& equipment
                        TFP         not calculated        not calculated
                                   38

26. Ccx and Harris (1985) p.131.

27. Cox and Harris used an estimate that was approximately half-way

     between the econometric estimate for 1968 calculated by Fuss and

     Gupta (1981) and the engineering estimate contained in Gorecki

     (1978). Our estimate is very close to the Fuss and Gupta estimate.

     As noted by Ccx and Harris, the econometric estimates are

     consistently below engineering estimates. However, since the

     engineering estimates assume a single product line, they include any

     theoretical cost savings from specialization. Had we applied Ccx

     and Harris's scale elasticity estimate of 1.25 to our aggregate

     output growth, we would have obtained a larger efficiency gain

     attributable to scale economies under the Auto Pact but a

     correspondingly smaller (probably negative) gain attributable to CSE

     (i.e. specialization), since the sum of the two (relative TFP

     growth) would remain unchanged.

28. After the oil crisis of 1973, the switch in consumer preferences

     towards small energy—efficient automobiles led to increased

     competitive pressures from European and Japanese producers. The

     Voluntary Restraints Agreements between Japan and Canada and the

     U.S. since 1981 have substantially reduced the competitive threat of

     Japanese imports.

29. We are not suggesting that the selective trade liberalization of the

     Auto Pact provided no significant benefits to Canada, but rather

     that a substantial decline in Canadian relative unit cost was not

     among the benefits. The elimination of tariffs for North American

     producers led to a very large increase in intra-industry trade
                             39

across the U.S.-Canada border as producers exploited intra-industry

cost advantages. In addition, Canada has been a clear winner in

terms of the distribution of production. We estimate that the Auto

Pact led to a 52% increase in Canadian production capacity by 1970

over what it otherwise would have been, although this advantage

declined to 24% by 1975 (Fuss and Waverman 1987). U.S. production

capacity was 4% less in 1970 than it would have been without the

Auto Pact. This disadvantage declined to 2% by 1975.
                                   40

                               REFERENCES




Baldwin, J. and P. Gorecki (1986), The Role of Scale in Canada—U.S.
     Productivity Differences, Background Study No. 5 for the Royal

     Commission on the Economic Union and Development Prospects for

     Canada, University of Toronto Press, Toronto, Canada.

Beigie, C. (1970), The Canada-U.S. Automotive Agreement: An Evaluation,

     Canadian-American Committee, Montreal, Canada.

Berndt, E. and M. Fuss (1986), "Productivity Measurement with Adjustments

     for Variations in Capacity Utilization and Other Forms of

     Temporary Equilibrium", Department of Economics, University of

     Toronto Working Paper No. 8602, forthcoming Journal of

     Econometrics.

Brander, J. (1981), "Intra-Industry Trade in Identical Commodities",

     Journal of International Economics, February, pp. 1-14.

Cox, D. and R. Harris (1985), "Trade Liberalization and Industrial

     Organization: Some Estimates for Canada", Journal of Political

     Economy, February, pp. 115—145.

Denny, M. and M. Fuss (1980), "Intertemporal and Interspatial

     Comparisons of Cost Efficiency and Productivity", Institute for

     Policy Analysis Working Paper No 8018, Dec., University of Toronto,

     Toronto.

Denny, M. and M. Fuss (1983), "A General Approach To Intertemporal and

     Interspatial Productivity Comparisons", Journal of Econometrics,

     December, pp. 315-330.
                                    41

Denny, M., M. Fuss, C. Everson and L. Waverman (1981a), "Estimating the

     Effects of Diffusion of Technological Innovations in

     Telecommunications: The Production Structure of Bell Canada",

     Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 14, pp. 24-43.

Denny, M,, M. Fuss and L. Waverman, (1981b), "The Measurement and

     Interpretation of Total Factor Productivity in Regulated Industries,

     with an Application to Canadian Telecommunications", Ch. 8 in: T.

     Cowing and R. Stevenson, eds., Productivity Measurement in Regulated

     Industries (Academic Press, New York) pp. 179—218.

Diewert, W.E. (1976), "Exact and Superlative Index Numbers", Journal

     of Econometrics 4, pp. 115—145.

Federal Task Force (1983), An Automotive Strategy for Canada, Report of

     the Task Force on the Canadian Motor Vehicle and Automotive Parts

     Industries, Supply and Services Canada, Ottawa, Canada, May.

Friedlaender, A., C. Winston and K. Wang (1983), "Costs, Technology and

     Productivity in the U.S. Automobile Industry", Bell Journal of

     Economics, Spring, pp. 1—20.

Fuss, M. and V. Gupta (1981), "A Cost Function Approach to the Estimation

     of Minimum Efficient Scale, Returns to Scale, and Suboptimal

     Capacity", European Economic Review, February, pp. 123-135.

Fuss, M. and L. Waverman (1985), "Productivity Growth in the Automobile

     Industry, 1970-1980: A Comparison of Canada, Japan and the United

     States", National Bureau of Economic Research Paper No. 1735,

     Cambridge, Mass., December; forthcoming in C. Hulten and

     J.R. Norsworthy (eds.) Productivity Growth in the United States and
                                   42

     Japan, N.B.E.R. Studies in Income and Wealth, University of Chicago

     Press, Chicago, Illinois.

Fuss, M. and L. Waverman (1986), "The Extent and Sources of Cost and

     Efficiency Differences Between U.S. and Japanese Automobile

     Producers", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper

     No. 1849, Cambridge, Mass., March.

Fuss, M. and L. Waverman (1987), Costs and Productivity in Automobile

     Production, Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

Gorecki, P. (1978), Economies of Scale and Efficient Plant Size in

     Canadian Manufacturing Industries, Bureau of Competition Policy,

     Consumer and Corporate Affairs, Ottawa, Canada.

Harris, R. (1984a), Trade, Industrial Policy and Canadian Manufacturing,

     Ontario Economic Council, Toronto, Canada.

Harris, R. (l984b), "Applied General Equilibrium Analysis of Small Open

     Economies with Scale Economies and Imperfect Competition", American

     Economic Review, December, pp. 1016-1032.

Helpman, E. (1981), "International Trade in the Presence of Product

     Differentiation, Economies of Scale and Monopolistic Competition",

     Journal of International Economies, August, pp. 305-340.

Helpman, E. and P. Krugman (1985), Market Structure and Foreign Trade,

     MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Johnson, H. (1963), "The Bladen Plan for Increased Protection of the

     Canadian Automobile Industry", Canadian Journal of Economics and

     Political Science, May, pp. 212-238.
                                   43

Jorgenson, D.W. and M. Nishimizu (1978), "U.S. and Japanese Economic

     Growth, 1952-74: An International Comparison", Economic Journal,

     88, pp. 707-726.

Kim, M. (1984), "The Beneficiaries of Trucking Regulation Revisited",

     Journal of Law and Economics, April, pp. 227—241.

Krugman, P. (1980), "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation and the

     Pattern of Trade", American Economic Review, September, pp. 950-959.

Markusen, J. (1981), "Trade and the Gains from Trade with Imperfect

     Competition", Journal of International Economics 11, pp. 531-51.

McFadden, D. (1978), "Cost, Revenue and Profit Functions", ch. 1.1 in

     M. Fuss and D. McFadden (eds.), Production Economics: A Dual

     Approach to Theory and Applications, North-Holland Publishing

     Company, Amsterdam.

Robidoux, B. and J. Lester (1986), "Econometric Estimates of Scale

     Economies in Canadian Manufacturing", Department of Finance, Ottawa,

     Canada, mimeo, April.

Sharpe, A. (1983), "A Comparative Analysis of the Canadian and American

    Productivity Slowdowns", paper presented at the annual meeting of

    the American Economics Association, December 28, San Francisco, Ca.

Spady, R. and A. Friedlaender (1978), "Hedonic Cost Functions for the

    Regulated Trucking Industry", Bell Journal of Economics,

    Spring, pp. 159—79.

Viner, J. (1952), "Cost Curves and Supply Curves", in AEA Readings in

    Price Theory, ed. by G.J. Stigler and K.E. Boulding, Homewood, Il.,

    Irwin.
                                  44

Wilton, D. (1976), An Econometric Analysis of the Canada-U.S. Automobile

    Agreement: The First Seven Years, Economic Council of Canada,

    Ottawa, Canada.

Wonnacott, R. and Wonnacott, P. (1967), Free Trade Between the United

    States and Canada: The Potential Economic Effects, Harvard

    University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
                        TABLE la


              Factor Own Price Elasticities
   (computed at the mean data point for each country)



Input                    United States             Canada

Capital                       -0.33                 -0.16
Materials                     -0.17                 -0.09
Labour                        -0.53                 -0.43




                        TABLE lb


       Elasticities of Substitution (Allen—Uzawa)
   (computed at the mean data point for each country)



Inputs                   United States             Canada

Capital-Materials              0.35                 0.17
Capital-Labour                 0.58                 0.22
Labour—Materials               0.67                 0.53
                             TABLE 2


    Cost-Output Elasticities, Scale Elasticities, Capacity
 Utilization Elasticities, Technical Change Elasticities, and
                  Product Mix Elasticities

        (computed at the mean data point for each country)




Elasticity                        United States         Canada



Cost—Output                             0.93            0.96

Scale                                   1.07             1.04

Cost-Capacity Utilization              0.82             0.79

Cost-Technical Change                  -0.24           -0.21

Cost-Product Mix                       0.02            -0.09
                                                                       TABLE 3


                                       Unit Production Cost Difference and Its Sources    -   Canada-United States




              Unit                                                       SOURCES OF DIFFERENCE (%)
           Production
 Time         Cost                                                    Cost                                                 Country
Period     Difference         Price of      Price of   Price of    Efficiency    Product         Scale      Capacity      Specific
                  (%)*         Labour        Capital   Materials   Difference     Mix          Economies   Utilization   Efficiency


1962-64           1.4           -6.0         -12.6       -2.8         26.9        0.1           21.1           2.2          2.2


1970-72           6.9           -4.7          -3.0      -2.8          19.0        0.4           12.1           0.7         5.7

1977—79          -2.9           —5.7          —3.4     —12.2          21.4        0.0             7.8          1.6         10.3


1979             -8.9           -6.2          -5.0     -14.9          20.2       -0.0             7.0          2.3         11.5


1980             -14.5          -7.2          -6.6     -12.6          13.0         -0.2          8.3          -3.1         10.5


*
    C3nada   —
                 1)   x 100
    u.s.
                                                                      TABLE 4


                                      Unit Production Cost Difference and Its Sources, Including Exchange Rate
                                          Fluctuations from Purchasing Power Parity - Canada-United States




                 Unit                                                   SOURCES OF DIFFERENCE (%)
                                                                             .

              Production
 Time            Cost                                                 Cost                                             Country      Exchange
Period        Difference         Price of   Price of   Price of    Efficiency    Product     Scale      Capacity      Specific        Rate
                   (%)*           Labour    Capital    Materials   Difference      Mix     Economies   Utilization   Efficiency   Fluctuation


1962-64              1.4           -4.6      -11.4        3.0         26.9         0.1       21.1          2.2           2.2        -8.3

1970-72              6.9           -4.7       -3.0       -2.7         19.0         0.4       12.1          0.7           5.7        -0.1


1977-79            —2.9            —5.5       —3.2      -11.2         21.4         0.0        7.8          1.6          10.3        —1.5



1979               -8.9            —5.7       -4.6      —12.7         20.2        -0.0        7.0          2.3          11.4        -3.5

1980               -14.5           -6.6       -6.0      -10.0         13.0        -0.2        8.3         -3.1          10.4        -4.2


*
    (Canada    -   1)      100
                                      TABLE 5



                    Output Price and Marginal Cost Differences




                    Output Price    Short-Run Marginal    Long—Run Marginal
Time Period          Difference*      Cost Difference*     Cost Difference*


1962-64                     4.8            -7.1                   2.6


1970-72                     6.0            4.4                   10.3


1977-79                 -1.4              -9.8                   —2.3


1979                    -3.8             -14.8                   -6.8


1980                    —2.4               2.8                   —4.9




*   Canada
     u.s.
             - 1)   X 100
                                    TABLE 6



          Canadian Relative Unit Cost Reductions Due to the Auto Pact
                   and Its Sources — Motor Vehicle Industry




                                         SOURCES OF REDUCTION

              Relative
              Production                                 Country
Time            Cost                  Scale              Specific
Period        Reduction             Economies           Efficiency
                    (%)*


1970-72             3 .1               2.0                  0.6

1977—79             1   .7             0.6                  0.8

1979                1   .4             0.3                  0.9

1980                1   .9             0.6                  0.9




* Canada
   ______    — 1)       x 100
                                TABLE 7



          Annual Growth Rates in the Automobile Industry (%)




                               TOTAL FACTOR          LABOUR
                   OUTPUT      PRODUCTIVITY       PRODUCTIVITY

            U.S.      CANADA   U.S.   CANADA      U.S.   CANADA

1966-72     2.8        12.8    1.0        1.5     3.0      8.7

1966-79     3.5         9.8    1.1        1.3     2.5      7.2
                                    TABLE 8



                               Labour Productivity
                            (Real Output/Hr. Worked)




                        Canada     U.S.       % U.S. Advantage*

        1966            25.4       32.7                 28.7

        1972            40.8       40.0                 -2.0

        1979            59.7       46.0                -23.0




*
             —
    Canada       1) X 100
                                TABLE 9

              Labour Productivity Growth in the Canadian
                  Automobile Industry and Its Sources




                                 % CONTRIBUTION DUE:


              Labour        Total Factor
Time       Productivity     Productivity             Factor
Period    Growth Rate (%)      Growth      Bias   Substitution

1966-72         8.7             17.8       55.8        26.4

1966-79         7.2             18.6       60.7        20.7
