                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  RATIONAL INATTENTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY

                                          James M. Sallee

                                       Working Paper 19545
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19545


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




The author would like to thank David Austin, Hunt Allcott, Lucas Davis, Ashley Langer, and seminar
participants at the University of Chicago/Resources for the Future Symposium and at the University
of California at Berkeley for helpful comments. The author also would like to thank Greg Sasso, Yi Sun
and Samantha Superstine for excellent research assistance, Roberts French for providing Environmental
Protection Agency five-cycle test data, Hunt Allcott and Ashley Langer for providing data on second
choice vehicles, and Ashley Langer for providing data used in simulation. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by James M. Sallee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency
James M. Sallee
NBER Working Paper No. 19545
October 2013
JEL No. D03,H23,Q48

                                              ABSTRACT

If time and effort are required to accurately ascertain the lifetime value of energy efficiency for a durable
good, consumers might rationally ignore energy efficiency. This paper argues that such inattention
may be rational in the market for automobiles and home appliances. To do so, it develops a heuristic
model of a consumer's decision problem when purchasing an energy consuming durable good in which
uncertainty about each good's energy efficiency can be resolved via costly effort. The model indicates
under what conditions the consumer will be less likely to undertake this effort. The empirical portion
of the paper argues that energy efficiency is often not pivotal to choice. This, along with a simulation
of the automobile market, suggests that returns to paying attention to energy may be modest, and analysis
of the information readily available to consumers suggests that the costs of being fully informed may
be substantial. The paper discusses the implications of rational inattention for public policy and for
empirical research on the energy paradox.


James M. Sallee
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sallee@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to elevate consideration of rational inattention in the study of energy
economics. The idea behind rational inattention is that when information is costly to acquire,
decision makers may sometimes choose to act upon incomplete information, rather than incurring
the cost to become perfectly informed. I argue in this paper that it will often be rational for
consumers to choose among energy-consuming durables, like automobiles or refrigerators, without
acquiring complete information about energy-efficiency.
     To explore this possibility, the paper first presents a simple model of a consumer making a
discrete choice among energy-consuming durables. The consumer is assumed to have beliefs about
the energy consumption of each alternative that are based on readily available information, and
therefore require minimal effort. The consumer recognizes that these beliefs may be incorrect,
and it is assumed that they can resolve any such uncertainty by exerting costly effort to acquire
additional information. The consumer must therefore decide whether to pay the requisite effort cost
and then make their choice with the benefit of full information, or whether they would rather make
their choice with the incomplete information that comes to them without cost. When consumers
act on incomplete information, they make choices equivalent to the choice they would make if they
ignored (were inattentive to) some component of fuel costs.
     The model draws intuitive conclusions. If the variance across alternatives in the unknown cost
of energy is large, then it is more likely that consumers will be attentive to efficiency. Conversely, if
the variation in the value of each product is determined primarily by attributes other than energy
efficiency, then energy efficiency is unlikely to be pivotal to choice and consumers will be less likely
to pay attention to it. Finally (and obviously), consumers will be less likely to pay attention when
the effort cost of doing so is high.
     The paper then proceeds to an empirical analysis, which takes this model as a guide and makes
the case that rational inattention is plausible in the market for automobiles and home appliances.
For these goods, the paper documents the fuel cost variation across alternatives and shows that
this variation, while substantial, is modest compared to variation in prices. To the extent that
prices proxy for variation in the value of all other attributes, these descriptive statistics suggest
that energy costs are unlikely to be pivotal in many cases and that consumers may therefore lose
little from being inattentive to them.
     For automobiles, the empirical analysis goes further by analyzing survey data on first and second
choice vehicles in order to quantify the fuel cost variation among the set of vehicles that consumers
actively consider, and by using the parameters from a discrete choice model to simulate the average
welfare loss that consumers would experience from choosing a vehicle with incomplete information
about fuel consumption. The simulation suggests average consumer loses are on the order of one to
three hundred dollars per vehicle when consumers make choices with incomplete information about
energy.
     The paper does not directly estimate the cost of learning about energy efficiency, but it does
argue that these costs are likely to be substantial and may plausibly exceed the one to three
hundred dollar benchmark from the simulation. Automobiles and some home appliances come
with government issued labels, which surely reduce the cost of learning about energy consumption.
The paper demonstrates that significant effort costs are required even when labels are available,
however, both because the labels are incomplete and sometimes biased, and because heterogeneity
in usage patterns implies that labels can resolve only a modest portion of consumer uncertainty.
     This framework, by necessity, concludes that inattention can only prevail when the welfare losses
from it are small. Nevertheless, small individual welfare losses can still aggregate into large losses
when viewed economy wide. For example, the $100 per vehicle loss from inattention estimated in


                                                   1
the simulation is modest compared to other factors related to the purchase of a new car, but even
so it amounts to $1.5 billion per year in the U.S. car market.
    One reason that rational inattention is of interest to energy economics is its bearing on unre-
solved questions regarding the energy paradox. The energy paradox, or the energy-efficiency gap,
is the hypothesis that market actors systematically fail to adopt energy efficiency improvements
that are privately beneficial. Suspicion that an energy paradox exists comes in large part from the
observation that many energy-saving technologies—like compact-fluorescent lightbulbs, improved
building insulation and energy-efficient home appliances—have low adoption rates despite being,
according to engineering estimates, cost-effective. Economists have tested for an energy paradox
using revealed preference data in a variety of ways. Key early contributions were Hausman (1979)
and Dubin and McFadden (1984), who analyzed cross-sectional data on home appliances to test
for excessively high implied discount rates. Recent advances that use more credible panel data
have been concentrated in the automobile sector, where several papers test whether new and used
car prices correlate with gasoline price changes in the amount predicted by a theory in which con-
sumers fully understand and value fuel economy (Allcott and Wozny Forthcoming; Busse, Knittel,
and Zettelmeyer 2013; Sallee, West, and Fan 2009).
    Despite a flurry of studies and significant improvements in methodology, the question of whether
or not a paradox exists is best characterized as unsettled. Greene (2011) reviews 25 studies that
test for an energy paradox in the automobile market and finds that half of them indicate that
consumers undervalue fuel economy. Allcott and Greenstone (2012) review the wider literature on
the energy efficiency gap and conclude that there is little evidence of a widespread paradox, but
that more and better research is still needed because “this body of evidence frequently does not
meet modern standards of credibility.”
    Rational inattention poses a key challenge to this empirical literature. Revealed preference anal-
ysis necessarily evaluates consumer choice among the products that are on offer in the marketplace.
It is generally assumed that if consumers fully value energy efficiency among current products,
then firms will bring to market all cost-effective innovations. Suppose, however, that consumers
are attentive to some types of innovations and not others. In equilibrium, firms will bring to mar-
ket only those innovations that garner attention, and consumers may choose rationally among the
products on offer. To the econometrician, consumers will appear to fully value energy efficiency,
but a paradox nevertheless exists because cost-effective innovations that do not garner attention are
not brought to market. For example, rational inattention implies that consumers may rationally
value energy efficiency across broad categories (such as vehicle class), but they may ignore small
innovations (such as more efficient transmission types). Some studies, such as Busse, Knittel, and
Zettelmeyer (2013), test for an energy paradox by comparing prices across broad categories. Such
tests are ill equipped to detect rational inattention.
    Whether or not an energy paradox exists is important for public policy. If a paradox does exist,
it will influence the optimal design of public policies aimed at correcting energy-related externalities.
For example, traditional economic analysis consistently finds that a gasoline tax is a superior way
to reduce gasoline consumption than fuel economy standards and that fuel economy standards
often fail cost-benefit analyses (see Austin and Dinan (2005) for a key example and Anderson,
Parry, Sallee, and Fischer (2011) for a review of the literature). When performing their regulatory
impact analyses, however, U.S. federal agencies assume a substantial energy paradox, which implies
large private gains to consumers that are pivotal in allowing standards to pass the cost-benefit
test (NHTSA 2010). More generally, an emerging literature on policy design has shown that the
optimal externality-correcting policies are indeed altered by the existence of a paradox (Allcott,
Mullainathan, and Taubinsky Forthcoming; Fischer, Harrington, and Parry 2007; Heutel 2011).
    The policy implications of an energy paradox that is due to rational inattention, however,

                                                   2
may be distinct in several ways from a paradox due to the more commonly discussed sources of
present bias (myopia) or biased beliefs. If effort costs of attention represent real welfare losses, then
forcing consumers to pay attention is not necessarily welfare improving. Instead, policy might focus
on lowering the barriers to information processing (such as improving labels) or determining the
optimal coarseness of information presented to consumers. For example, inattention might justify
the use of coarse information or “notches”, such as whether or not a product qualifies for an Energy
Star label, alongside, or even in place of, fine-grained information. These possibilities are discussed
further at the end of the paper.
    This paper relates to a large literature on the energy paradox, much of which is cited above. It
also relates to the broader literature on the economics of information begun by Stigler (1961), as
well as to the recent theoretical literature on inattention, such as Gabaix (2013). The connection
between this paper and those, as well as to the few papers that directly connect inattention to energy
issues—including Howarth and Andersson (1993) and Houde (2012)—are described in greater detail
after the model has been presented.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes a heuristic model of a
consumer choosing among alternatives in a class of durable goods, about which there is uncertainty
regarding energy efficiency. Section 3 considers empirical evidence relevant from the automobile
market. Section 4 does the same for household appliances. Both suggest that there is considerable
scope for rational inattention, given the relative variance in prices, the barriers to ascertaining true
energy efficiency, and the variance in energy costs across similar models. Section 5 discusses the
implications of rational inattention for policy design, and 6 concludes.


2    Model
This paper is about a consumer who must make a discrete choice among durable goods, but must
also decide whether or not it is worth paying a cost to acquire additional information before making
that choice. Before proceeding to the mathematical characterization of the problem, it is useful to
describe it in more general terms.
     Take the example of a consumer purchasing an automobile. The automobile’s color, size, body
type, passenger capacity, brand and sticker price are all readily apparent to a shopper. Other
features, such as the interior space, cargo volume and comfort can be determined relatively easily
upon inspection. The automobile’s drivability, turning radius, acceleration and performance can
be, at least in good part, determined by a test drive. All of these features can be felt or experienced
by the consumer, and a consumer can intuitively determine how much they are willing to pay for
each feature in much the same way that they can determine their willingness to pay for produce at
a grocery store. In contrast, the consumer has no way of seeing or experiencing the automobile’s
lifetime cost of refueling, and consequently he or she may struggle to value fuel economy.
     Consumers do have some information related to fuel costs. Most consumers likely understand
that bigger, heavier, more powerful cars have worse fuel economy. Mandatory labels provide the
government sanctioned city and highway fuel economy ratings of every car. Thus, with relative ease,
consumers can form some belief regarding the vehicle’s fuel economy and its consequent impact on
the cost of ownership, but this expectation will come with uncertainty. Uncertainty exists both
because the true fuel economy may deviate from its expected value (this is discussed in detail
below) and because, for valuation, fuel economy must be translated into lifetime operating costs.
Thus, after a quick inspection of a car, the consumer may form a belief about fuel costs, but they
will also have uncertainty regarding that belief. The consumer can choose a car given this easily
formulated belief, or the consumer can seek additional information before making a selection.


                                                   3
     What information might they obtain? The value of an automobile to a consumer should reflect
its lifetime operating costs, which is often written in the following form:
                                                                               T
                                                                               X          Pgt mt
                 Present-discounted value of lifetime operating costs =              δt          ,
                                                                                          mpgt
                                                                               t=0

where t indexes time period with t = 0 being today, T is the lifespan of the vehicle, δ is the discount
factor, Pgt is the price of gasoline per gallon, mt is the number of miles driven, and mpgt is the
vehicle’s fuel economy.
     Ideally consumers would know this full fuel cost equation and take it under consideration when
choosing a car, but they face two challenges in doing so. First, the present-discounted calculation
is itself cognitively difficult. Second, none of the components of the calculation are immediately
available to the consumer. A vehicle’s life expectancy is uncertain. Most consumers do not know
how much they drive today, and will necessarily be uncertain about their driving in the future.
Consumers may know the price of gasoline today, but they will be uncertain about future prices.
They may or may not have a solid grasp on the appropriate discount rate for the calculation.
Driving style and conditions will affect the fuel economy that they obtain when driving a car, and
fuel economy degrades over the life of a vehicle. Thus, even if label fuel economy is exactly right
for the average driver, uncertainty remains. (The size of this uncertainty is estimated below.)
     How might consumers gain an estimate of fuel costs that is more accurate than their quick
impression? Firstly, consumers can attempt to perform the present-discounted calculation, rather
than relying on an intuitive guess. If they do not know how to do the calculation, they could
seek help. Secondly, consumers could research the unknowns. They could research the reported
fuel economy of a particular model to see if it deviates from the label. They could keep track of
their own driving behavior more closely to determine their mileage. To calibrate the impact of their
driving styles and patterns, they could try to figure out how their experienced fuel economy deviates
from the label rating for their current vehicle, or attempt to separate out their city versus highway
mileage and recalculate costs based on separate ratings. All of these actions would improve the
information available for their decision, but such actions require time and effort, which represent real
costs. And these costs are real because consumers do not already know how to do this calculation;
qualitative interviews of new car buyers show that consumers cannot readily articulate any of the
building blocks necessary for this calculation, save the current price of gasoline (Turrentine and
Kurani 2007).
     Under what conditions will a rational consumer select a vehicle without learning additional
details about fuel consumption? What are the consequences for the automobile market if they do?
The next section develops a heuristic mathematical model to answer these questions.

2.1    Mathematical model
To gain insight into the conditions that determine when inattention might be rational, this section
describes a simple model of a consumer making a discrete choice who faces a cost to learn the exact
energy consumption of each product. A risk-neutral consumer i is to choose a durable j out of a
set of durables J . The consumer will choose exactly one model.
    The choice problem analyzed is standard, except that consumers are assumed to have imperfect
information about each product’s true fuel cost c∗j . Consumers instead observe c̄j , where c∗j = c̄j +cj ,
so that cj is an unobserved random error. The focus of the analysis here is on uncertainty rather
than biased beliefs, so it is natural to assume that c̄j is an unbiased estimate of the truth (E[c̄j ] = c∗j ).
The belief c̄j should be interpreted as the best guess regarding fuel costs for product j given all of


                                                      4
the easily ascertained information about the product, including label information and all attributes
that enter the utility function directly.1 The consumer is assumed to know the distribution of cj
but not its value. This leads to the following formulation for the utility of consumer i over good j:
                                                   0
                                         Uij = β Xj − pj − (c̄j + cj ) + εij                                           (1)
                                             ≡ Vj − cj + εij ≡ Wij − cj ,                                              (2)

where Uij is utility, Xj is a set of observed attributes, pj is the price of the vehicle, and εij is a
random error term. Vj is defined as the representative utility of good j, without the random error
component of energy costs, and Wij is the idiosyncratic valuation of vehicle j absent the uncertain
cost component.2 Use of V and W will simplify notation later. All consumers are assumed to have a
common valuation of attributes, prices and costs—only εij varies across individuals. Heterogeneity
in these dimensions could be allowed in the standard way without changing the analysis below, but
at the cost of notational complexity.
    Before choosing a product, the consumer first decides whether or not to exert effort, defined as
e ∈ {0, 1}. If they exert effort (e = 1), then the vector cj is revealed but they pay an effort cost s.
If they choose not to exert effort (e = 0), then no cost is borne but they must choose a product j
without knowing the fuel cost errors cj . From the consumer’s point of view, cj is an unknown error
term. Exerting effort reveals these error terms.
    If the consumer exerts effort and gains full information, then they will simply choose the product
with the highest utility (choose j if and only if Uij ≥ Uik ∀ k 6= j ∈ J ). Under the assumption
that c̄j are unbiased estimates of the truth, the consumer will choose the product with the highest
Wij if they choose not to acquire full information (choose j if and only if Wij ≥ Wik ∀ k 6= j ∈ J ).
Thus, a consumer will exert effort and learn true costs if and only if the expected increase in utility
from making a fully informed choice exceeds the cost s. It is equivalent to say that the consumer
will exert effort if and only if the expected welfare loss from making the choice with incomplete
information is larger than the costs of search. This latter formulation can be written as, consumer
i will choose e = 1 if and only if:

                                          E[max Uij ] − max E[Wij ] ≥ s.                                               (3)
                                               j              j

    When will consumers choose rational inattention? The answer is easiest to characterize under
some assumption about the distribution of the error term. The solution is particularly elegant
under the assumption that cj is a type-I extreme value random variable with zero mean and scale
parameter σ (which implies a variance of π 2 /(6σ 2 )).3 This makes the problem directly analogous
to a standard logit, where now the uninformed consumer occupies the econometrician’s standard
position, in that they can calculate choice probabilities but do not know the error terms. Formulas
familiar from the logit problem carry over, and expression 3, after rearrangement, can be rewritten
   1
      In this section, I assume that all attributes in Xj are included in the forecast because otherwise it is illogical to
assume that the error terms are independent of utility, and independence facilitates exposition. Sections 2.3 and 2.4
explore alternative structures that relax this assumption.
    2
      Recall that c∗j is the present-discounted lifetime fuel cost of the vehicle. The absence of a coefficient in front of
pj and c̄j + cj in the utility function implies full valuation—the consumer trades-off current price and lifetime fuel
costs one for one. In that sense, the model assumes rationality of the type usually analyzed in the energy paradox
literature, which typically tests for an equal weight of fuel costs and prices on choice. Any mistakes made in the
model result from the rational decision to make the durable choice with less than full information—that is, from
rational inattention.
    3
      An earlier version of this paper assumed a normal distribution. All of the qualitative implications for that case
are identical to those described here. Relaxation of the independence assumption is discussed below in section 2.4.



                                                            5
as, the consumer will choose e = 1 if and only if:
                                                                                         !
                                                                                  σWij
                                                                        P
                                                         1                  j∈J e
                                  Expected Welfare Loss = ln                                 > s.                   (4)
                                                         σ                   eσWik

This decision rule has an intuitive interpretation, and it makes the important results of the model
immediately apparent. The term inside of the parentheses is one over the probability that the
consumer will choose good k under full information.4 Choice k is the product that the consumer
will choose when they are imperfectly informed. When that probability is high, the consumer is less
likely to make a mistake when inattentive, and thus effort becomes less likely. As the probability
rises that good k is the correct choice, the inverse of that probability will fall; its log will fall; and
effort becomes less likely. The logged term approaches zero as the probability that k is the correct
choice goes to one, which makes effort less beneficial.
    Ceteris paribus, increasing Wik , the value of the perceived top choice k, will raise the probability
product k is the correct choice. If choice k is far better than the next best alternative given the
information that is available for free, then effort will have little benefit because it is very unlikely
that revelations about cj will change the consumer’s choice. In contrast, if choice k is similar in
observable attributes to other choices (Wik is close to other Wij ), then the consumer is likely to
change his or her mind after observing cj . More generally, as products become “more different,”
fewer consumers will exert effort.
    As uncertainty about fuel costs rises, the expected welfare loss from inattention will rise and
effort will become more likely. Recall that the variance of the unknown component cj is inversely
related to the scale parameter σ. As σ rises, the variance of uncertainty falls and the expected
welfare loss falls. It is straightforward to show this by differentiating expression 4.5 An increase in
the variance of cj increases the returns to acquiring information because the greater is the variance
in unknown energy costs, the more likely the consumer is to change his or her mind about which
product is optimal once information is revealed, and, conditional on changing from choice k to
some other product, the larger will be the average utility gain. When the variance of cj is high, the
uninformed consumer will make more, and bigger, mistakes. This increases the return to effort.
    Expression 4 also shows clearly (and obviously) that effort is less likely as the cost of effort
rises. When s gets bigger, the inequality will be harder to satisfy. Note also that the effort cost
bounds the expected welfare losses of inattention. When an energy paradox is due to inattention,
the losses from it on average cannot exceed the cost of paying attention. This framework shows
that this welfare loss can be written in terms of a standard logit model, which is a fact that may
aid future empirical work.
    These intuitive results constitute the main guidance for empirical work provided by the model.
Consumers are more likely to be rationally inattentive if (a) effort costs are high, (b) the variance
of unknown energy costs are low, and (c) products are very different, so that consumers are far
from indifferent between their first choice and its alternatives. This last point implies either that
the attributes of goods are quite different or that the random utility component of preferences
is large. The empirical portion of the paper explores these different parameters for the cases of
automobiles and home appliances. Before proceeding to the empirical analysis, however, the next
several subsections describe the model’s implications for producer behavior, how the model could
   4
     The term in parentheses is precisely the inverse of the probability that k is chosen in a standard logit model, for
any choice k.
   5
     This derivative is more easily shown after multiplying both sides by σ, exponentiating and grouping terms
on one side of the inequality, which must be less than zero if e = 1. Then, the derivative with respect to σ is
        P              σWij
            (Wik −Wij )e
eσWik          P σWij 2       + se−σs . Because Wik ≥ Wij , both terms are positive.
              ( e      )



                                                               6
be recast as a model about heterogeneity or noisy signals, the model’s implications for empirical
research, and its relation to existing work.

2.2    Inattention and producer behavior
What does rational inattention imply for firm behavior? Suppose that the firm that produces j
(call it firm j) can implement an innovation that marginally lowers fuel costs cj at a production
cost below the informed consumer’s willingness to pay. Will it adopt this improvement and increase
price pj to recoup the costs? Inattentive consumers will recognize only the price increase pj , but
not the commensurate reduction in fuel costs cj . Thus, an innovation that improves the true value
of the product will be perceived as a change that lowers value for inattentive consumers. This may
cause producers to fail to bring cost-efficient innovations to market. This intuition holds, however,
only in certain cases; if the marginal consumer is attentive, there can be rational inattention among
other consumers without causing any market inefficiencies.
     To see why, consider the choice of a consumer in the two good case, where there are only
products j and k. Define the difference in idiosyncratic taste terms as ∆ε ≡ εij − εik . For a given
value of Vj and Vk , when ∆ε is large enough, consumer i will choose good j without exerting effort.
Denote by θ∗ this cutoff value of ∆ε.6 Conversely, if ∆ε is smaller than −θ∗ , then consumer i will
choose good k without exerting effort.
     The true cost difference cj −ck determines who the marginal consumer is under full information;
it is the consumer with ∆εi = cj − ck . If that marginal consumer is attentive, then no inefficiency
need arise. This happens when cj − ck is between −θ∗ and θ∗ . It is the marginal consumer who
would be influenced by the firm’s decision to improve fuel economy and raise price, so if they are
fully informed and firms know that, there is no impetus for underprovision of a marginal innovation.
     This is illustrated in Figure 1, which plots the distribution of ε for the case where Vj = Vk .7 In
the figure, individuals with ∆εi < −θ∗ will choose model k without effort; those with ∆εi > θ∗ will
choose model j without effort; and those in the middle with exert effort. Of those who exert effort,
some will choose j and some k after learning true costs, which is shown to be point A = cj − ck .
In this example, A lies between −θ∗ and θ∗ , which means that marginal consumers search. In such
a situation, there will be no “mistakes”. Consumers who prefer j, accounting for energy costs,
will end up purchasing j. If the firm knows where the marginal consumer lies, both firms j and
k recognize that marginal improvements (such that cj falls by more than pj rises) will increase
demand, and hence there is no reason for underprovision.
     If, however, the true realization of cj and ck implies that the marginal consumer under full
information is rationally inattentive in equilibrium, then underprovision may occur. In Figure 1,
this would be true if cj − ck were at point B. Given these cost realizations, some of the consumers
who choose to purchase k without searching would in fact prefer to have model j. The demand for
model k is equal to the probability that ∆ε < θ∗ . Raising price pk will shift −θ∗ , lowering demand
for k. But, lowering ck will create no offsetting increase in demand because only consumers who
exert effort recognize the change in ck , but none of those consumers are marginal—they will choose
j even if there is a marginal improvement in k. Similarly, firm j would not make the innovation
because raising pj will shift −θ∗ , lowering demand for j. But, the corresponding drop in cj will
again only be recognized by consumers who purchase j, with or without a marginal improvement.
Thus, neither firm would have the proper incentive to adopt a cost-efficient innovation.
   6
     Specifically, i will choose j and e = 0 iff Vj − Vk + ∆ε > − ln(eσs − 1)/σ ≡ θ∗ . Note that, when some consumers
search in equilibrium, ln(eσs − 1) < 0 so θ∗ > 0.
   7
     If Vj 6= Vk , then the distribution will simply be shifted to the left or right, holding constant the values of θ.




                                                          7
                                Figure 1: Effort and demand across consumer types
                    (a) No mistakes made                                         (b) Some mistakes made

                  Choose k            Choose j                                Incorrectly choose k   Choose j
                  with effort         with effort                                without effort      with effort

                                                                      Correctly
                                                 Choose j             choose k                                  Choose j
        Choose k                                                    without effort                            without effort
                                               without effort
       without effort


                    -Θ* A                   Θ*           ∆ℇ                       B -Θ*                    Θ*           ∆ℇ



Figure shows the distribution of effort and demand across the ∆ε distribution, assuming that Vj = Vk for the two
good case. The actual realization of cj − ck determines the choice cutoff for fully informed consumers. A and B in
the diagrams denote this cutoff for two different realizations of cj − ck .




     This model is not complete, as it has not specified fully the form of competition among firms
or the consistency of consumer beliefs with that strategy. Nevertheless, in an equilibrium with
inattentive marginal consumers, firms will not be able to signal higher energy efficiency simply by
raising price, as that would give all firms an incentive to inflate prices, so it cannot be a signal of
quality in equilibrium, holding constant all other attributes. Moreover, for products with many
attributes about which consumers have uncertainty, consumers will not readily know whether a
higher price implies greater efficiency or an improvement in some other characteristic.
     The model is also not complete in that it does not consider directly the supply of information
to consumers. If there are cost-effective ways of giving consumers greater information about energy
efficiency, producers (or other third-party actors) might choose to provide information that goes
beyond the government’s mandatory labels or the information that consumer choose to collect. It
is intuitive to expect firms to provide additional information that limits the prospect for rational
inattention, but as I discuss in section , this may not be feasible in some cases, especially when
uncertainty stems from idiosyncrasies of consumers. In addition, there are legal restrictions on
claims that producers can make regarding information in many markets—automakers, for example,
are not allowed to advertise a fuel economy that exceeds that determined by the federal test.
Finally, Gabaix and Laibson (2006) show that, counter to basic economic intuition, competitive
forces may not force “shrouded attributes” (like unknown energy efficiency) to be revealed honestly
by sellers, but rather may cause firms to intentionally obscure consumer information.

2.3     Alternative interpretations of the model
The model was cast as one in which the consumer has unbiased information about the true energy
consumption of the product. This could easily be recast as a model in which the consumer has
a prior belief about the product’s energy consumption (formed as a function of the product’s
attributes perhaps) and they receive a noisy signal about energy consumption. Then, the belief c̄j
that appears in the model is the mean of the posterior distribution and the variance of cj is the
variance of the posterior distribution.8
   8
   In particular, if cj is assumed to have a normal distribution (as opposed to a type-I extreme value) then the
mapping is very natural. Let the prior p ∼ N (p̄, ρ2 ) and the signal d ∼ N (0, δ 2 ). Then the posterior belief c̄ is also


                                                                8
    The model can also be recast as a model about heterogeneity. One reason that consumers may
have uncertainty about fuel consumption is that their own fuel consumption may differ from that of
the average consumer. Specifically, suppose that consumers know with certainty the true fuel costs
of each product for the average consumer c̄j (such as from a government label). But, consumers
differ in utilitization, so their own fuel costs are scaled functions of this mean, γi∗ c̄j . In the case
of automobiles, an example would be if consumer i drives γi∗ m̄ miles, where m̄ is the mean miles
driven, their fuel costs will be γi∗ c¯j . If consumers are certain of c̄j , but uncertain about γi∗ , then
the model is very similar, and utility can be written as:
                                          0
                                 Uij = β Xj − pj − (γi + ui )c̄j + εij ≡ Yij − ui c̄j .                                      (5)

The assumption parallel to the model above would be to assume that they have an unbiased belief
about their heterogeneity γi , such that γi∗ = γi + ui and E[γi ] = γi∗ . This is exactly the same as
the original setup in equation 1, except that the error term cj from the original problem is now
ui c̄j . Now, errors across products cannot be independent from each other for consumer i, because
they are the product of each good’s average fuel consumption and the consumer’s error, which
is common across products. This dependence in the error structure makes the mathematics less
elegant, but the main intuition goes through.
      To see this, consider the case of consumer i choosing between only two goods j and k. Let k
be the good with the higher utility given incomplete information (Yik > Yij ). Then, the expected
payoff to choosing k without exerting effort is
                                         Z ∞
                                             (Yik − ui c̄k )dF (ui ),                             (6)
                                                  −∞

where F (·) is the distribution function of ui . Define u∗i as the value at which the consumer is
indifferent between goods j and k, that is, u∗i = (Yik − Yij )/(c̄k − c̄j ).9 Suppose that c̄k > c̄j
(analogous math follows for the opposite case). Then, under full information the consumer will
choose k so long as ui < u∗i , but will otherwise choose j. In this case, the expected payoff under
full information is:
                       Z u∗                            Z ∞
                           i
                             (Yik − ui c̄k )dF (ui ) +     (Yij − ui c̄j )dF (ui ) − s.         (7)
                               −∞                                  u∗i

Taking the difference between equations 6 and 7 and rearranging yields the following condition.
Consumer i will exert effort if and only if:
                       Z ∞
                            ui (c̄k − c̄j )dF (ui ) > (1 − F (u∗i ))(Yik − Yij ) + s.       (8)
                                u∗i

The left-hand side of expression 8 is the expected gain from switching to product j, conditional
on wanting to do so under full information. The right-hand side is the probability that the con-
sumer chooses k even under full information times the difference in utility between k and j under
incomplete information, plus the cost of effort.
normally distributed, c̄ ∼ N (p̄ + (d − p̄) ∗ ρ2 /(ρ2 + δ 2 ), (ρ2 δ 2 )/(ρ2 + δ 2 )). If the posterior errors are type-I extreme
value, then a different prior distribution would be required for the noisy signal interpretation to map perfectly into
the model with the parametric assumptions emphasized above.
   9
     Note that it makes sense to impose a restriction on the support of u∗i so that total fuel consumption cannot be
negative. With this assumption imposed, there will be values of Yik , Yij , c̄j and c̄k for which no realization of ui could
cause the consumer to change their mind. In such cases, the consumer will obviously not exert effort.


                                                               9
     Straightforward analysis of equation 8 shows that the comparative statics have the same signs
as those in the baseline model. As s rises, the probability of effort falls. As Yik , the desirability of
product k relative to j, rises, the probability of effort falls. And, if ui has a normal distribution,
then an increase in variance will raise the probability of effort because it will raise the truncated
mean of ui above u∗i .10 Thus, the basic insights of the model apply when the source of uncertainty
is individual heterogeneity. This is important because uncertainty from this source is especially
difficult for policy makers or third parties to resolve, as detailed in section 3.4.2.

2.4    Alternative belief structures
The derivation above assumed that the consumer forms an unbiased belief, c̄j , which takes into
account the correlation between fuel consumption and all other attributes that enter the utility
function, Xj . If beliefs are biased or they do not take all attributes into account, then the error
terms cj will not be independent across products.
    For many products, an estimate of energy efficiency that takes all other attributes into account
will be quite accurate. For example, as shown in section 3.3, a limited number of automobile
attributes account for over 80% of the variation in fuel economy across the new car market. It
makes sense to suppose that many consumers will not have such a complete belief system. Instead,
they may form a belief c̄j taking into account a limited set of product attributes. Less sophisticated
belief formation will necessarily raise the variance of the unknown component of fuel costs, but the
effect of this increased variance on rational inattention will be mitigated by the degree to which
consumers are choosing between alternatives with similar attributes because those products will
have correlated errors.
    To see this, consider the simplest case where a product has only a single attribute Xj , which
determines utility and is correlated with fuel consumption. Specifically, let the true fuel consump-
tion of product j be c∗j = αXj + cj , where cj is mean zero and independent of Xj . Then, the
unbiased belief regarding fuel consumption that takes Xj into account would be c̄j = αXj . The
belief of a consumer who ignored the attribute Xj of each model, but was nonetheless unbiased for
the entire set of vehicles would be ĉj = αX̄, where X̄ is the mean of the attribute among the set
of alternatives.
    In this case, the true utility of good j is:

                                      Uij = βXj − pj − (αXj + cj ) + εij ,

whereas the perceived utility is:

                                βXj − pj − ĉj + εij = βXj − pj − αX̄ + εij .

The difference between true utility and perceived utility is then α(Xj − X̄) + cj , whereas this
difference is simply cj when the belief accurately takes Xj into account. The misperception about
the value of good k will likewise be α(Xk − X̄) + ck , and the difference in errors across j and k is
therefore α(Xj − Xk ) + (cj − ck ). Thus, if a consumer’s first and second choice products have very
similar (or identical) values of X, then ignoring the role of X in determining fuel costs will have a
small (or zero) effect on the consumer’s rank ordering of the goods, which is all that matters for
choice. That is, as β gets larger compared to α, failing to account for Xj in fuel cost beliefs will
have less impact on choice.
  10
     More generally, any transformation that increases the truncated mean of ui above u∗i will have this effect, which
will be true of a broad class of variance increasing transformations.



                                                         10
    For example, suppose that a consumer has a strong preference for large vehicles, but they ignore
the role of weight in determining their beliefs about fuel consumption. They will underestimate
the fuel costs of large vehicles, but their mistakes will be similar across vehicles of similar sizes,
so their rank ordering among large vehicles may not change very much. Such misinformation may
raise the effort cost of becoming informed without necessarily raising the benefits of information.

2.5   Implications for empirical research
Rational inattention has three important implications for empirical research on the energy paradox.
First, it is possible for consumers to make on average rational choices given the products available
in the market, and yet an energy paradox exists because firms decline to make cost-effective in-
novations when the marginal consumer is inattentive. If firms only bring innovations to market
when they are likely to garner attention, then the natural outcome will be that consumers will do
a reasonably good job of choosing among products that actually exist, but a paradox (and hence
social inefficiency) still exists.
    By necessity, all revealed-preference empirical work on this topic examines how consumers
choose among the products actually in the marketplace. This is true for research on appliances,
as in Hausman (1979) or Dubin and McFadden (1984), and automobiles, as in Allcott and Wozny
(Forthcoming), Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013), Goldberg (1998), Kilian and Sims (2006),
Sallee, West, and Fan (2009), and Sawhill (2008). The idea in this literature is to test how consumers
trade-off fuel costs and up-front purchase prices, among available products. This approach will
detect an energy paradox that is due to myopia or systematic mis-valuation, but it might not
detect a paradox due to inattention.
    Much of the consternation regarding the energy paradox owes to a dissonance between “bottom
up” engineering estimates and these types of revealed preference tests. Engineering studies tend to
conclude that there are a host of innovations that appear to be cost effective that have not been
brought to market. Often these innovations are small in nature. For example, in the automobile
market, NRC (2011) concludes that the cost-effective technology improvements that appear to pay
for themselves but are left undone are small features that are not easily visible to the consumer,
like the use of low-friction lubricants, engine friction reduction, and variable valve timing. In
contrast, visible changes like the deployment of advanced diesel engines, hybrid technologies or
even turbocharging are far less cost-effective. This is typical of engineering cost studies, which
generally find that a host of small cost-effective features are left undone by the market (see also
NRC (2002) and NHTSA (2010)).
    The tension in the literature has been to square analyses of this type with credible revealed
preference studies, like Allcott and Wozny (Forthcoming) and Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer
(2013), which find that consumers fully (or nearly fully) value fuel economy. To the extent that
engineering estimates point to cost-plus innovations that are likely to be invisible to the inattentive
consumer, rational inattention can potentially reconcile these two sets of facts.
    A second, closely related, lesson for empirical research is that the level of the comparison matters
when there is rational inattention. That is, under rational inattention, consumers may correctly
recognize and properly value fuel cost differences across broad product categories, but they may
not value small differences correctly. In the automobile market, this might mean that consumers
correctly value the fuel cost differences across SUVs and compact cars, but they do not understand
the differences in fuel costs across two small compact cars. If true, then empirical work that focuses
on broad category differences will be less likely to find evidence of an energy paradox.
    This is relevant for interpreting recent work in the automobile sector. Busse, Knittel, and
Zettelmeyer (2013), for example, relates variation in gasoline prices to variation in average used


                                                  11
car prices across fuel economy quartiles. That is, they measure how a change in gasoline prices
affects the relative price of the 25% of vehicles with the worst fuel economy relative to the 25%
of vehicles with the best fuel economy. They conclude that price variation is consistent with full
valuation, which is interpreted as evidence against an energy paradox. Their results do not rule
out a paradox due to inattention, however, so long as consumers can sort vehicles into quartiles
when forming their low-cost beliefs c̄j .
    Third, in the presence of rational inattention, empirical studies that use actual fuel consumption
in choice models are biased by measurement error. Rationally inattentive consumers use c̄j to make
choices, but the econometrician typically uses c∗j . Econometric estimates will thus be biased by
mismeasurement. When the classical measurement error model holds, the bias will attenuate the
coefficient on fuel costs, which drives the estimate towards zero. This coefficient is typically the
coefficient analyzed in order to test for the presence of an energy paradox.
    Bias need not follow the classical measurement error model in the context of discrete choice
models, however. Such mismeasurement will still likely bias coefficients, as evidenced by the anal-
ogy between this problem and the one analyzed by Bento, Li, and Roth (2012), who show that
heterogeneity in the valuation of fuel economy leads to bias in discrete choice models. Their sim-
ulations suggest that such bias will be downwards and could easily be of sufficient magnitude to
explain some of the findings in the literature of undervaluation. Rational inattention could have a
similar effect on coefficient estimates.

2.6   Relationship to existing literature
The model developed here relates to a growing literature on inattention, as well as to an older
tradition on search decisions. The model has roots in the optimal search literature begun by Stigler
(1961), in that information is costly and the consumer must decide how much information is worth
obtaining before making a purchase. It is also closely related to recent theories of inattention,
including Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2013), Gabaix (2013), and Gabaix and Laibson (2005).
The model of Gabaix (2013) is particularly relevant. That model is a much more general statement
of the consumer choice problem, where a consumer decides how much to buy of many different
goods. Gabaix (2013) develops a sparsity-based decision rule in which consumers have a prior over
the price of each good and they know the price variation. Then, they decide how much costly
attention to allocate towards learning the price of each good with precision. The fundamental
insight is that, in this setting, consumers will pay more attention to goods that have more price
variation (and which they buy more of). This result is similar to the result obtained here regarding
the importance of variance in garnering attention.
    The inattention model in this paper differs from those discussed above by focusing on a discrete
choice problem. In that regard the model is similar to that of Matejka and McKay (2013), which
explores how uncertainty in a discrete choice model can rationalize the logit framework. Finally,
a strain of research in macroeconomics uses models of costly information acquisition and rational
inattention to solve dynamic consumption problems (Reis (2006) and Sims (2003) are key examples).
    In the literature on energy efficiency, existing research that is more closely related to this paper
includes Greene (2011), which estimates an energy gap arising from incomplete information and
loss aversion in automobile fuel economy but does not focus on rational inattention. Howarth and
Andersson (1993) discuss the demand for energy efficiency when information acquisition requires an
effort cost. Their model does not develop a discrete choice model, nor does it allow heterogeneity
in the preference for different models, so the overlap in insights with this paper are modest.
    The work most similar in spirit to this paper is a working paper, Houde (2012). Houde (2012)
presents a model of costly search for information about energy efficiency in a consumer’s discrete


                                                  12
choice among refrigerators. The model in that paper has some technical differences from the
one presented here, but it captures many of the same insights. Houde (2012) then estimates the
model using data on refrigerators and concludes that a substantial fraction of consumers choose
not to search in equilibrium and subsequently choose a refrigerator as if they are indifferent to,
or ignorant of, energy efficiency. That paper and this one are complementary: whereas this paper
explores why inattention may be rational for several types of goods, but does not estimate a demand
model, Houde (2012) estimates a structural demand model for a single good, but does not delve
empirically into why inattention might be rational.


3     Automobile energy costs
The next two sections use the model as a guide for assessing the plausibility of rational inattention
in the marketplace. I begin by considering automobiles here, and then discuss home appliances
in section 4. The theoretical framework tells us that rational inattention is more likely when the
variance of the unknown component of fuel costs cj is small. But in the absence of data on how
consumers form beliefs, what I do below (in section 3.1) is document the variation in fuel costs
across all cars and within vehicle class, which I argue gives a conservative estimate of how much
variation inattentive consumer beliefs would capture. Of course, what really matters is how fuel
costs vary within the set of vehicles that a consumer might choose between. To better measure
that object, I analyze data from surveys that ask consumers about their first and second choice
vehicles in section 3.2.
     The model indicates that it is not only variation in fuel costs that determines rational inatten-
tion, but also the degree to which a consumer’s first choice vehicle is superior in all attributes to
other vehicles. To proxy for variation in all other attributes, I document variation in prices and
compare this to variation in fuel costs in section 3.1. Both aspects of the problem are combined
in section 3.3, where I use the parameters from a discrete choice model to simulate the choice
that consumers would make under full information and under rational inattention and quantify the
welfare loss from inattention. It is shown that welfare loss is modest.
     The model indicates also that rational inattention is more likely when effort costs are high.
Lacking any quantitative estimates of effort costs, instead I argue in qualitative terms that effort
costs are likely to be substantial, both because readily available information on fuel economy labels
is biased and incomplete and because heterogeneity across consumers makes resolving uncertainty
difficult.
     Finally, in section 3.4 I also document that price variation within model is large compared to
fuel cost uncertainty. This means that if a consumer faced an effort budget, they might do better
to exert effort towards getting the best possible price on their most preferred model, rather than
exerting effort in learning about fuel costs across models.

3.1   Fuel cost and transaction price variation
To quantify fuel cost variation, I estimate the distribution of lifetime fuel costs implied by trans-
action data from a large random sample of new vehicle purchases for model year 2006 vehicles.
I compare this variation to price variation, which both serves to contextualize the fuel cost mag-
nitudes and acts as a proxy for variation in all other attributes. Transaction data come from an
industry source that directly samples a large, representative sample of dealers across the country.
The data contain information about the transaction price, trade-in allowance, cash rebates and
financing. The final prices are adjusted for incentives, including cash rebates and interest rate


                                                 13
                Table 1: Median fuel cost and transaction prices across vehicle categories

                    Median Price      SD Price     Median Fuel Cost      SD Fuel Cost          N       No. VINs
Compact Car           16,829           (3,890)           9,899             (1,680)          372,802      192
Midsize Car           22,053           (4,676)          11,878             (1,347)          344,974      320
Luxury Car            33,642          (12,909)          13,498             (1,397)          151,555      238
Sports Car            24,882          (13,150)          14,141             (1,647)           86,738       61
SUV                   26,612          (10,162)          15,629             (2,458)          442,409      432
Pickup                24,450           (5,879)          17,468             (1,623)          309,424      372
Van                   24,539           (5,298)          14,141             (1,131)          153,535       90
Total                 23,405           (9,506)          13,498             (3,101)         1,861,437    1,705

Table shows median transaction price, accounting for customer rebates, trade-in allowances, and interest rate sub-
sidies. Fuel costs are calculated assuming 12,000 miles driven per year for 14 years, with a 5% discount rate and a
$2.50 per gallon price of gasoline. The fuel economy used is the EPA estimated combined fuel economy. The fifth
column shows the total sample size, and the sixth shows the number of distinct VIN codes included in the sample.




subsidies calculated relative to the Federal Reserve’s survey of 48-month car loan interest rates
from commercial banks.11
    The sample used here ranges from May 2005, when the very first model year 2006 vehicles
appear in the data, to May 2007, when the very last are sold. I focus here on a single model year
in order to provide a snapshot of the market that a consumer wishing to purchase a vehicle at a
particular time would face. The model year 2006 was chosen as the most recent year for which a
complete cycle is available in the data.
    To calculate fuel costs, I assume that all vehicles are driven 12,000 miles a year for 14 years.
Both estimates are close to their national averages (US Department of Transportation 2008). I
use a 5% annual discount rate and a gasoline price of $2.50 per gallon, which is approximately the
average price over the months from which the sample is drawn. For fuel economy, I merge EPA fuel
economy ratings onto the transaction data. For fuel costs, I use the combined EPA fuel economy
rating, which is a weighted harmonic average of the city and highway ratings.
    Table 1 shows the average actual transaction price, net of incentives, and the average fuel
cost across vehicle class, as well as their standard deviations. The relevant object for determining
inattention is the variation in fuel costs that is unknown to the consumer. This is determined
by the information that consumers use to form their beliefs (c̄j ). A conservative approach is to
assume that they recognize only vehicle class—a coarse industry measure that delineates cars into
compact, midsize, luxury, and sports cars, and light-duty trucks into SUVs, pickups, and vans.
Table 1 shows price and cost variation by class, as well as for the whole fleet. The table also shows
information about the overall sample size, including total observations and the number of different
Vehicle Identification Numbers (VINs), which distinguish across models and engine sizes and trim
levels.
    Table 1 shows that fuel costs are significant, ranging between $10,000 and $18,000. The total
fuel cost is also a substantial fraction of the total vehicle price, with fuel costs equal to roughly half
of the purchase price for most categories, reaching nearly two-thirds for compact cars. Variation in
average fuel costs across class is also large, with mean differences of several thousand dollars across
car and light-truck classes. It therefore makes little sense for consumers to be rationally inattentive
to fuel costs when comparing models across classes, unless effort costs are extraordinarily high.
    Consumers are likely to be drawn to vehicles that are similar in attributes, which will generally
  11
       The same methodology is employed in Sallee (2011a), which provides additional detail.


                                                          14
imply that consumers are comparing vehicles in the same class. Table 1 shows that, even within
class, fuel cost variation is large, ranging between $1,100 for vans and $2,500 for SUVs. This
variation is substantial, and on its face does not suggest rational inattention is likely.
    In absolute terms, the variation in lifetime fuel costs across vehicles within a category is large,
but it is considerably smaller than the variation in transaction prices across the same set of vehicles,
particularly for light trucks, where the standard deviation in fuel costs is around 20% of the variation
in transaction prices. Thus, fuel costs are a modest part of the variation in vehicle features overall.
Hence fuel costs may not be pivotal to choice in many cases, which suggests that inattention could
be rational. To address this further, I next consider data on second choices.

3.2    Second-choice data
Consumers report actively considering only a few models before buying a car (Ratchford and
Srinivasan 1993; Moorthy, Ratchford, and Talukdar 1997; Ratchford, Lee, and Talukdar 2003).
It is the fuel cost variation among these choices that determines whether inattention is rational,
rather than variation across entire classes of vehicles. Most sources of automobile data, including
the transaction data used here, do not include information on the vehicle that a consumer would
have chosen if their preferred model was unavailable. Some such data do exist, including the Vehicle
Ownership and Alternatives Survey (VOAS), an Internet survey of about three thousand consumers
that is analyzed in Allcott (2011) and Allcott (2013), as well as survey data from about thirteen
thousand consumers used in Langer (2012).
    I use these data to estimate the distribution of fuel cost savings that a consumer faces between
their first and second choice vehicles.12 To make results comparable to the fuel cost numbers from
the other tables, I calculate lifetime differences in fuel costs between first and second choice vehicles,
assuming the same usage pattern and discounting used above: cars are driven 12,000 miles a year
for 14 years, with a $2.50 per gallon price of gasoline and a 5% discount rate. This difference can
be positive (if the second choice vehicle was more fuel economic) or negative (if the alternative
was less fuel economic). In the VOAS, the mean of the difference is just $170, and the median is
zero. The standard deviation is $2,890; the 25th percentile is -$1,350; and the 75th percentile is
$1,620. In Langer’s data, the mean of the difference is -$225, and the median is zero. The standard
deviation is $3,112; the 25th percentile is -$1,472; and the 75th percentile is $984.
    These standard deviations are somewhat larger than the standard deviations of within vehicle
class fuel costs reported in table 1, but they are skewed heavily by a modest fraction of consumers
who report having chosen between very different vehicles. To show the full distribution more clearly,
I plot the cumulative density function of the lifetime fuel cost difference in figure 2. In the VOAS,
around 18% of all consumers are choosing between two vehicles with exactly the same fuel economy
rating, which means that the difference in lifetime fuel costs is zero. In Langer’s data, only 6%
report their first and second choice vehicles having identical fuel economy, but the distributions
are otherwise fairly similar. In particular, around 40% of consumers in both surveys are choosing
between two vehicles with lifetime fuel costs within $1,000 of each other, and around three-quarters
of all consumers would save less than $1,000 by switching to their second choice vehicle.
    These differences are of the same order of magnitude as the within class standard deviations
described in table 1. They indicate that there are many consumers who report choosing among
vehicles with very similar fuel economies. For these consumers, inattention might be rational. There
  12
    The VOAS includes choices over used cars as well as new ones, whereas my interest is only in new car purchases.
The survey does not ask if the vehicle was new, so instead I keep cases where the model year is within 1 year on
either side of the year in which the vehicle was purchased. This makes results comparable to the tabulations from the
transaction data in table 1, which include only new vehicles. This restriction produces a sample of 798 observations.



                                                         15
Figure 2: Cumulative distribution function of the absolute value of the lifetime difference in fuel
                         costs across first and second choice models




                                                   1
             Cumulative Probability Distribution
                                                   .8
                                                   .6
                                                   .4
                                                   .2




                                                                                                          Allcott (2012)
                                                                                                          Langer (2012)
                                                   0




                                                    −5000                      −1000     0   1000                     5000
                                                        Lifetime Fuel Cost Difference Between First and Second Choice ($)


          Data are from Allcott (2013) and Langer (2012). See text for details.




are many others, however, choosing among vehicles with far greater cost variation. The problem
with relying on second choice data is that these close second choice pairings may be the result of
attention to fuel economy, and they do not indicate how consumer welfare differs across first and
second choices. When the second choice is more fuel efficient, changing to that choice would save
fuel costs but may offer lower utility from other attributes associated with fuel economy. To better
address these issues, I turn next to a simulation.

3.3   Simulated choices with rational inattention
This section uses a discrete choice model to simulate how vehicle choices would be influenced if
consumers were inattentive to fuel costs. The idea is to calculate how much consumer utility
would fall if consumers ignored fuel costs when making a vehicle purchase by calculating their
optimal choice, and then calculating the choice that they would make with limited information
(due to inattention). The difference between utility values of these two choices (calculated with
full information) represents the utility lost from making a choice with incomplete information. The
distribution of this welfare loss statistic could be directly compared to effort costs in order to assess
the rationality of inattention.
    This exercise requires estimates of the utility value of many different cars for a sample of
consumers. The estimates from a discrete choice model of the vehicle market, of which there are
many, provide coefficients that can be combined with data to calculate utility values, but neither


                                                                                    16
the data nor the coefficients provide the unobserved error terms. The error terms are not known,
but their distribution is estimated as part of a discrete choice model estimation, so I simulate
choices using actual data, estimated coefficients, and randomly drawn error terms.
    There are a variety of discrete choice models of the vehicle market. Many model the car market
using coarse categories—i.e., “Ford midsize car”. These are not adequate for present purposes
because they would hide the many cases where inattention caused consumers to switch between
very similar models that fall within the same aggregated category. Models also vary in how flexibly
they allow preferences over attributes, including fuel economy, to vary. In this exercise, it is
important to allow as much flexibility in preferences as possible, which is best done in a mixed
logit that estimates the shape of a heterogeneous distribution of taste for attributes, including
fuel economy. For the mixed logit, research has shown that having stated second choice data as
well as the actual car purchased by a consumer is critical for precision (Train and Winston 2007).
Some models of vehicle demand also allow consumers to have incomplete valuation of fuel economy
(e.g., Allcott and Wozny (Forthcoming)), whereas for the current exercise it is best to impose full
valuation when the consumer has full information because the goal is to determine how a fully
rational consumer will behave with different information sets.
    One paper that is ideal for the exercise is Langer (2012), which estimates a mixed logit demand
system for a fine-grained version of the car market that includes 213 different models in the choice
set. The estimation uses actual car purchases and stated second choices. Langer estimates the
utility function as follows:
                                          X                         X
                      Uij = δj + αpj zi +    βk xjk zi + α̃νip pj +   β˜k νik xjk zi + ij
                                                k                          k
                                         X
                   where δj = ᾱpj +          xjk β̄k + ξj for each j = 1, 2, ..., J,
                                          k

where i denotes a consumer, j denotes a vehicle, pj is price, zi are consumer characteristics, and
x are the attributes (denoted k = 1, 2, ..., K). The ν terms are standard normal random variables,
unique to each person i and characteristic k (but not car j), and ij is a type-I extreme value
error. The parameters to be estimated are α, β, δ and ξ. Each vehicle is modeled as having
a common utility value δj , which is a function of observable attributes p and xk (not interacted
with individual characteristics or the random ν). ξ is the value of unobserved attributes of the
vehicle, which is estimated through a standard contraction mapping to fit market demand, as in
Berry (1994). Heterogeneity in demand for each vehicle is allowed both through the interaction of
consumer characteristics with prices and attributes and by allowing individual’s to have random
variation in tastes around the mean taste. The random variation is assumed to be distributed
normally with mean zero, and the variance is estimated in parameters α̃ and β̃.13
    In the heterogeneous portion of the utility function, Langer includes price divided by income,
and random coefficients for price, vehicle classes, horsepower, fuel consumption and curb weight.
Langer includes price, class dummies, curb weight, number of passengers, turning radius and a
dummy for domestic production in her estimates of δj . Note that this second list does not include
fuel consumption, which means that fuel consumption is included in the ξj terms. This is ideal
because it allows me to impose that the average consumer fully values fuel consumption, as described
below.
    The simulation works as follows. I take the demographic characteristics of each of the 13,454
observations in Langer’s data set. I then draw a random νk for each attribute that has a random
  13
     Langer estimates such equations for each of four demographic groups in order to study price discrimination. See
Langer (2012) for details.


                                                         17
component (there are i x k, that is 13,454 x 9 such errors). These random coefficients νk create
correlation in the demand across similar car types for each consumer—e.g., consumers who get a
high draw in their taste for horsepower will like all powerful cars more than the average consumer
does. I then draw a type-I extreme value error term for each of the 213 vehicle choices in the model
(there are i x j, that is 13,454 x 213 such errors). Given these random draws and the coefficient
estimates reported in Langer (2012), I then calculate the utility (consumer surplus) of each of the
213 vehicles. I identify the vehicle with the highest utility as the choice that the consumer would
make if they had full information. (The model does include an outside good, the value of which is
normalized to zero, so some consumers will choose not to buy a car.)
      To determine choices and utility under inattention, I recalculate a perceived utility for each
vehicle using the same random error draws and coefficients, but after substituting a perceived fuel
consumption variable for the true one. That is, rather than assuming that consumers observe true
fuel costs c∗j , I assume they make decisions based on three alternative forms of perceived fuel costs
c̄j . This substitution has two effects on the perceived utility of each vehicle. First, the perceived fuel
cost enters into the random coefficient term on fuel consumption and changes the apparent utility
of each vehicle. Vehicles with below average fuel economy will see a rise in their perceived utility,
and those with above average fuel economy will see their perceived utility fall. Second, I raise or
lower the vehicle’s average utility δj by the difference between true and perceived lifetime fuel costs,
multiplied by the average coefficient on price ᾱ.14 This imposes that the average consumer fully
values lifetime fuel costs, but the random coefficient component allows some consumers to value it
more or less. Once the perceived utility of each vehicle is calculated, I identify the vehicle that the
consumer would have chosen given these perceptions. Having identified the vehicle that consumer
i would have chosen under full information and under partial information, the difference in actual
utility can be calculated by taking the difference in consumer surplus across the two choices (based
on true fuel consumption for both vehicles).
      I consider three scenarios that represent different levels of information and generate different
perceived fuel consumption values. To represent total ignorance, the first scenario replaces the ac-
tual fuel consumption term of all vehicles with the global mean value of fuel consumption, weighted
by sales, across the sample. This preserves the average utility measure across all consumers, but
it wipes away all perceived differences in fuel consumption. This necessarily will improve the per-
ceived merit of all cars with below average fuel economy, and weaken the appeal of all cars with
above average fuel economy. Each consumer is assumed to have the same misperception, but be-
cause there is a random coefficient on fuel consumption, this misperception will lead to varying
changes in perceived utility. Given these perceived utilities, I identify the vehicle that consumers
would choose under total ignorance. I then calculate the welfare loss for each consumer of choosing
under imperfect information by comparing the true utility of this choice to the true utility of the
choice made with full information.
      In the second scenario, rather than using the global mean of fuel consumption, I use the class
mean. Classes in Langer’s data are luxury cars, sports cars, all other cars, pickup trucks, sport-
utility vehicles and vans, which differs only slightly from the class definitions used above. This
represents the case in which consumers have an unbiased estimate of the lifetime fuel costs of
each type of car, but they know nothing about fuel cost variation within type. They assume, for
example, that all pickup trucks have the same fuel economy, which is equal to the class average.
Class accounts for around 50% of the variation in fuel costs of a vehicle, so this scenario represents
a considerable improvement over pure ignorance.
  14
     I use the same parameters as in the lifetime fuel cost calculations above to transform fuel economy ratings into
lifetime fuel costs.



                                                         18
             Table 2: Estimated welfare impacts of choice under incomplete information

                                                                     Perceived Fuel Economy Used for Choice
                                                             Global Mean        Class Mean     Attribute Predicted
Average welfare lost (per vehicle purchased)                     $552               $291                $89
                                                                  (33)              (21)                (11)
Percent who change vehicle                                        19%               14%                  7%
                                                                (0.8%)            (0.7%)              (0.7%)
Average welfare lost conditional on changing vehicle            $2957              $2092               $1285
                                                                 (141)             (119)               (123)
Standard deviation of welfare lost                               $1725             $1112                $539
                                                                  (96)              (79)                (63)

Statistics are averages over 500 simulations, based on the data and coefficients from Langer (2012). The values
in parentheses are the standard deviations of the test statistics over the 500 trials. In the global mean scenario,
choices are determined as if all vehicles have the fleet average fuel economy. In the class mean scenario, choices are
determined as if all vehicles have the average fuel economy for their class (luxury car, sports car, all other cars, pickup
trucks, sport-utility vehicles and vans). Class predicts 41% of the variation in fuel consumption. In the attribute
predicted scenario, vehicles are assigned their predicted fuel consumption from a regression of fuel consumption on
class dummies, horsepower, curb weight, number of passengers and a dummy for being domestically produced. These
variables predict 82% of the variation in fuel consumption.




    In the third scenario, I use a more sophisticated prediction of a vehicle’s fuel economy that takes
into account horsepower, weight, number of passengers and location of production (foreign or do-
mestic), in addition to class. Specifically, I regress fuel consumption on class dummies, horsepower,
a dummy for whether the vehicle is made by a domestic automaker, curb weight and number of
passengers, and I assume that consumers’ perception is the predicted value from this regression.
The R2 on this regression is around .82, with most of the explanatory power coming from vehicle
classes and weight. The attributes used here to predict fuel consumption are all in some sense
“visible”. A vehicle’s class, brand and the number of passengers are easy to perceive. A vehicle’s
horsepower and weight are commonly cited statistics, but they may not be as easy to perceive.
Thus, it likely makes sense to think that the average consumer has an easily determined fuel cost
perception c̄j , the accuracy of which lies somewhere between that used in the second and third
scenarios.
    The procedure draws all of the random terms once, and then calculates four choices that would
emerge, given the same random draws, under the four information scenarios. I then repeat this
procedure, using a new set of random draws, 500 times and report average welfare changes over
all trials. For each trial and in each information scenario, each consumer’s welfare loss from mis-
perception is calculated based on the choice they would make given incomplete information but
the utility they would derive given the vehicle’s true characteristics. Consumers who choose the
same vehicle under complete and incomplete information will have a utility loss of zero. All other
consumers will lose utility; by definition, it is not possible to make a better choice than that which
would be made with full information.
    Table 2 summarizes the results. The first row reports the average loss in consumer surplus per
vehicle across all vehicle purchases over all 500 trials.15 This statistic is an average of zero utility
  15
     The model includes an outside good, but the statistics reported exclude cases in which the consumer chose the
outside good (did not buy a car) in both cases of a pairwise comparison. Welfare losses therefore represent average
utility losses, conditional on a vehicle being purchased. Including cases where the consumer chooses the outside good
in both scenarios would drive down all of the estimated losses but also change the interpretation.


                                                            19
loss for many consumers whose choice is not changed by misperception and some utility losses from
those who do change their choice. The second row of table 2 reports the percentage of consumers
who change their vehicle choice because of misperception. The third row shows the average welfare
loss conditional on the consumer changing vehicles as a result of misperception. The fourth row
shows the standard deviation of the average welfare losses reported in the first row. The table
also reports the standard deviation across trials in each of the welfare statistics. (These standard
deviations are fairly small because each trial has a large sample.)
    In the scenario of total ignorance, where consumers assign the global mean fuel consumption
to all vehicles and choose accordingly, the average welfare loss is $552. Even in this scenario,
81% of consumers will choose the same vehicle under full and partial information. The modest
number of switchers is driven by two factors. One is that a top choice is sufficiently preferred to
other choices that modifying one characteristic does not change the discrete choice made in many
situations. Another is that, if a consumer’s preferences are such that their first and second (and
higher order) choices are all similar cars, then the misperception will have similar impacts on all
of those cars, which preserves the ordering and does not change choice. When misperception does
cause a consumer to switch vehicles, the welfare costs are large, at an average of $2,946.
    These welfare losses are reduced significantly when the consumer’s perceived fuel economy is
set to the class average, as shown in column 2. The average welfare loss from misperception when
consumers take class into account is around half of the losses that arise from total ignorance. In
the class scenario, the average welfare lost is $291, and this reduced misperception causes only 14%
of consumers to change their choice of vehicle.
    If consumers make a more sophisticated prediction and accurately account for the impact of
curb weight, horsepower, domestic production and the number of passengers, then the average
welfare lost falls to a modest $89 per vehicle, as shown in column 3. In this scenario, only 7% of
consumers change their vehicle choice. As mentioned above, the sophisticated prediction model
likely overstates the amount of information that consumers have at no or low cost, while it is
intuitive to believe that consumers do know the class of vehicles they are considering and can
perceive cost differences across classes on average. A reasonable conjecture is therefore that the
true welfare loss from rational inattention in the car market would lie somewhere between the
estimates in columns 2 and 3.
    The next section will discuss why effort costs may be substantial, but there are no direct
quantitative estimates of these costs. But, one can imagine that effort would exceed $89 or even
$291. Another way to frame the issue is to say that, when buying a car, if paying attention to
some feature provides only a few hundred dollars of value on average, many people will focus their
efforts elsewhere.
    Rational inattention is more likely as the welfare costs of it get smaller. But, even small welfare
costs add up across the market. In the past decade, the new automobile market in the United States
has averaged 14.9 million new cars sold, fluctuating between a low of 10.6 million in 2009 during
the financial crisis and a high of 17.4 million in 2005. If consumers were rationally inattentive in
scenarios two or three, that would correspond to total welfare losses of $4.3 billion or $1.3 billion
per year, on average. Thus, while the individual welfare costs of inattention are modest, because
the market is large, the total welfare impact on society is non-trivial.

3.4   Effort costs and fuel economy labels
The simulation suggests that the gains to effortful attention may be low. But, even if these gains
are relatively low, consumers will become informed unless the cost of doing so is significant. All new
automobiles come with fuel economy labels that show the EPA’s official estimates of fuel economy.


                                                  20
                               Figure 3: Current fuel economy label




Given that, is it reasonable to suppose that consumers face nontrivial costs in calculating lifetime
fuel costs? This section argues that the costs of becoming fully informed are likely high, both
because label information is incomplete and possibly inaccurate, and because heterogeneity is an
important source of uncertainty. One way to think about effort costs is simply to multiply the
wage rate by the time required. The material below suggests that several hours would be required
to overcome information limitations, which means that effort costs could easily be in the hundreds
of dollars, even when fuel economy labels exist.

3.4.1   Labels are incomplete and inaccurate
Figure 3 provides an example of the current fuel economy label for new vehicles. It includes three
fuel economy estimates (city, highway, and combined), as well as an estimated annual fuel cost and a
comparison of the combined fuel economy to other vehicles in the same class. Nevertheless, the label
does not provide all of the information necessary to fully inform the consumer. The label contains
an annual fuel cost, but this must be transformed via a present discounted value calculation, which
requires information about the life of the vehicle, a discount rate, the schedule of mileage over time,
and future fuel costs. The comparison to other vehicles is in miles per gallon (mpg), not dollars.
Also, the comparison shows the extreme values in each category, without providing any sense of
the distribution between the points, which would be necessary for the consumer to judge how likely
they would be to find a similar vehicle with substantially different fuel costs.
    Research shows that consumers find difficulty in converting the information on labels into life-
time fuel costs. Larrick and Soll (2008) document that, in a laboratory setting, consumers fail to
understand the nonlinearity of costs in mpg and overestimate the pecuniary gains from increases
in high mpg vehicles, underestimating improvements in inefficient models. Allcott (2013) runs a
stated preferences experiment and shows that consumer beliefs about the value of fuel economy are
inaccurate and biased in ways consistent with the findings of Larrick and Soll (2008). Qualitative
interviews documented in Turrentine and Kurani (2007) show that consumers lack information on
all of the building blocks necessary for a lifetime fuel cost calculation, save the current price of
gasoline. Early marketing research on energy efficiency labels came to a similar conclusion—labels


                                                  21
improved decision making, but consumers are sensitive to the form of the information and responses
are not entirely consistent (McNeill and Wilkie 1979; Hutton and Wilkie 1980).
     The effort required of consumers to become fully informed is increased by the fact that the EPA’s
fuel economy ratings, which are based on a laboratory test, are imprecise and sometimes biased.
Since its inception in 1978, the fuel economy label program has undergone two major changes.
First, in 1986, in response to consumer complaints that EPA ratings significantly overestimated
on-road fuel economy, the EPA adjusted the test ratings. Rather than devising a new procedure
to improve accuracy, the EPA simply scaled down the original values. City values were reduced by
10% and highway values were reduced by 22%. Assuming that these adjustments were accurate,
the original ratings were biased by a noticeable amount.
     More recently, the EPA determined that the test ratings were inaccurate because tests no longer
reflected typical driving behavior. (For example, the top speed on the highway test was 60 miles
per hour, and the tests were conducted without running the vehicle’s air conditioner.) The EPA
determined that it was necessary to replace the old procedure, which conducted one test for the
highway rating and one for the city, with a procedure that involves five tests that are combined to
create the same two ratings with greater accuracy. New ratings were generated as of 2008.
     To understand how the transition would affect labels, the EPA analyzed a sample of 615 vehicles
for which they determined the old and new ratings. They have generously provided these data to
me. Of the original sample, 380 are gasoline-only vehicles with complete information on all five
tests. (The new test procedure has a much more pronounced impact on gas-electric hybrids vehicles,
which I omit from my analysis.) Using these data, I reconstruct the original fuel economy label
ratings and the new five-cycle ratings and compare them. Under the assumption that the new
ratings are correct, the difference between the two rating systems indicates the degree of error in
the prior rating system.
     Figure 4 shows scatter plots of the old and new tests, for both city and highway values, along
with the 45-degree line for reference. The vast majority of the data points are below the 45-degree
line, implying that the new rating is lower than the original. The effect is more pronounced for the
highway rating. The spread is also much more pronounced for the highway rating, indicating that,
even after accounting for systematic (average) bias, the change in fuel economy between rating
systems varies substantially across vehicles. OLS regressions (not shown) confirm that the slopes
differ from one by a statistically significant amount, and the point estimates indicate that the old
rating system overestimated the cost savings of a fuel economy improvement by 7% for city ratings
and 18% for highway ratings. As a result, a consumer basing his or her fuel economy calculation on
the official ratings would have misstated his or her potential fuel savings by a substantial amount,
on average.
     The apparent mismeasurement of the official fuel economy ratings translates into significant
differences in lifetime fuel costs. Figure 5 shows the distribution of the difference in lifetime fuel
costs between the two label ratings—using the same assumptions about mileage, gasoline prices,
discounting, vehicle lifetime, and ratio of highway to city miles as employed elsewhere in this
paper—in two ways. Figure 5a calculates lifetime fuel costs using the old test ratings and subtracts
cost using the new ratings. Figure 5b instead calculates this difference using the predicted new
fuel economy ratings from an OLS regression of the new ratings on the old; this removes the
systematic bias so that differences are centered around zero and leaves variation that reflects only
the idiosyncratic effects of the test change on particular vehicles.
     The mean mismeasurement is -$1,700—that is, on average, the old EPA ratings understated
lifetime fuel costs by $1,700—and mismeasurement ranges from -$400 to -$4,000. This is large
relative to the welfare costs of inattention estimated in section 3.3 and the savings from switching
vehicles estimated in section 3.1. Even once the systematic bias is removed, the variation in the

                                                 22
                                           Figure 4: New and old EPA fuel economy ratings, in mpg
                                           (a) City rating                                                       (b) Highway rating




                                                                                                  40
                       40




                                                                                                  35
                       35
      5 Cycle Rating




                                                                                 5 Cycle Rating
                                                                                                  30
                       30




                                                                                                  25
                       25




                                                                                                  20
                       20




                                                                                                  15
                       15




                                                                                                  10
                       10




                                 10   15       20    25      30   35   40                                   10   15    20     25     30    35    40
                                               Original Rating                                                          Original Rating



Figures based on 380 test vehicles for which data for both rating systems are available. Test vehicles come from
model years 2003 to 2006. Dashed lines show a linear fit.



                                 Figure 5: Difference in lifetime fuel costs across new and old EPA ratings
                                      (a) Old - actual new                                                  (b) Predicted new - actual new
                       .001




                                                                                                  .001
      Probability




                                                                                 Probability
                       5.0e-04




                                                                                                  5.0e-04
                       0




                                                                                                  0




                             -4000           -2000            0         2000                           -4000          -2000           0           2000
                                       Difference in Fuel Costs ($)                                               Difference in Fuel Costs ($)



Figures based on 380 test vehicles for which both rating systems are available. Lifetime fuel costs are constructed
assuming 12,000 miles driven per year for 14 years, with a 5% discount rate, a $2.50 per gallon gasoline price, and 55%
of miles driven in the city. Predicted new ratings are calculated using the predicted values from an OLS regression
of the new ratings on the old ratings.




idiosyncratic mismeasurement is substantial. The standard deviation of the difference between the
old and new ratings is $597, and the standard deviation using the predicted values is not much
smaller, at $467.
    Imprecise measurement of fuel costs should not prevent consumers from valuing fuel economy;
rational consumers facing uncertainty should have made expected value calculations and based their


                                                                            23
decision on those. There is little reason, however, to believe that consumers had a reliable way of
estimating the bias in the old fuel economy labels, and it is less likely that they had the ability to
determine the variation in mismeasurement across models. As such, the effort cost of ascertaining
true lifetime fuel costs must be substantial.

3.4.2    Heterogeneity and effort costs
Even if labels provided perfectly accurate information of the lifetime fuel costs for the average driver,
significant effort would still be required for consumers to figure out the value of fuel economy to
them, if they differ from the average in their
                                            P consumption     behavior. Recall the formula used above
                                                   Pgt mt
for the lifetime fuel costs of a vehicle, Tt=0 δ t mpg  t
                                                          . Each  parameter in this formula engenders
some heterogeneity, including forecasted future gasoline prices Pgt , miles driven per period mt , the
discount factor δ t and fuel economy for a given vehicle mpgt (based on driving behavior and style).
As a result, the lifetime fuel cost of the same car will be different for different drivers. Importantly,
this type of uncertainty is difficult to resolve with labels or other information provision.
    To show how wide is the dispersion in lifetime fuel costs for the same vehicle when drivers
are heterogeneous, I simulate the value of increasing fuel economy by one mile-per-gallon using
estimates of the distribution for these parameters taken from the literature. This is similar to the
simulation in Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (Forthcoming). That paper provides an empirical dis-
tribution of inflation-adjusted forecasted gasoline prices from a sample of nationally-representative
households.16 The distribution of miles driven per year comes from the National Highway Trans-
portation Survey.17 The distribution of discount factors is calculated using the loan rate on new
automobile purchases from a nationally-representative sample of transactions analyzed in Anderson
and Sallee (2011).18
    Specifically, I draw a sample of 100,000 observations from these empirical distributions, assuming
independence across the parameters for each individual. I then calculate the lifetime fuel costs for
each observation at every fuel economy value in the range of 16 to 31 mpg, assuming a starting
price of gasoline of $2.50 per gallon. The range of 16 to 31 mpg is the 10th and 90th percentiles in
the transaction data analyzed above.
    Figure 6 plots the median value of fuel economy and the interquartile range from this simulation.
The downward slope of the values reflects the nonlinear relationship between fuel costs and fuel
economy. The key result is that the interquartile range is very wide, in absolute dollar terms and
as compared to the median. For example, at 20 miles-per-gallon, the median fuel cost is $12,300,
   16
      The data used in Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (Forthcoming) come from the Michigan Survey of Consumers
and report a five-year ahead forecast of gasoline prices. I convert those forecasts into an annual growth rate and
model heterogeneity by assuming growth at that rate for five years, after which time gasoline prices are assumed to
be constant. This assumption of constant prices after five years likely understates forecast heterogeneity.
   17
      I do not use the survey data directly, but instead use the mean and variance of annual miles driven calculated
from the survey that are reported in Li, Timmins, and von Haefen (2009), adjusted for vehicle survival rates as
reported in Lu (2006), to calculate the survival-probability weighted mileage of vehicles in each time period, based
on the prior period’s accumulated miles. This parameter of the simulation is identical to that used in Anderson,
Kellogg, and Sallee (Forthcoming), which includes more detail.
   18
      I do not model variation in fuel economy across drivers of the same car because the empirical distribution required
is unavailable. Langer and McRae (2013) do show that there is wide dispersion in experienced fuel economy of a set
of drivers using identical vehicles. Sallee (2011b) shows that city ratings are, on average, 19% lower than highway
ratings (equivalent to the difference between a Volkswagen Jetta and a Ford Crown Victoria). Drivers who drive
mostly highway versus mostly city will therefore have very different fuel consumption per mile, but the location
of miles driven is unavailable. Thus, idiosyncratic fuel economy for a given vehicle is likely to be significant, and
omitting it from the simulation therefore understates fuel consumption heterogeneity.




                                                           24
                     Figure 6: Heterogeneity in the lifetime fuel cost of vehicles




                                                 20000
                                                                                   Interquartile Range
                                                                                   Median




                        Lifetime Fuel Cost ($)
                                                 15000
                                                 10000
                                                 5000




                                                         15   20              25                 30
                                                                   Fuel Economy


                     Estimates are based on a simulation using random draws from the
                     empirical distribution of gasoline price forecasts, interest rates, and
                     lifetime mileage. See text for details.



but the interquartile range is $8,900 to $16,500.19 The standard deviation is $6,200. This means
that even if a fuel economy label explained the lifetime fuel costs accurately for the median driver,
that estimate will be too high or too low by $6,200, or 38%, on average.
    Of course, many consumers will have some sense of whether their fuel costs are higher or lower
than the average. But, it is not obvious how they would know by how much they differ from the
average, short of gathering detailed idiosyncratic information on their own driving behavior and
performing the necessary calculation. To the degree that this uncertainty stems from consumer’s
not knowing individual specific parameters—how much they drive, or whether they are especially
aggressive drivers, what they think future gasoline prices will be or what discount rate they wish
to apply to the choice problem—an outside party will have trouble overcoming the information
problem for them.
    This type of uncertainty can greatly raise the effort cost of resolving uncertainty without causing
a commensurate increase in the returns to those efforts. As discussed in section 2.3, if a consumer’s
driving patterns, gasoline price forecasts and discount rates are independent of the vehicle they
chose, then the errors they make will be closely correlated across models and will therefore have a
mitigated impact on choice.

3.5    Price variation within model
Until now, the paper has emphasized a comparison of the costs and benefits of exerting effort to
resolve uncertainty about the value of fuel economy. Another way to think about the consumer’s
decision to pay attention to fuel economy is to ask what the opportunity cost of that attention is.
  19
    This corresponds to a median value of improving fuel economy by one mpg of $585, with an interquartile range
of $426 to $786.



                                                                     25
               Table 3: Standard deviation in vehicle transaction prices and fuel costs

                             (1)                       (2)                      (3)                    (4)
                         Price (All)           Price (Within VIN)            Fuel Costs           Ratio: (2)/(3)
Compact Car                3,890                      1,707                    1,680                   1.0
Midsize Car                4,676                      2,107                    1,347                   1.6
Luxury Car                 12,909                     3,099                    1,397                   2.2
Sports Car                 13,150                     2,562                    1,647                   1.6
SUV                        10,162                     2,667                    2,458                   1.1
Pickup                      5,879                     2,745                    1,623                   1.7
Van                         5,298                     2,443                    1,131                   2.2
Total                      9,506                      2,435                    3,101                   0.8

Table shows the standard deviations. Column (1) shows variation between and within models in transaction price.
Column (2) shows the variation in transaction price within VIN type. Column (3) shows the variation in fuel costs.
Column (4) shows the ratio of within-VIN price variation to fuel costs.




Suppose that the consumer has a fixed amount of time to devote to researching a car purchase.
Should they devote more time to studying fuel economy, or spend their time on something else?
    One answer comes from comparing the welfare costs of fuel consumption estimated above to
variation in retail prices that different consumers pay for identical cars. In the automobile market,
haggling over the final price of the good is important. One can attempt to get price quotes for
identical cars from multiple dealerships, or spend effort in negotiation. How does this price variation
compare to the consequences of ignoring fuel consumption?
    To quantify the value of negotiation, I use the transaction data detailed above to calculate
price variation for vehicles with the same vehicle identification number (VIN). The VIN indicates
a vehicle’s manufacturer, model name, model year, engine cylinders, engine displacement, drive
type, body style, trim level, fuel type, transmission, and aspiration (e.g., turbo charged). For
example, a 2006 flexible-fuel Ford F150 extended-cab pickup with a 5.4-liter V8 engine and manual
transmission is a unique VIN type. The VIN does not indicate differences in options packages,
such as carpeted floor mats, roof racks or satellite radio. The variation in prices that remains after
removing the mean price for each VIN type in the sample therefore reflects differences in bargaining
outcomes and financial incentives from manufacturers, as well as differences in final options. There
are 1,705 different VIN types in the sample for model year 2006. I demean all prices by VIN, and
then calculate the variation that remains. This is equivalent to measuring the standard deviation
of the residuals from a fixed effects regression, where the fixed effects are the VIN types.
    For reference, column 1 in Table 3 reproduces from Table 1 the total variation in price both
between and within VIN for each vehicle class. Column 2 shows the standard deviation in price
within each VIN, which is an estimate of the amount of money that a consumer could save by
reducing the transaction price by one standard deviation, conditional on having already selected
a vehicle to purchase. There is substantially less variation within VIN than across, as would be
expected, but the remaining variation is still quite large. In all categories, a one standard deviation
reduction in transaction price, within VIN, still represents thousands of dollars in savings.
    For comparison, column 3 reproduces the variation in fuel costs across vehicles within a class
from Table 1, and column 4 shows the ratio of within-VIN price variation to this across-VIN fuel
cost variation. In all categories, the within-VIN price variation exceeds the across-VIN fuel cost
variation. In other words, consumers would save more, on average, by improving the transaction
price for the vehicle he or she has chosen to buy by one standard deviation than he or she would


                                                        26
                                                           Figure 7: Vehicle prices over model year cycle

                                     180,000                                                                                           0

                                                            Average Price
                                     160,000                Relative to Month 1                                                        -500


                                     140,000                                                                                           -1000
                                                                                                             Number of Observations
            Number of Observations




                                     120,000                                                                                           -1500




                                                                                                                                               Average Price ($)
                                     100,000                                                                                           -2000


                                      80,000                                                                                           -2500


                                      60,000                                                                                           -3000


                                      40,000                                                                                           -3500


                                      20,000                                                                                           -4000


                                          0                                                                                            -4500
                                               1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26

                                                                                     Month in Sample


           Solid line plots the month coefficients from a regression of vehicle price (in levels) on a set of
           month dummies for every month in the sample with VIN fixed effects. Bar graph plots total
           sample size over the model year cycle. Month 1 is April 2005.


gain from making a one-standard deviation improvement in fuel economy, within their vehicle class,
by changing vehicle.20
   It may be difficult to negotiate a better price, but some transaction price variation is predictable
and can be taken advantage of by the consumer. The most pronounced example is variation over
the model year cycle. When a new model year for a vehicle is first introduced, the price of the
vehicle is at its highest point. In following months, the price declines steadily, but slowly. To
quantify this variation in prices, I run a regression of the following form:
                                                                            26
                                                                            X                    1,705
                                                                                                 X
                                                       pijt = α +                 1(t = s)δt +           1(v = j)γj + uijt ,                                       (9)
                                                                            s=2                  v=2

where pijt is the transaction price of observation i of VIN type j in month t, δt are month dummies
for the 26 months in the sample (with month 1 the omitted category), γj are dummies for each of
the 1,705 VIN types in the sample, 1(·) is the indicator function, and uijt is an error term. The
month dummy variables represent the average price in each sample month, controlling for VIN
fixed effects.
    Figure 7 plots these month coefficients to show the average price decline over the model year
  20
    Adjusting the price data for outliers and dropping transactions that have interest rate subsidies (the calculation
of which requires use of a market benchmark and therefore may exaggerate variance for individuals) reduces price
variation by only modest amounts. The standard deviation for a sample that drops the highest and lowest 2% of
transactions within VIN is $2,100 across all classes, and the sample that excludes interest rate subsidized vehicles
has a standard deviation of $2,344, as compared to the $2,435 for the full sample.



                                                                                           27
                                  Table 4: Appliance lifetime energy costs

                                              Mean                   SD               Mean                SD
Appliance                                 Lifetime Cost        Lifetime Cost       Retail Price       Retail Price
Dishwasher                                      267                   21               807                495
Clothes washer (top loading)                    282                   96               590                244
Clothes washer (front loading)                  144                   32               919                377
Oven                                            280                   66              2,056              1,300
Range                                           591                   88               962                568
Refrigerator (top, auto)                        523                   74               709                265
Refrigerator (side, auto)                       734                   67              2,368              1,548
Refrigerator (bottom, auto)                     577                   55              1,481               553
Refrigerator (side, auto, TTD)                  729                   75              2,368              1,548
Refrigerator (bottom, auto, TTD)                680                   40              1,481               553
Freezer (upright, manual)                       558                   81               618                42
Freezer (upright, auto)                         776                  119               651                126
Freezer (chest)                                 451                  110               391                114

Dishwasher data from FTC, with 10 year life assumed. Clothes washer data from FTC, with 11 year life assumed.
Oven and range data from NRC, with 15 year life assumed. Refrigerator data from AHAM, with 17 year life
assumed. For refrigerator/freezer data, auto and manual refer to defrost modes. Freezer location is above fresh food
refrigerator (top), below (below), or side-by-side (side). TTD indicates through-the-door ice. All retail price data are
from Consumer Reports. Price data do not distinguish between TTD and non-TTD refrigerators.




cycle. The figure also shows the sample size in each month, to show the distribution of sales over
the time period. The price decline is relatively smooth, with a slope around -$156 per month.
Thus, a consumer can expect to gain more, on average, by waiting one month to buy an identical
vehicle than they stand to lose by making the wrong choice due to inattention, as estimated in the
simulation in section 3.3. The total price decline over the cycle is around $4,000, which is 17% of
the median vehicle price over the entire sample. Estimating equation (9) can also be written with
logged price on the left-hand side. Then, the month coefficients represent average percentage price
declines relative to the first month in the sample. The coefficients from this regression have a very
similar shape to the one shown in Figure 7. They indicate that prices decline by 13% over the 25
months in the sample, which is broadly similar to the average annual model year price decline of
9.0% estimated by Copeland, Dunn, and Hall (2011).


4     Appliance energy costs
The preceding analysis suggests that even though fuel costs and their variation are substantial in the
automobile market, inattention at some level may be rational. This section briefly considers related
data for home appliances. The necessary data on household appliances are not uniformly available
from the federal government, but a patchwork of sources enables an analysis of the most important
appliances, including dishwashers, clothes washers, ovens, ranges, refrigerators, and freezers.
   Table 4 quantifies the mean lifetime cost and the standard deviation in lifetime cost for these
appliances, assuming appliance lifetimes as cited by the DOE, a 5% discount rate, and a 10.66 cent
per kWh price of electricity (the price used on current Energy Guide labels). Data for dishwashers
and clothes washers come directly from the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). FTC data for other
appliances are incomplete for varied reasons, so other sources are used. Association of Home
Appliance Manufacturers (AHAM) data are used for refrigerators and freezers, and data from


                                                          28
Natural Resources Canada (NRC) are used for ovens and ranges.
    Table 4 shows that the lifetime fuel costs for most of these appliances is substantial, ranging
from a low of $144 for efficient front-loading clothes washers to $776 for freezers. The standard
deviations in these costs across models is much smaller. Only freezers show a standard deviation
above $100. This means that, for most major appliances, consumers stand to gain modest amounts
from a one-standard deviation improvement in energy efficiency for a given appliance category.
    To compare these gains to the prices of the goods, Table 4 also includes the mean retail price and
the standard deviation in the retail price across models, as calculated from Consumer Reports data.
Looking within categories, the lifetime energy costs of many of the cheaper appliance categories is
a substantial fraction of the purchase price. The variation in energy costs, however, is dwarfed by
the variation in retail prices for all appliances except for freezers. Unlike the data for automobiles,
these price variations reflect only variation in suggested retail prices across models. Price variation
from sales and promotions and differences across retailers will make the full price variation much
larger.
    This leads to a conclusion similar to that for automobiles. On an absolute level, energy costs
are important, and variation in energy costs is non-trivial. At the same time, there is far greater
variation in prices, which implies both that (a) differences in attributes may be sufficient to imply
that consumers are far from indifferent between different choices and (b) that a consumer with
limited attention may choose to focus on attributes other than energy efficiency.

4.1    Effort costs: appliance labels
Some appliances carry Energy Guide labels in the United States, which are mandated by federal law.
These include refrigerators and freezers, air conditioners, clothes washers, dishwashers, fluorescent
lighting, furnaces, boilers, and heaters. This leaves out a variety of goods, including ovens, ranges,
televisions, VCR and DVD players, incandescent lighting, computers, monitors, audio equipment,
printers, fax machines, scanners, air purifiers, and dehumidifiers. When present, Energy Guide
labels include categorical information about the appliance, along with an estimate of the kWh used
per year, the annual operating cost, and the range of costs for similar models.
     Labels greatly reduce, but do not eliminate, the effort cost required of consumers to become
fully informed. Prior to 2008, labels included a comparison with other models in terms of kWh
per year, instead of dollars, meaning that consumers had to do additional calculations in order to
monetize the difference between their model and its alternatives. Figure 8a shows an example for a
refrigerator label. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 mandated a review of the labels, and the labels
were changed, effective in 2008. An example of a refrigerator label from the new regime is provided
in figure 8b.
     Even under the new design, labels do not provide all the necessary information to calculate the
lifetime cost of operating the appliance, which is the relevant dollar amount for consumers. To
do so, consumers still need to estimate the lifetime of the appliance, posit future electricity prices,
know how their local elecriticy price varies from the national average, and calculate the present
discounted value using the appropriate discount rate. Thus, labels lower search costs but do not
eliminate them. In fact, labels may cause consumers to undervalue energy efficiency differences by
presenting estimates from only a single year, and only for comparable models that share the same
features, which makes a lifetime cost difference of $100 show up as an annual difference of a few
dollars. An alternative is to present an estimate of the lifetime costs of energy on the label, which
is partly done in Canada.21
  21
     Early marketing research suggested that lifetime fuel costs created a bigger response in consumers than labels
with annual consumption (Hutton and Wilkie 1980).


                                                        29
                                                                                                             Figure 8: Energy guide labels
                                                    (a) Before 2008                                                                                                               (b) After 2008

                   Based on standard U.S. Government tests




                   Refrigerator-Freezer
                   With Automatic Defrost
                                                                                                                      U              XYZ Corporation
                                                                                                                                         Model ABC-W
                   With Side-Mounted Freezer                                                                                   Capacity: 23 Cubic Feet
                   With Through-the-Door-Ice Service

                     Compare the Energy Use of this Refrigerator
                           with Others Before You Buy.
                                                                 This Model Uses
                                                                 600kWh/year
                                                               �
                         Energy use (kWh/year) range of all similar models
                      Uses Least                                                                                                           Uses Most
                      Energy                                                                                                                  Energy
                      539                                                                                                                        698
                    kWh/year (kilowatt-hours per year) is a measure of energy (electricity) use.
                    Your utility company uses it to compute your bill. Only models with 22.5 and 24.4
                    cubic feet and the above features are used in this scale.

                   Refrigerators using more energy cost more to operate.
                   This model's estimated yearly operating cost is:

                                                                                        $54
                     Based on a 2005 U.S. Government national average cost of 9.064 per kWh for electricity. Your
                     actual operating cost will vary depending on your local utility rates and your use of the product.

                         Important: Removal of this label before consumer purchase violates the Federal Trade Commission’s Appliance Labeling Rule (16 C.F.R. Part 305).




                                                                                      Table 5: NRC lifetime cost inaccuracy

                             Average                                                                                                                            Average Second    Overstatement:      Overstatement:
                            kWh/year                                                              Lifetime                                                        Price Tag      5% Discount Rate   10% Discount Rate
Dishwashers                    295                                                                   13                                                              383               32%                 66%
Clothes Washers                215                                                                   14                                                              302               42%                 80%
Refrigerators                  486                                                                   17                                                              827               73%                118%
Clothes Dryers                 933                                                                   18                                                             1,681              83%                131%
Ranges                         509                                                                   18                                                              916               82%                130%
Freezers                       576                                                                   21                                                             1,210             113%                169%

Data from Natural Resources Canada. NRC calculates a “second price tag” which is the undiscounted cost of energy
given a 10 cent per kWh price of electricity and the appliance lifetime in the table. Overstatement of costs is calculated
as the difference between the undiscounted and discounted lifetime costs divided by the discounted costs.




     The Canadian government does not include a lifetime cost on its labels, but NRC does calculate
a lifetime cost on its website, which it calls the “second price tag”. The second price tag, which
is described as the lifetime cost of operating the appliance, is included along with other energy
efficiency statistics in the NRC’s guide to appliances. Unfortunately, NRC calculates this as the
undiscounted cost of energy over the life of an appliance, given a set of assumptions about the
lifetime of each type of appliance, the price of electricity, and the estimated annual energy con-
sumption of the appliance. The lack of discounting causes a significant overstatement of lifetime
energy costs.
     Table 5 shows the estimated lifetime operating costs, assuming a 10 cent per kWh cost of
electricity and the lifetime of appliances indicated on the NRC website. The first column shows
the average annual kWh for each appliance type, according to the NRC’s microdata on appliance


                                                                                                                                                                           30
efficiency. Column three calculates the average second price, which NRC includes in its data for con-
sumers. The fourth and fifth columns show how much the NRC’s undiscounted measure overstates
the lifetime costs of the appliances, assuming a 5% and 10% discount rate, respectively, calculated
as a percentage exaggeration over the true discounted cost. The overstatement is significant. Given
the long estimated lifetime of appliances, a failure to discount leads to an exaggeration of more
than 100% of true costs for many appliance categories when the true discount rate is 10%. In other
words, NRC’s estimation more than doubles the true value of an increase in energy efficiency in
these cases.
     The lesson here is that, even when label information is available, it may not be perfect. Knowing
the annual cost is not in itself a solution to the need for costly effort to estimate the correct costs
when purchasing a durable good. The Canadian government made a sizable error when doing the
calculation itself.

4.2   Summary for appliances
As was the case for automobiles, an analysis of appliance data indicates that, while fuel cost
variation is important, it is substantially smaller than the variation in prices. In addition, energy
labels seem inadequate for resolving consumer uncertainty, which leaves open the possibility that
consumers will decide that figuring out lifetime energy costs is not worth the trouble.
    Missing from the preceding analysis are a variety of appliances, including microwave ovens,
televisions, computers, monitors, fax machines, dehumidifiers, and air purifiers. They are missing
from the prior calculations because data on their energy consumption is much more difficult to come
by. The Energy Star data files contain lists of approved appliances, but neither the Department of
Energy nor the NRC provide a list of non-qualified items. Moreover, for most of these goods, the
information in the Energy Star label does not include an annual cost, but instead relies on metrics
that depend on the intensity of use, which means that consumers have an additional burden of
calculating their use in order to estimate the value of increased efficiency. It is these goods that
are most likely to be the victims of rational inattention.
    The empirical analysis here has focused on the goods for which it is least likely that consumers
will exhibit rational inattention—automobiles and the largest home appliances. Even for these
goods, there seems to be room for rational inattention because variation in energy costs is quite
modest compared to variation in price, and the barriers to assessing lifetime cost, even when labels
are present, is significant. The case is much stronger for the variety of goods that lack any official
labels.


5     Implications for policy
In a wide range of applications, the first-best solution to a market failure caused by an externality
is a Pigouvian tax. In energy economics, Pigouvian taxes typically take the form of a direct tax on
fuel or emissions, and in the presence of a Pigouvian tax there is no role for taxes or regulations
on the product market. Theoretical research has found, however, that product taxes or subsidies
can be used in conjunction with fuel or emissions taxes to improve welfare when both externalities
and an energy paradox are present (Allcott, Mullainathan, and Taubinsky Forthcoming; Fischer,
Harrington, and Parry 2007; Heutel 2011). This logic has been used by policy makers to promote
alternatives to Pigouvian taxes. For example, the government credits recent Corporate Average
Fuel Economy regulations with large improvements in the private welfare of consumers. These
benefits, derived under the assumption that consumers exhibit significant myopia, are pivotal in
making the standards pass the government’s formal cost-benefit analysis (NHTSA 2010). More

                                                  31
generally, the energy paradox is frequently cited as a reason for reliance on policies other than
Pigouvian taxes.
     Rational inattention is not necessarily a market failure, however. If making better choices
requires costly effort, then a policy that, through some incentive, induced consumers to exert effort
has both benefits (from improved choice) and costs (from exerted effort). If inattention is rational,
then consumers have demonstrated by revealed preference that costs exceed benefits, and a policy
that gets them to pay more attention will be welfare decreasing, at least initially. If consumer
attention changes the products on offer in the marketplace by changing producer innovations, then
the welfare impacts of inducing consumers to pay attention are less clear. This is an important
question for future research.
     What does seem clear is that if policy can lower the cost of attention (rather than incentiving
it) then that would improve welfare. The most obvious way of lowering attention costs is to
direct more effort towards the appropriate design of labels, where there is almost certainly room
for improvement. For example, research has shown clearly that consumers are confused by fuel
economy labels written in miles-per-gallon (Larrick and Soll 2008), but after extensive review the
EPA has decided to keep the mpg rating, though they have added the gallons-per-mile rating also.
Allcott (2013) discusses this reform process and concludes that label redesign is highly cost effective.
Unfortunately, there is little to no research on how effective these labels are in practice, and thus
more work is needed. (Allcott and Mullainathan (2010) also argue that more research on labels is
warranted.)
     A closely related question is what factors might make information easier for consumers to
digest. Take as an example “notched” policies, such as the Energy Star label system. Notched
policies present coarse information to consumers, and this may create product design distortions.
Notched policies are an inefficient method of raising energy efficiency because they fail to equate the
marginal costs of improvement across sources (Sallee and Slemrod 2012). Empirical evidence that
these notches do indeed create product distortions is presented in Houde (2013), Sallee and Slemrod
(2012), and the working paper version of this paper. These inefficiencies could be justified, however,
if inattention causes consumers to ignore fine grained information, whereas streamlined information,
such as whether or not an appliance qualifies for the Energy Star label, may be taken into account
because the cost of doing so is low. If consumers are rationally inattentive, the increased salience
from the notched system might outweigh the product design distortions, creating a justification for
such policies. This possibility is explored in more detail in Houde (2013).
     The energy paradox literature has long made an important distinction between “market failures”
and “market barriers”. Whereas market failures are immediately suggestive of a role for policy,
market barriers are factors that make optimal choice of energy efficiency difficult, but they might
be overcome by market forces even without government intervention. Incomplete information is
typically categorized as a market barrier, and Metcalf (1994), for example, argues that informational
uncertainty should therefore give rise to market services that provide information, such as home
energy audits. This suggests perhaps a muted role for policy.
     In the case of rational inattention, however, market forces may not be able to provide a way
around the barrier. For some goods, like microwaves or laptops, even if information provision costs
can be lowered from economies of scale, it may still be the case that consumers will be rationally
inattentive if the other attributes of those goods are so much more important that energy concerns
are rarely pivotal to discrete choice. Even for goods with larger costs, like automobiles, if the un-
certainty stems from heterogeneous parameters—like how much one drives or idiosyncratic driving
styles that affect fuel economy—that consumers themselves do not know, it will be challenging for
a third party (or the government) to solve the information problem for the consumer.
     Finally, if consumers demand too little energy efficiency because of inattention, then any action

                                                  32
that draws attention to efficiency may help reduce externalities. An interesting implication of this
is that programs that create “buzz” around a product or technology can be important and change
the traditional evaluation of programs. For example, Sallee (2011a) demonstrates that the federal
tax credit for the hybrid Prius was effective during a time period when there was excess demand
for the Prius, and therefore the subsidy had no effect on demand. Normally, this would be damning
to any cost-benefit analysis of the subsidy, but if the credit created public awareness of the new
technology (brought attention to hybrids), then it may have been helpful in overcoming welfare
losses due to inattention. A catch to this implication, however, is that if attention is costly then
the welfare implications of driving people’s attention towards something are ambiguous. That is,
lowering information acquisition costs is obviously beneficial, but causing someone to pay attention
to energy efficiency may not be welfare improving, even if it helps them avoid making a product
choice mistake, because they must incur the cost of effort.


6    Conclusion
The goal of this paper is to elevate consideration of rational inattention in the study of energy eco-
nomics. The heuristic model aids this task by providing a framework for thinking about conditions
under which rational inattention is likely to emerge. Specifically, rational inattention is more likely
when uncertainty around variation in energy costs is small, when variation in the differentiation of
products in other dimensions is large, and when effort costs of paying attentions are large.
    The empirical portions of the paper argued that inattention is quite plausible in the markets for
automobiles and home appliances. In particular, a simulation of the automobile market indicates
that the welfare cost to consumers of being inattentive is modest. The paper does not, however,
develop a direct test of inattention or prove its existence. This is a key step for future research.
The analysis in Houde (2012), which integrates costly attention into a discrete choice model for
refrigerators, is an important step in this direction. Future work would do well, not only to test
directly for the role of rational inattention, but also to devote more directed attention to the
exact design of the information transmitted to consumers, both by the government and third-party
certifiers.
    Greater consideration of rational inattention also has implications for both empirical and the-
oretical research in energy economics. In terms of empirics, an energy paradox that is driven by
rational inattention may not be detected by standard empirical methodologies because these meth-
ods take as given the set of products consumers face. Researchers may need to develop additional
tests of the paradox that use data on revealed preferences but nevertheless allow for the possibility
that certain products may not be brought to market. This will likely require tighter integration of
models of consumer demand and product design decisions.
    In terms of theory, rational inattention may indicate how notched program policies, simple
labels, or other policies that present coarse information to consumers may be welfare improving.
These types of public policies are ubiquitous, yet standard economic models suggest that they
are redundant or even welfare decreasing (Sallee and Slemrod 2012). Further study of rational
inattention could provide an explanation as to why these policies exist in the form that they do.
More broadly, the presence of rational inattention complicates the welfare analysis of externality
correcting policies, and additional research is essential to help guide optimal policy design.




                                                  33
References
Allcott, Hunt. 2011. “Consumers’ Perceptions and Misperceptions of Energy Costs.” American
  Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 101 (3):98–104.

———. 2013. “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations from
 the Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (3):30–66.

Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone. 2012. “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 26 (1):3–28.

Allcott, Hunt and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2010. “Behavior and Energy Policy: Online Supporting
  Material.” Science 327 (5970):1204–1205.

Allcott, Hunt, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Dmitry Taubinsky. Forthcoming. “Energy Policy with
  Externalities and Internalities.” Journal of Public Economics .

Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny. Forthcoming. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy
  Paradox.” Review of Economics and Statistics .

Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee. Forthcoming. “What Do Consumers
 Believe About the Future Price of Gasoline?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-
 agement .

Anderson, Soren T., Ian W.H. Parry, James M. Sallee, and Carolyn Fischer. 2011. “Automobile Fuel
 Economy Standards: Impacts, Efficiency and Alternatives.” Review of Environmental Economics
 and Policy 5 (1):89–108.

Anderson, Soren T. and James M. Sallee. 2011. “Using Loopholes to Reveal the Marginal Cost of
 Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards.” American Economic Review 101 (4):1375–
 1409.

Austin, David and Terry Dinan. 2005. “Clearing the Air: The Costs and Consequences of Higher
 CAFE Standards and Increased Gasoline Taxes.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
 Management 50 (3):562–582.

Bento, Antonio M., Shanjun Li, and Kevin Roth. 2012. “Is There an Energy Paradox in Fuel
  Economy? A Note on the Role of Consumer Heterogeneity and Sorting Bias.” Economics Letters
  115 (1):44–48.

Berry, Steven T. 1994. “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation.” RAND
  Journal of Economics 25 (2):242–262.

Bordalo, Peter, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “Competition for Attention.” NBER
  Working Paper 19076.

Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. “Are Consumers My-
  opic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review 103 (1):220–
  256.

Copeland, Adam, Wendy Dunn, and George Hall. 2011. “Inventories and the automobile market.”
  RAND Journal of Economics 42 (1):121–149.


                                              34
Dubin, Jeffrey A. and Daniel L. McFadden. 1984. “An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric
 Appliance Holdings and Consumption.” Econometrica 52 (2):345–362.

Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian W.H. Parry. 2007. “Should Automobile Fuel Econ-
  omy Standards Be Tightened?” The Energy Journal 28 (4):1–29.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2013. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality, Applied to Basic Consumer
 and Equilibrium Theory.” Manuscript: New York University.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. 2005.       “Bounded Rationality and Directed Cognition.”
 Manuscript: New York University.

———. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information Suppression in Compet-
 itive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2):505–540.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. 1998. “The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Stan-
 dards in the U.S.” The Journal of Industrial Economics 46 (1):1–33.

Greene, David L. 2011. “Uncertainty, Loss Aversion, and Markets for Energy Efficiency.” Energy
  Economics 33 (4):608–616.

Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Energy-
  Using Durables.” The Bell Journal of Economics 10 (1):33–54.

Heutel, Garth. 2011. “Optimal Policy Instruments for Externality-Producing Durable Goods Under
  Time Inconsistency.” NBER Working Paper 17083.

Houde, Sébastien. 2012. “How Consumers Respond to Product Certification: A Welfare Analysis
  of the Energy Star Program.” Manuscript: Stanford University.

———. 2013. “Bunching with the Stars: How Firms Respond to Environmental Certification.”
 Manuscript: University of Maryland.

Howarth, Richard B. and Bo Andersson. 1993. “Market Barriers to Energy Efficiency.” Energy
  Economics 15 (4):262–272.

Hutton, R. Bruce and William L. Wilkie. 1980. “Life Cycle Cost: A New Form of Consumer
 Information.” The Journal of Consumer Research 6 (4):349–360.

Kilian, Lutz and Eric R. Sims. 2006. “The Effects of Real Gasoline Prices on Automobile Demand:
  A Structural Analysis Using Micro Data.” Manuscript, University of Michigan.

Langer, Ashley. 2012. “Demographic Preferences and Price Discrimination in New Vehicle Sales.”
  Manuscript: University of Michigan.

Langer, Ashley and Shaun McRae. 2013. “Step on It: Evidence on the Variation in On-Road Fuel
  Economy.” Manuscript: University of Arizona.

Larrick, Richard P. and Jack B. Soll. 2008. “The MPG Illusion.” Science 320 (5883):1593–1594.

Li, Shanjun, Christopher Timmins, and Roger H. von Haefen. 2009. “How Do Gasoline Prices
  Affect Fleet Fuel Economy?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (2):113–137.

Lu, S. 2006. “Vehicle Survivability and Travel Mileage Schedules.” Technical Report DOT HS 809
  952, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

                                              35
Matejka, Filip and Alisdair McKay. 2013. “Rational Inattention to Discrete Choices: A New
 Foundation for the Multinomial Logit Model.” Manuscript: Boston University.

McNeill, Dennis L. and William L. Wilkie. 1979. “Public Policy and Consumer Information: Impact
 of the New Energy Labels.” The Journal of Consumer Research 6 (1):1–11.

Metcalf, Gilbert E. 1994.    “Economics and Rational Conservation Policy.”        Energy Policy
 22 (10):819–825.

Moorthy, Sridhar, Brian T. Ratchford, and Debabrata Talukdar. 1997. “Consumer Informa-
 tion Search Revisited: Theory and Empirical Analysis.” The Journal of Consumer Research
 23 (4):263–277.

NHTSA. 2010. “Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Corporate Average Fuel Economy for MY
 2012-MY 2016 Passenger Cars and Light Trucks.” Washington, DC: National Highway Traffice
 Safety Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation.

NRC. 2002. “Effectiveness and Impact of Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards.”
 National Research Council. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

———. 2011. “Assessment of Fuel Economy Technologies for Light-Duty Vehicles.” National
 Research Council. Washington DC: National Academies Press.

Ratchford, Brian T., Myung-Soo Lee, and Debabrata Talukdar. 2003. “The Impact of the Internet
  on Information Search for Automobiles.” Journal of Marketing Research 40 (2):193–209.

Ratchford, Brian T. and Narasimhan Srinivasan. 1993. “An Empirical Investigation of Returns to
  Search.” Marketing Science 12 (1):73–87.

Reis, Ricardo. 2006. “Inattentive Consumers.” Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (8):1761–1800.

Sallee, James M. 2011a. “The Surprising Incidence of Tax Credits for the Toyota Prius.” American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (2):189–219.

———. 2011b. “The Taxation of Fuel Economy.” Tax Policy and The Economy 25:1–37.

Sallee, James M. and Joel Slemrod. 2012. “Car Notches: Strategic Automaker Responses to Fuel
  Economy Policy.” Journal of Public Economics 96 (11-12):981–999.

Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan. 2009. “Consumer Valuation of Fuel Economy:
  A Microdata Approach.” Proceedings of the National Tax Association Annual Conference on
  Taxation .

Sawhill, James. 2008. “Are Capital and Operating Costs Weighted Equally in Durable Goods
  Purchases? Evidence from the US Automobile Market.” Working Paper, University of California
  at Berkeley.

Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics
  50 (3):665–690.

Stigler, George J. 1961. “The Economics of Information.” Journal of Political Economy 69 (3):213–
  225.



                                               36
Train, Kenneth E. and Clifford Winston. 2007. “Vehicle Choice Behavior and the Declining Market
  Share of U.S. Automakers.” International Economic Review 48 (4):1469–1496.

Turrentine, Thomas S. and Kenneth S. Kurani. 2007. “Car Buyers and Fuel Economy?” Energy
  Policy 35 (2):1213–1223.

US Department of Transportation. 2008. “Corporate Average Fuel Economy for Model Years 2011-
 2015 Passenger Cars and Light Trucks.” Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis.




                                              37
