NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION:
ONE SIZE DOES NOT FIT ALL
Kala Krishna
Alexander Tarasov
Working Paper 19546
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19546

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

Kala Krishna would like to thank the Human Capital Foundation for Support to the Economics Department
at The Pennsylvania State University, the Economics Department at New York University and the
Cowles Foundation at Yale for support as a visitor while this paper was being finished. Alexander
Tarasov gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through
SFB/TR 15. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19546.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Kala Krishna and Alexander Tarasov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Affirmative Action: One Size Does Not Fit All
Kala Krishna and Alexander Tarasov
NBER Working Paper No. 19546
October 2013
JEL No. D61,I23
ABSTRACT
This paper identifies a new reason for giving preferences to the disadvantaged using a model of contests.
There are two forces at work: the effort effect working against giving preferences and the selection
effect working for them. When education is costly and easy to obtain (as in the U.S.), the selection
effect dominates. When education is heavily subsidized and limited in supply (as in India), preferences
are welfare reducing. The model also shows that unequal treatment of identical agents can be welfare
improving, providing insights into when the counterintuitive policy of rationing educational access
to some subgroups is welfare improving.

Kala Krishna
Department of Economics
523 Kern Graduate Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu
Alexander Tarasov
Department of Economics
University of Munich
Ludwigstrasse 28, room215
80539 Munich, Germany
alexander.tarasov@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

1

Introduction

Aﬃrmative action, or more generally, preferences are ubiquitous in much of the world. The idea is often
put as “levelling the playing field”, or even tilting it in favor of certain groups so as to atone for past
injustices. In this paper we develop a rationale for aﬃrmative action that is diﬀerent from that oﬀered so
far in the literature. We develop a simple model of contests with large numbers of agents (so that strategic
eﬀects are removed) and objects. There are two groups: the disadvantaged and the rest of society and two
kinds of ability, native and acquired. The test, which determines placement, values acquired ability more
highly than does society. Eﬀort is expended in order to do well in the test and is potentially wasteful.
Our rationale for aﬃrmative action, or giving preferences to the disadvantaged, is based on modelling
the trade-oﬀ between wasteful eﬀort and selection. On the one hand, conditional on getting in, the
disadvantaged tend to put in more eﬀort just to get in, as they need to do so being disadvantaged.
Such eﬀort is wasteful, which works against giving preferences to the disadvantaged. On the other hand,
conditional on winning, the disadvantaged have higher native ability than the advantaged. This factor
works in favor of having preferences. While there is no one size fits all answer, the results obtained
suggest when aﬃrmative action is likely to be beneficial. The model would apply to the system in place
in India as its rules are very clear cut. It would also apply to the US setting in spirit, though the US
admission system is very nuanced. Our results suggest that in countries, like India, where education is
free and preferences are extreme, such reverse discrimination is very harmful to society. However, in the
US, where education is costly and preferences are marginal, such a policy may well be beneficial.
The examples and simulations provide a number of other interesting results. They suggest that even
when there are no diﬀerences between agents, without imposing any unreasonable conditions, it may be
welfare increasing to create them by allowing some agents access to education while denying it to others.
This could be done by having a lottery that allocates access, or by allowing access to one group and not
another. Such artificial diﬀerences may be optimal both when there is no diﬀerence between what society
values and what the test does, and when there is.
We will proceed as follows. In the rest of the introduction, we first provide some background on the
prevalence and rationale for preferences in the US and the world. Following this we relate our work to the
existing literature. Section 2 lays out the key elements of our model and the raison d’être behind them,
making it clear how our work diﬀers from the literature. It also works through the properties of basic
model. Section 3 defines the “eﬀort eﬀect” and “selection eﬀect” and shows formally that while the former
works against giving preferences, the latter works in favor of preferences. Section 4 uses an example and
develops some simulations to better understand the case for unequal treatment or preferences. Section 5
discusses extensions and Section 6 concludes.

2

1.1

Background

As President Lyndon B. Johnson said in a speech at Howard University1 in 1965:
“Freedom is not enough. You do not take a person who for years has been hobbled by
chains .. bring him to the starting point of a race and then say “you’re free to compete” and
justly believe that you have been completely fair.”
In 1965 President Johnson issued executive order No. 11246 that required all federal contractors to
take aﬃrmative action to promote the hiring of blacks and other minorities. Aﬃrmative action was,
ironically, seen as way to ensure that “employees are treated ...without regard to their race, creed, color
or national origin.” In Philadelphia for example, specific quotas were set for each of the building and
construction trades for blacks, but by the mid seventies, opposition to quotas was growing. In Bakke vs.
the University of California, Davis, the Supreme court ruled that Allan Backke, a white medical school
applicant, was denied admission on the basis of his race as a quota was set aside for deprived minorities.
However, it upheld the use of race as a legitimate criteria in admissions.
Blacks and Hispanics are still given preferences in higher education. Nevertheless, the scope for giving
race based preferences has been considerably reduced over the years. While schools used to actively target
a given level of minority presence, i.e., meet quotas, such “quotas” are not acceptable today. In 2003,
the U.S. Supreme Court approved the use of “points” to promote a diverse student body. However, a
number of states, such as Texas, have moved away from using only race based preferences and added
other measures. Texas now gives the top 10% of students from public high schools in Texas automatic
admission to the state’s flagship public university, UT Austin, in addition to using points to help diversify
the student body as allowed by the 2003 supreme court ruling. The Supreme Court very recently ruled
on Fisher versus the University of Texas which challenged the current policy.2 The ruling seems to have
further reduced the space in which universities could give preferences.
In India, preferences are given in higher education and in public sector jobs to “scheduled castes and
tribes” and these preferences are quite extreme. Preferences reserve a fraction of seats, proportional
to their population share, for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The former were traditionally
relegated to unpleasant tasks as “untouchables”, while the latter were outside the traditional caste system
in India.3 India’s allocation system is based on performance in open competitive exams. The diﬀerence in
cutoﬀ scores for admission between those given preferences and the general category is huge. Moreover,
India’s higher educational system is heavily subsidized. Brazil also approved an aﬃrmative action bill in
2012 that reserves half the spots in federal universities for high school graduates of public schools, and
distributes the reserved spots among black, mixed race and indigenous students according to the racial
1A

leading historically black institution.
Noel Fisher was denied admission to UT Austin and is white.
3 See Frisancho and Krishna (2012) for more on this.
2 Abigail

3

makeup of each state.

1.2

Related Literature

Much of the work in economics on the aﬀects of preferences has focused on what is called models of
statistical discrimination. If ability is unobserved, but correlated with an observable like race, this line of
work argues that race based preferences may be counterproductive or even create inequality where none
existed. Another line of work has focused on aﬃrmative action as a way of mitigating diﬀerential access
to education due to credit constraints. A third line has looked at the issue in the context of contests.
We discuss each of these below. While we focus on the theoretical work, we also discuss the relevant
empirical work as needed.
1.2.1

Statistical Discrimination

Models of statistical discrimination are the dominant line of research in this area. The key papers are
those of Arrow (1973), Phelps (1972) and Coate and Loury (1993). The reason is that preferences create
a “culture of dependence”. Intuitively, less eﬀort is put in by the group given preferences, precisely
because preferences make it easy to get jobs even without eﬀort. As a result, people expect the group
given preferences to be worse, and these expectations are validated in equilibrium. Even if there are no
diﬀerences between groups, quotas giving preferences to one group over the other can end up hurting
them through this channel. See Fang and Moro (2011) for a comprehensive survey of this literature.
On the empirical side, Ferman and Assuncao (2005) suggest that the eﬀort expended by those oﬀered
preferences falls. They exploit a natural experiment which arose when a racial admissions quota was
imposed on two of Rio De Janeiro’s top public universities. Using a diﬀerence -in-diﬀerence approach,
they found a 5.5% decrease in standardized test scores among the favored group. This constituted a 25%
widening of the achievement gap. Moro (2003) estimates a structural model of statistical discrimination
for the US and his work suggests that though wage inequality has declined in the US this is not because
of a switch in the equilibrium. A counterfactual exercise suggests that in a color-blind society blacks’
wage would have been on average more than 20% higher. Moro and Norman (2004) incorporate general
equilibrium eﬀects in the labor market into a model with statistical discrimination. They find that while
aﬃrmative action may increase the minority workers’ incentive to invest in learning while diminishing
the non minority’s.
In any case, it is far from clear that aﬃrmative action on the basis of race is optimal. There is concern
that admitting students based on preferences creates “mismatch”. In extreme cases, this mismatch may
result in their being worse oﬀ than if they went to a school or program better suited to their preparation
level. See Rothstein and Yoon (2008) for work on Law Schools in the US and Frisancho-Robles and
Krishna (2012) for work on quotas in India. On the other hand, Alon and Tienda (2007) suggest that

4

students admitted under the 10% rule in Texas had a higher graduation rate. Arcidiacano et. al (2012)
shows that this may be due to their choosing easier courses/majors. In addition, giving preferences on
the basis of income rather than race seems to be called for. Cestau, Epple and Sieg (2012) empirically
investigate the importance of using race as basis for aﬃrmative action. They develop and estimate a
structural model of admission to a gifted and talented program for children entering the first grade
kindergarten program in a mid sized urban school district in the US. Their work suggests that once
admission to the program is allowed to depend on being part of the free lunch program or not4 , further
conditioning on race gives little benefit to society.
1.2.2

Credit Constraints

The second line of work, distinct from statistical discrimination, looks at preferences in the presence of
credit constraints. The basic idea is that markets work well in allocating agents to seats. Monetary bids
are just transfers and as long as those with the most to gain from obtaining the seats are also those that
society wants to have the seats, i.e., there is no misalignment in social and private benefit, markets will
give the first best allocation at the lowest cost. Contests on the other hand involve wasted resources even
if they result in the same allocations. Thus, they are dominated by the market. However, if there are
credit constraints, then contests may give a better allocation and so be worth the wasted resources they
engender, see Fernandez and Gali (1999). Of course, to the extent that credit constraints are income
rather than race based, such arguments also favor income based preferences. Also, basic economics (in the
form of the principle of targeting which calls for policies to operate on the same margin as the distortion)
would suggest that preferences are not the first best solution if the distortion lies in access to credit.5
1.2.3

Contests

There is considerable recent work on the role of preferences in education couched in the contests setup,
both with small numbers of agents so that there is a strategic eﬀect, and with large numbers where there
is not. Here the main issue is whether contests encourage eﬀort or not and eﬀort is seen as being good
per se.
Fu (2007) and Fain (2009) have a model with two agents, a minority one who is handicapped relative
to the non minority agent. They compete to get in to a school. Eﬀort raises performance at some cost,
though performance has a random component. Aﬃrmative action (giving more weight to the score of
minorities) can increase the eﬀort expended by all agents, and if this is the objective, then aﬃrmative
action may be desirable.
More recently, Chade, Lewis, and Smith (2011) model a duopoly setting where colleges set admission
standards and the ability of students is only partially observable. Students choose the portfolio of schools
4 This
5 For

is oﬀered to poor students in the US.
a nice recent survey on the role of credit constraints in education, see Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2012).

5

to apply to and schools choose admission rules. They show a number of interesting asymmetries arise in
the comparative statics and argue that their model helps explain the observed fall in minority applicants
to top public universities after aﬃrmative action was removed. Such schools were removed from the
portfolio of minority students who now had less of a chance of getting in.
These strategic models are less closely related to our work than those based on a competitive setting
like that in Fryer and Loury (2013). This paper looks at the least cost way of achieving a given diversity
goal. In their model there are a given number of slots that agents want to acquire. In the first period,
agents make investment decisions and these decisions result in a distribution of second period abilities.
The minority group is seen as having higher costs of such investments and as a result are on average
disadvantaged ex-post in terms of getting these slots. As there are no externalities or distortions, the
market allocation of slots is eﬃcient. They ask, when should the intervention occur: Ex ante or ex post?
Should intervention should be sighted (based on race say) or blind (based on say being in the top 10%).
They show that if the policy can be sighted, then ex post intervention (a subsidy for the disadvantaged
group) is all that is needed to meet the target as this subsidy also raises the ex ante incentive to invest
by the minority group. In contrast to their work, we explicitly model a possible reason for aﬃrmative
action: namely that native ability is more valuable to society than acquired ability and look for when a
case for unequal treatment can be made.
Chan and Eyster (2003) look at whether sighted or blind intervention is more eﬃcient. They argue
that a ban on aﬃrmative action is ineﬃcient in practice. Universities with a wish for diversity will just
obtain it using an alternative criterion which is less eﬃcient at identifying student quality. Fryer, Loury
and Yuret (2008) estimate these costs to be four to five times as high as color-conscious aﬃrmative
action.6
Hickman (2011) compares quotas, admission preferences, and a color blind system and shows that they
diﬀer in terms of their eﬀects. He uses an all pay auction setting and then takes the limit of the auction
as the number of agents rises. In an auction setting, the distribution of costs (or valuations) of those
you are competing with plays an essential role in how you bid. With a quota system, minorities compete
for slots only with other minorities who have a worse distribution of costs than non minorities. With a
points system, where minorities are given some points and then compete with the general population,
competitors have better costs. With a color blind system, that does not give preferences there are no
points given to minorities. As a result, with quotas, the best minorities put in less eﬀort than under a
system of preferences, while the worst minorities put in more eﬀort. For non minorities, the eﬀects are
6 There

is also the question of whether lower admission standards result in minority students being out of their depth

and so performing poorly. There is a literature on mismatch and catchup that relates to this question which we will not
say much about here. See Frisancho-Robles and Krishna (2012) for a literature review and some evidence on this topic
using Indian data. Loury and Garman (1993) show that for a given performance, blacks gain more in subsequent earnings
from attending selective colleges than whites. However, for many blacks and some whites at such institutions the gain from
attending a selective college may be oﬀset by worse performance.

6

reversed. Hickman focuses on both the eﬀort elicited and on the gap in attainment and cutoﬀs. The
former is seen as a positive and the latter as a negative. It is worth noting that similar results, though
for diﬀerent reasons, occur in the presence of uncertainty in performance. In this case, the eﬀort profile
is hump shaped in ability. Agents that are very good need to put in little eﬀort and those that are very
bad know that they have little chance of getting in and so choose to put in little eﬀort. Agents who are in
between are highly motivated as their chances of getting in rise steeply with eﬀort. Giving preferences to
the disadvantaged reduces their cutoﬀ score. This reduces the eﬀort of the more able in the disadvantaged
group but raises that of the less able and as the latter are predominant, tends to raise overall eﬀort.
We focus on anonymous contests7 and the eﬀect of preferences in such settings. While contests
play many roles8 , we abstract from most of these below and zoom in on their eﬀort costs. Contests
encourage eﬀort, and to the extent that such eﬀort is under/over supplied, this directly raises/reduces
welfare. Examples of wasteful eﬀort are manyfold: managers may undercut their competitors at the cost
of the company bottom line and salesmen may steal their rival’s customers. Eﬀort itself tends to be
privately beneficial but socially wasteful when there are rents being competed for, or agents incentives
are misaligned with those of the principal or society. We focus only on the costs of eﬀort and its social
versus private benefits in this paper, abstracting from other dimensions such as those above.
Although we use placement in educational institutions as the example, other applications are possible.
Our setting is non strategic with large numbers of applicants who understand they cannot aﬀect the
equilibrium cutoﬀs by their actions. This environment makes it much easier to analyze the case for
preferences. A number of the insights in Siegel (2009) hold in our framework, albeit in a more transparent
manner. There is also recent related work on contests with head starts, see Siegel (2013). Our setup
diﬀers from the work on contests with head starts both in terms of being non strategic, and in allowing
intrinsic diﬀerences between agents in their abilities. With head starts, all agents typically diﬀer only in
terms of how far ahead they are, while we allow for interactions between native and acquired ability and
eﬀort. We also explicitly focus on social welfare and how policies aﬀect it.

2

The Basic Model

We first lay out the rationale for the basic assumptions made. Then we setup the model and explain how
it works.
7 Anonymous

contests provide a non-strategic setting (analogous to that of monopolistic competition) as this makes more

sense in the education application we are interested in.
8 For example, contests identify latent talent that might not otherwise be unearthed. The international Math Olympics
or the Putnam Exam in the US (administered by the Mathematical Association of America) for example allows students to
discover their math ability at an early age. See Kenderov (2006) for a discussion of the role of competitions on education
in mathematics.

7

2.1

The Setup

Our basic setup makes a few assumptions. First, we posit that performance in the contest is related
to total ability which is seen as arising from native ability and acquired ability. This seems reasonable.
Both innate ability and training are needed for superior performance, though the extent to which one can
substitute for the other is an open question. In this context it is worth mentioning the super 30 program
in India which has attracted a lot of attention. Anand Kumar, an India Mathematician from humble
beginnings, started a program that tries to level the playing field for scheduled caste/tribe students in the
Indian State of Bihar. It trains them to take the JEE (joint entrance exam) for entry into elite engineering
schools in India like the IITs (Indian Institutes of Technology).9 From 2002 onwards, 30 disadvantaged
students were chosen on the basis of an aptitude/ability test by the program. What is amazing is that
the program has consistently placed over 90%, and often 100% of them these elite institutions.10
The results of the super 30 program suggest that natural ability, once combined with some training
(acquired ability), yields large improvements in performance, i.e., the cross partial derivatives of performance with respect to native and acquired ability are positive. We assume that groups may diﬀer in
terms of the distribution of acquired ability as diﬀerences in background create diﬀerences in acquired
ability so that even if native ability is similarly distributed between groups as posited, total ability may
not be.
Second, we assume that (i) total ability and eﬀort give rise to performance in the exam, (ii) that
there is no randomness in outcomes, and (iii) that eﬀort to improve exam performance has no innate
value. That higher ability and eﬀort raise performance is uncontroversial. That there is no randomness
in exams is less so. After all, everyone has a bad day and this aﬀects performance. Or one may get lucky
and get exactly what one studied in the exam and do better than someone who focused on topics that
were not tested! Though randomness in performance complicates matters, in many ways our basic results
remain unchanged as discussed in Section 5. Finally, the assumption that studying for the exam has no
innate value needs some discussion. The education literature distinguishes between assessments based on
exams which encourage rote learning, where studying may have no innate value,11 and those based on
“formative” and “authentic” assessments. Formative assessments allow students to both develop their
abilities and assess their progress. They tend to integrate teaching and learning with assessment. Often,
they do not require formal grading, but a demonstration of the ability to complete some task. Authentic
assessments involve demonstration of ability in a real-world context. Studying for such exams may indeed
be valuable in itself. We show that even if agents obtain private benefits from studying, what is critical
9 The

JEE is fiercely competitive and at a very high level. It is said that it is harder to qualify in this exam than to get

into Harvard, MIT or Caltech! Smart upper middle class students with all the advantages of their background and training
routinely fail this exam, despite tutoring and maniacal eﬀort. There are preferences for backward castes and tribes that
make it much easier for them to get in.
1 0 See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super_30 for more on this.
1 1 There is some evidence that high stakes testing does not improves student learning. See Amerein and Berliner (2002).

8

to our arguments is that they study more than they would otherwise. This excessive eﬀort is what is
wasteful.12
Third, we assume that society values native ability more than the contest does. The contest allocates
seats according to the total ability of the agent. However, society would prefer that seats be allocated
to those most likely to contribute to the social good. It is reasonable to expect that agents with high
native ability are more likely to make the major breakthroughs of use to society than less able, but highly
groomed candidates. In other words, society would want Albert Einstein to be educated even if he was
bad at exams. Moreover, agents cannot internalize their social contribution so that there is a mismatch
between who gets in and who should get in.

2.2

The Specification

There is a continuum of heterogeneous agents, with measure one, who decide whether to take an exam
that will be used as the basis for admission. An agent is admitted if his performance exceeds a cutoﬀ
performance level denoted by ̃ . This cutoﬀ is determined in equilibrium to fill the available seats. We
assume that there is no randomness in outcomes.13
As there is a continuum of agents, the environment is non strategic. Agents take a summary statistic
(the cutoﬀ score) as given, and maximize their objective function. In equilibrium the cutoﬀ score assumed
is validated. This is analogous to models of monopolistic competition where firms take the aggregate price
index as given and make their choices (on pricing, entry, etc.) to maximize their profits, and where, in
equilibrium, the price index that firms take as given is exactly the price index that emerges from the
profit maximizing behavior of firms.14 While the body of the paper looks at admission to a single school,
we explain why the results generalize in Section 5 and show this in an Appendix that is available on
request.
Agents diﬀer according to their abilities. Specifically, we distinguish between two types of ability:
natural and acquired abilities. Natural ability is the ability an agent was born with, while acquired
ability is accumulated prior taking the exam (for instance, acquired in high school, or from tutoring).
The performance of an agent is denoted by  where:
 =  ( +   ),

(1)

where  and  are natural and acquired abilities respectively,  =  + is total ability. For simplicity,
we assume that the two types of ability are perfect substitutes. Finally,  is the eﬀort undertaken by the
1 2 We

ignore any social benefits of studying for the exam in this paper. Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) suggests that such

externalities are limited, at least for secondary school.
1 3 The eﬀects of dropping this assumption are discussed in Section 5.
1 4 Formally, this is an anonymous game. The game is called anonymous because players’ preferences depend only on their
own actions and the distribution of all other agents’ actions, i.e. on the aggregate behavior of all other agents, not on who
plays what.

9

agent to pass the test. We assume that  ( ) is increasing in both its arguments and the returns to
eﬀort in terms of performance are increasing in ability, i.e.,  (·) ≥ 0. Moreover,  ( ) is concave in :

 ≤ 0. Eﬀort has a private cost denoted by () with 0 (·)  0 and 00 (·) ≥ 0 and (0) = 0. As eﬀort is
costly, this immediately implies that if an agent decides to take the exam, then the eﬀort expended will
be the minimum needed to attain the cutoﬀ denoted by ̃ If he does not take the exam then his eﬀort

level is zero. Hence, the eﬀort level for agents who decide to take the exam is implicitly defined by  in
equation (2):
 ( ) = ̃

(2)

Let this eﬀort level be denoted by ∗ ( ̃ ).
Higher ability agents need to put in less eﬀort to attain a given performance cutoﬀ so that eﬀort levels
are decreasing in ability. This follows from totally diﬀerentiating equation (2) to get
 (·)
∗ ( ̃ )
=−
 0

 (·)

(3)

Moreover, eﬀort rises as the performance cutoﬀ rises,
∗ ( ̃ )
1
 0
=
 ()
 ̃

2.3

(4)

Equilibrium

The private returns from education of an agent with ability  are given by () − , where  is the tuition
level. Without loss of generality, the outside option is normalized to zero. In the text, we assume that
eﬀort expended in studying for the exam has no intrinsic value as it does not aﬀect the payoﬀs, (),
which depend only on . In the Appendix, we incorporate an intrinsic value of eﬀort by letting payoﬀs
when educated depend on eﬀort and show that the essence of our results remains. Though eﬀort has two
roles in this augmented model; it raises payoﬀs when educated and it helps you get in, only the former
has social value. When there are rents to be appropriated from getting in, agents exert more eﬀort than
socially optimal in order to be admitted which is wasteful.
An individual decides to take the exam if doing so is better than not doing so. That is, an agent with
total ability  takes the exam if and only if
() −  ≥ (∗ ( ̃ ))
We assume that () is increasing in : more able individuals gain more from education.
Define ∗ by:
(∗ ) −  = (∗ (∗  ̃ )).
The marginal agent (the agent with ability ∗ ) is indiﬀerent between getting into university or not. Agents
with ability below the cutoﬀ ∗ choose not to put in the eﬀort required to pass the exam while students
10

above this cutoﬀ choose to put in the required eﬀort.15
We assume that the natural and acquired abilities are independently distributed across agents. The

distribution functions are given by  ( ) and  ( ) on [0 
max ] and [0 max ], respectively. Then,

the distribution function for the total ability  is () on [0 max ], where
() =

Z

0


max

 ( − ) ()

(5)


16
and max = 
max + max .

The equilibrium in the model is determined by two conditions. First, the total mass of agents accepted
to the university equals the number of available seats. Second, the agent with ability ∗ is indiﬀerent
between going to university and not. The former condition means
1 − (∗ ) = 

(6)

where  is the number of seats (which is exogenously given and strictly less then one). The latter
condition means that
(∗ ) −  = (∗ (∗  ̃ ))

(7)

Hence, we have two equations with two unknowns: ∗ and ̃ . In particular, we can solve (6) for ∗ and
then, given ∗ (), solve (7) for ̃ .17 Since () is increasing in  and ∗ ( ̃ ) is decreasing, () −  −
(∗ ( ̃ )) is increasing in  Note that the equilibrium value of ∗ depends solely on , while ̃ depends

not only on  but also on the tuition level  .
As depicted in Figure 1, in equilibrium, the eﬀort level is zero till ability ∗ . At this point it jumps to
∗ (∗  ̃ ) the eﬀort required to get in. Then, eﬀort falls with ability and at some point may go to zero
as depicted if able enough agents can attain the performance cutoﬀ with no eﬀort.18
The next lemma shows what happens if the number of seats is increased or the tuition level rises.
Lemma 1 A greater number of available seats or a higher tuition level decreases the performance cutoﬀ
̃ That is,

̃


 0 and

̃


 0. Moreover, a greater number of available seats reduces the ability cutoﬀ

though a higher tuition has no eﬀect on it. That is,
1 5 This

∗


 0 and

∗


= 0

corresponds to Siegel (2009) where the reach and power of an agent are critical in defining the equilibrium. In our

setup, the “reach” of an agent is the score at which his gain from admission is zero, the cutoﬀ score or “threshold” is the
reach of the marginal agent, and the “power” of an agent is his surplus from choosing a score equal to the threshold score.
This is also his payoﬀ in equilibrium.
1 6 Note

that Pr( + ≤ ) =

max
 =


Pr(  − ) Pr( ). Replacing the sum with the integral gives the equation.

=0

In other words, the area under the line  +  = , (), is the same as calculating the density of the population below
the line  +  =  at a given   ( ( −  ) ( )) and then integrating over all  .
1 7 We assume that the number of seats is small enough that an interior equilibrium occurs.
1 8 As the cost of this eﬀort at ∗ is just compensated for by the increase in earnings from going to university, the payoﬀs
depicted in Figure 2 are continuous, though there may be a kink at ∗∗  the ability at which no eﬀort is needed to be
admitted. They are also increasing in ability.

11

Figure 1: Eﬀort in Equilibrium
6
t

∗ (∗  ̃ )

0

t

¡
¡
ª

∗ ( ̃ )

t
∗

∗∗

t




Figure 2: Payoﬀs from Education
6

() −  − (∗ ( ̃ ))
?

0

∗

∗∗

12





Proof. In the Appendix.
∗

A greater number of seats lets agents with lower ability in ( 
  0) and as there are more seats,
the cutoﬀ performance falls

̃


 0 In Figure 1, the eﬀort curve shifts down and to the left with the

marginal agent being of lower ability and putting in less eﬀort.
Similarly, a rise in the tuition level decreases the return from being educated of all agents at a given
eﬀort level. In order to make the marginal agent indiﬀerent between getting in and not, the eﬀort need
to get in, and hence the performance cutoﬀ, must fall as the tuition rises ( ̃  0). As the performance
cutoﬀ falls, all agents need to put in less eﬀort to be admitted. In Figure 1, the eﬀort curve would shift
∗

down, with the identity of the marginal agent being unaﬀected ( 
 = 0), as the tuition rose.
Due to the lack of randomness in outcomes, agents are able to put in just the eﬀort needed to ensure
they attain the cutoﬀ performance, ̃ However, since eﬀort does not improve ability, these eﬀorts are
a social waste, even though they are privately valuable and are necessary to allocate seats.19 Eﬀort
expended is then the maximum of the eﬀort needed to get in and the eﬀort chosen for other reasons.
Eﬀort is excessive when the eﬀort needed to get in exceeds that which would be chosen for other reasons.
As the eﬀort needed to get in falls with ability, unless the eﬀort chosen for other reasons falls even faster
(which is hard to motivate) lower ability agents are the ones who expend excessive eﬀort and the essence
of our results goes through. See the Appendix for details.

2.4

Social Welfare

We postulate that natural ability is more important than acquired ability for society. To capture this we
assume that the social gains from education of an agent with abilities  and  are given by ( + ),
where  ∈ [0 1]. Here,  represents the relative importance of the acquired ability for the society. If 
is equal to zero, then the society cares only about natural ability. If  is equal to one, then natural and
acquired abilities are of the same importance for the society. Social welfare is obtained by integrating
social surplus over those with total ability over the cutoﬀ level ∗ .
Z
´
³
 =
( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃ )) −   ( ) ( )

(8)

 + ≥∗

where  is the social cost of education per student. As tuition is a lump-sum transfer,  does not directly
aﬀect welfare. It only aﬀects it via the eﬀort put in by agents. In addition, as there is no uncertainty in
our setup, agents below the cutoﬀ ability do not expend any eﬀort.
Given the number of seats, there are two distortions in the economy. In the model, the eﬀort expended
to pass the exam is determined by the tuition level: if the tuition is low, then getting in is very valuable
and the performance cutoﬀ is high. To make the cutoﬀ, much eﬀort is needed. This eﬀort is wasteful
1 9 While

assuming eﬀorts have no eﬀect on ability or payoﬀs might seem a bit extreme, it is not an unreasonable char-

acterization of many entrance exams which involve studying for the test and emphasize memorization rather than deep
understanding. In addition, relaxing this assumption does not change the flavor of the results as shown in the Appendix.

13

which results in welfare losses. In (8), this loss is equal to (∗ ( +   ̃ )) for an agent with ability
 =  +  .
The other distortion, given the number of seats, arises due to social benefit deviating from private
benefit. In particular, it is optimal for society that the agents with the highest social benefit get in.
However, in practice, those with the highest private gain enter. For example, if admission is on the basis
of exam performance, and the latter depends on the sum of natural and acquired ability, but social benefit
comes from a function that puts more weight on natural ability than acquired ability, then the wrong
people will be admitted. Note that, in the first best case, the number of seats should be set so that the
social cost of an additional seat equals the social benefit generated. If the number of seats diﬀers from
this level there are welfare costs.
Next, we explore the eﬀects of the tuition level and the number of seats on social welfare. In many
countries the best public education is much cheaper and often far better than private education. However,
it is rationed by strict performance cutoﬀs. In India, for example, until recently, all higher education
institutions were public, close to free, and seats were allocated by performance in a school leaving exam.
Even now, the best colleges remain public. The alternative to a bad domestic placement is to go abroad,
where admission to comparable institutions is much easier, and to pay non-resident tuition. As a result,
those going abroad to study from India seem to fall into two categories: those admitted with funding
who tend go to the best places abroad, and those without funding who pay their own way, often at less
prestigious places as the best places fund whoever cannot pay. Turkey has a similar system. In fact, in
most continental European countries, higher education is public and free. In some countries, students
even get a government stipend to go to school. It is easy to see that this system encourages agents to
put in more eﬀort than is socially optimal when the number of seats is small.
Next we build our understanding of the model by first considering what happens when  = 1 and
find the optimal tuition level given the number of seats and the optimal number of seats. Then we look
at the eﬀect of  6= 1
2.4.1

Optimal Tuition and Seats with  = 1

We show that the following proposition holds.
Proposition 1 For any given number of seats, the welfare maximizing tuition elicits zero eﬀort from the
marginal agent. When  = 1 that is the society values native and acquired ability equally, and conditional
on no preferences, the first best can be achieved by setting tuition at the full cost of education and setting
the number of seats so that all seats are demanded and the marginal agent puts in no eﬀort.
Proof. In the Appendix.
The intuition behind the result is straightforward. An increase in  has no aﬀect on the identity of
the marginal agent as long as the equilibrium eﬀort level of the marginal agent is positive. In addition,
14

as it is a transfer, it has no direct eﬀect on welfare. Its welfare consequences arise through its eﬀects on
agent’s actions. As an increase in  reduces the payoﬀs from admission, it reduces the eﬀort expended by
the marginal agent (whose identity is unchanged by the tuition increase) and so reduces the performance
cutoﬀ. This reduction in the performance cutoﬀ in turn reduces the eﬀort each agent choosing to become
educated needs to incur, which raises welfare. This is the case until  is such that zero eﬀort is expended
by the marginal agent. In this way, the optimal tuition removes the distortion caused by wasted eﬀorts.
The optimal tuition level,   , is given by
  = (∗ )

(9)

and the equilibrium performance cutoﬀ is determined by
∗ (∗  ̃ ) = 0 ⇐⇒ ̃ =  (∗  0)
It is worth noting that higher tuition does have a redistributive eﬀect. The least able agents are
unaﬀected as the alternative to going to university is the same and they are indiﬀerent between these
two options. The more able lose from an increase in tuition. When tuition rises, there are two eﬀects on
the payoﬀs from education (given by () −  − (∗ ( ̃ ))). First, keeping eﬀort fixed, the increase in
tuition shifts the surplus curve down in a parallel fashion. Second, less eﬀort is expended by all agents in
order to get in (as ̃ falls) and this shifts the surplus curve up till the surplus of agent ∗ is again zero.
As the less able put in more eﬀort, this fall in eﬀort is more valuable to them, so that the shift up is
greater for less able agents and this flattens the surplus curve. As a result, individual welfare falls with
tuition increases, and more so for the more able. Figure 3 illustrates this reasoning. Of course, as wasted
eﬀort is reduced, social welfare rises.

2.5

Bringing in Selection

As discussed above, the distortion caused by wasted eﬀort can be eliminated by setting a suﬃciently high
tuition level. However, the distortion caused by selection into education can not be completely removed.
Only the agents with the highest social gains from education should fill the available seats. Specifically,
given the number of seats to be filled, agents with abilities  and  , such that ( +  ) ≥ ∗ ,
should be accepted where ∗ is determined by
Z

 ( ) ( ) = 

( + )≥∗

However, competition results in the acceptance condition  +  ≥ ∗ . As a result, some agents, who
should not be accepted to the university, are accepted and vice versa, which in turn leads to welfare
losses.
Figure 4 illustrates the distortion for the case when −1 (∗ )  ∗  −1 (∗ ). In Figure 4, agents

15

Figure 3: Payoﬀs from Education: a Rise in T
6
() −  − ∗ ( ̃ )
(2)( ̃ falls)
(1)(T rises)

0

∗





Figure 4: The Selection Distortion
 6

∗

−1



@
@

@
@
( ) H
HH @
HH@
H@
HH
@ 
H
@H
@HH
@ HH
HH
@
@
∗
0

−1 (∗ )
∗

16



with abilities in the triangle ∗ −1 (∗ ) should be accepted to the university on the basis of maximizing
social welfare, but they do not apply, as their individual gains from education are less than their outside
option. Instead, agents with abilities in the triangle ∗  −1 (∗ ) take the exam and get in, while the
social gains from their education are lower than those of the agents in the triangle ∗ −1 (∗ ). As the
cutoﬀ ability ∗ is determined by the number of seats , the optimal choice of  can limit the welfare
losses caused by the selection distortion, but can not completely eliminate them.
Notice that if  is equal to one, private gains are equal to social gains, so that the first best outcome
can be achieved. Specifically, the number of seats should be such that only agents with ( +  ) ≥ 

take the exam, which implies that the equilibrium value of ∗ must be equal to −1 ( ). In this case, the

optimal number of seats,  , is such that the solution ∗ ( ) of
1 − (∗ ) = 
is equal to −1 ( ). Finally, the optimal tuition   in this case is equal to the social cost of education,
.

3

Reservations and Welfare

In this section, we ask if there is a case for treating groups of agents diﬀerently. We assume there are two
groups of agents indexed by  ∈ {1 2}, which have identical distributions of natural ability and potentially
diﬀerent distributions of acquired ability. The latter is motivated by the fact that agents with diﬀerent
social backgrounds have had diﬀerent educational inputs prior to taking the exam, which in turn results
1
2
in diﬀerent acquired abilities on their part. In particular, we assume that 
( ) = 
( ) ≡  ( ),
1
2
while 
( ) º 
( ) where º stands for the likelihood stochastic order. Hence,

2 ( )
1 ( )
 2
for any    :   .
1
 ()
 ()

This means that group 1 is more favored in terms of acquired ability than group 2. In addition, we
assume that the distribution of natural ability has a log-concave density. This assumption is needed to
ensure the likelihood stochastic order of the distributions of total ability: i.e.,  1 () º  2 ().20
The share of each group in the total mass of agents (which is normalized to unity) is denoted by
  , where  1 +  2 = 1. A share of available seats is reserved for each group of agents. We denote this
reservation quota by  , where 1 + 2 = 1. If these quotas are binding, then the cutoﬀs for the two
groups will diﬀer.
Rewriting the equilibrium conditions (6) and (7) to reflect this, let
Z 
max


 () =
 ( − )
()  = 1 2

(10)

0

2 0 See

Theorem 1.C.9 in Shaked and Shanthikumar (2007) for the proof. This assumption is not very restrictive, as a

number of commonly used distributions such as the normal, uniform, Gamma, and Beta distributions satisfy it.

17


where 
max is the upper bound of  ( ). Then

¡
¢
  1 −   (∗ ) =  
(∗ ) − 

= (∗ (∗  ̃ )) where  = 1 2

(11)
(12)

Here, ∗ is the total ability of the marginal agent from group  and ̃ is the performance cutoﬀ for agents
from group .
Having binding reservations is equivalent to setting diﬀerent performance cutoﬀs across groups for
acceptance to the university. Social welfare in this case is given by
Z
´
³
1
 () =  1
( )
( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃1 )) −   ( )
 + ≥∗
1

+ 2

Z

 + ≥∗
2

´
³
2
( )
( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃2 )) −   ( )

Next, we explore how imposing reservations aﬀects social welfare. To reduce notation, let 2 = , so
that 1 = 1 − . The reservation quota  has two eﬀects on the social welfare. First, changes in  have
an impact on the performance cutoﬀs ̃1 and ̃2 and, therefore, on the eﬀort put in by the agents. For
example, a rise in  (i.e. more seats for the “underprivileged” second group) decreases ̃2 and increases
̃1 . This in turn implies that agents from group 2 need to put in less eﬀort, while agents from group 1
need to put in more eﬀort to get in. We call this the eﬀort eﬀect on the social welfare. Second, there
is an impact on selection into education, as ∗1 and ∗2 are aﬀected by  as well. Specifically, a rise in
 decreases ∗2 and increases ∗1 . That is, more agents from group 2 and fewer agents from group 1 are
accepted. We call this the selection eﬀect. Hence, we have the following:
"
#
 (∗1  ∗2  ̃1  ̃2 )  ̃1
 (∗1  ∗2  ̃1  ̃2 )  ̃2
 (∗1  ∗2  ̃1  ̃2 )
=
+



 ̃1
 ̃2
"
#
 (∗1  ∗2  ̃1  ̃2 ) ∗2
 (∗1  ∗2  ̃1  ̃2 ) ∗1
+
+
∗1

∗2

=  + 
where  and  stand for the eﬀort (changes in  aﬀect the performance cutoﬀ and via it eﬀort)
and selection eﬀects (changes in  aﬀect the total ability cutoﬀ and aﬀect selection) on the welfare,
respectively. In the Appendix, we derive exact expressions for  and 

3.1

Identical Groups

Before we proceed to the analysis of the general case, we first ask whether there is a case for slight
1
2
preferences if the groups of agents are the same: i.e., 
( ) ≡ 
( ) even if social and private

benefits from education diﬀer. Not surprisingly, the answer is no. The intuition is that on the margin,
the gains of one group are exactly made up for by the losses of the other in this case.
18

Let us define the non-discrimination quota as the quota which results from market clearing so that
̃1 = ̃2 . Note that this immediately implies that ∗1 = ∗2 . The following proposition holds.
1
2
Proposition 2 If 
( ) ≡ 
( ), then whatever be  welfare is locally unchanged in response to

the quota when it is set at the non-discrimination level, i.e., such that  =   .
Proof. In the Appendix.
The intuition behind this is straightforward. Given a change in , agents in one group have their
performance cutoﬀ fall (the cutoﬀ falls by more if the group is small so that asymmetry in the size of the
groups does not aﬀect this result), which reduces the eﬀort for all abilities and raises the welfare of this
group. The opposite happens for the other group. If the initial equilibrium is non discriminatory and the
groups have the same distributions, then the gains to one group exactly cancel the losses to the other so
that welfare is unchanged. In other words, the eﬀort eﬀect evaluated at the non-discrimination quota is
equal to zero. Similarly, there is no eﬀect on the total welfare through selection. The welfare losses due
to the selection eﬀect of one group are completely oﬀset by the gains of the other group.
Even though welfare does not change when a “marginal quota” is imposed when groups are identical
in their acquired as well as native abilities, this does not mean that quotas are always welfare reducing
with identical groups. Strictly binding quotas may well raise welfare. The reason is that under certain
conditions, the non-discrimination quota gives a minimum, not a maximum of welfare! We explore this
result using simulations in the next section.

3.2

Non Identical Groups

When groups are not identical, even marginal quotas can aﬀect welfare. That is, starting from a point
where the two groups have the same cutoﬀ, but diﬀer in terms of their ability distributions, discriminating
in favor of one group can raise the social welfare. To better understand when this can occur we evaluate
the eﬀort and selection eﬀects ( and ) when the initial equilibrium is non discriminatory. We show
that the eﬀort eﬀect is negative, which calls for discrimination against the weaker group, but that the
selection eﬀect is positive which calls for discrimination in favor of the weaker group.
The following proposition holds.
1
2
Proposition 3 If 
( ) º 
( ), and the distribution of natural ability has a log-concave density,

then the eﬀort eﬀect of discriminating in favor of the weaker group (group 2), evaluated at the nondiscrimination quota, is negative. That is,
=∗  0.
Proof. In the Appendix.

19

Moving seats from group 1 to group 2 increases the performance cutoﬀ for group 1 and decreases it
for group 2, implying that agents from group 1 put in more eﬀort to get in, while agents from group 2
put in less eﬀort. As the distribution of total ability in group 1 stochastically dominates that in group
2, in the non-discrimination equilibrium, agents from group 1 put in less eﬀort on average than agents
from group 2. As a result, discriminating in favor of group 2 (a rise in ) raises total wasted eﬀort and
decreases the social welfare compared to the non-discrimination equilibrium.
Next we examine the selection eﬀect evaluated at the non-discrimination quota. Specifically, the
following proposition holds.
1
2
Proposition 4 If 
( ) º 
( ), then the selection eﬀect of discriminating in favor of the weaker

group (group 2) evaluated at the non-discrimination quota is positive. That is,
=∗  0.
Proof. In the Appendix.
The intuition is simple. When group 2 is more disadvantaged in terms of acquired ability, those agents
from group 2 who do get must on average have a higher average natural ability.21 In fact, we can show
1
2
that if 
( ) º 
( ), then in the non-discrimination equilibrium, the distribution of natural

ability among agents from group 2 accepted to the university stochastically dominates (in the likelihood
ratio order) that among accepted agents from group 122 Since likelihood ratio dominance ensures first
order stochastic dominance, accepted agents from group 2 have a higher natural ability on average than
do accepted agents from group 1. As society cares more about the natural ability, than does the exam,
a quota in favor of group 2 increases welfare by raising the average natural ability of admitted students.
>From the above considerations, we can see that a quota in favor of the disadvantaged group can
decrease or increase welfare depending on the magnitudes of the eﬀort and selection eﬀects. Group 2 is
the disadvantaged group (because of a worse distribution of acquired ability), and reservations in favor
of this group make sense as they allow talented but poorly educated agents to get higher education (the
selection eﬀect in the model). However, this comes at a cost, as agents from the disadvantaged group put
in on average more eﬀort (the eﬀort eﬀect), which is socially useless. If the selection eﬀect dominates, as
is likely when  is low so that acquired ability is worth little to society, then discriminating in favor of
the disadvantaged is socially optimal. If  is close to 1, so that acquired ability can easily compensate
for native ability in social welfare, then it is actually optimal to discriminate against the less advantaged!
In the next section we explore when discriminating in favor of the less advantages is welfare improving
using a parametric model as an example as well as simulations.
2 1 This

is the equivalent of saying in casual conversation that if someone from a bad High School got into Harvard, he/she

must be really good!
2 2 The proof is available on request.

20

4

Example and Simulations

In this section we look at an example and some simulations to better understand the model and its
implications for policy.

4.1

A Special Case

We parametrize the model to derive a closed-form solution and thereby compare the magnitudes of the
eﬀort and selection eﬀects. To simplify the analysis, we assume linearity so () = ,  ( ) =  + ,
and () = , where  and  are parameters. In this case, the eﬀort put in is given by
³
´
∗ ( ̃ ) = max ̃ −  0 
which implies that agents with total ability greater than ̃ do not put in any eﬀort. The equilibrium
conditions under the non-discrimination quota are given by
¡
¡
¢
¢
 1 1 −  1 (∗ ) +  2 1 −  2 (∗ ) = 
³
´
∗ −  −  ̃ − ∗
= 0

(13)
(14)

where the first equation determines the cutoﬀ of total ability, ∗ , while the second one determines the
performance cutoﬀ:
̃ =

( + )∗ − 



We also assume that both types of ability are uniformly distributed across the agents. That is,
£  ¤
£  ¤




 ( ) =  
max on 0 max and  ( ) =  max on 0 max where max1 ≥ max2 . Note

1
2
1
2
that under this assumption, 
( ) ² 
( ) (but 
( ) º1 
( )) so that our assumption

about the likelihood stochastic order does not hold anymore. However, as shown below, with uniform
distributions of abilities, first-order stochastic dominance is suﬃcient for all the results formulated in the
previous section to hold.
In equilibrium, the marginal ability ∗ is pinned down by the number of seats  (see (13)). In our
∗

analysis, we consider the case when ∗ ≥ 
max and  ≥ max for  = 1 2. That is, the number of seats

is so low that an agent needs both types of ability to get in. Next, we derive explicit expressions for the
eﬀort and selection eﬀects evaluated at the non-discrimination quota.
Proposition 5 The eﬀort and selection eﬀects evaluated at the non-discrimination quota are given by
⎛
³
´2 ³
´2 ⎞


−
min(
̃

)
−
min(
̃

)
max2
max2
max1
max1
 ( + ) ⎜ 
⎟

=∗ = −
−
⎠,
⎝max1 − max2 +
2
max2 − ∗
max1 − ∗
=∗

=

¢
¡

(1 − ) 
max1 − max2
,
2

21

where

max = 
max + max 

Proof. In the Appendix.
As can be seen, the magnitude of the eﬀort eﬀect positively depends on the parameters describing the
returns from education and the cost of eﬀort,  and . Moreover, it is straightforward to see that the
magnitude of the eﬀort eﬀect is increasing in the performance cutoﬀ ̃ . Indeed, if ̃  max for  = 1 2,
so that some of both abilities get in, then
=∗ = −


´2

 ( + ) ³
max1 − max2
,
̃ − ∗
2
(max2 − ∗ ) (max1 − ∗ )

which is negative and decreasing in ̃ . If max2 ≤ ̃ ≤ max1 , then
⎛
³
´2 ⎞

−
̃
max1
 ( + ) ⎜ 
⎟
=∗ = −
⎠
⎝max1 − 
max2 −
2
max1 − ∗
which is also decreasing in ̃ . Finally, if ̃  max1 , then the eﬀort eﬀect is given by
=∗ = −

¢
 ( + ) ¡ 
max1 − 
max2 
2

and, therefore, does not depend on ̃ . Thus, all else equal, the eﬀort eﬀect is strictly decreasing in ̃ on
[∗  max1 ) and then is flat with respect to ̃ .
The selection eﬀect depends only on  and the parameter  that describes the diﬀerence between the
social and private gains from education. Note that if ̃  max1 , the overall eﬀect on social welfare is
negative:

¢
¡

 

max1 − max2
( + ) 
= =∗ + =∗ = −
 =∗
2

In this case, the eﬀort eﬀect dominates over the selection eﬀect. Hence, we can conclude that, for
suﬃciently high values of the performance cutoﬀ (which represents the level of competition for seats,
which in turn depends on tuition and the availability of seats), the eﬀort eﬀect is stronger than the
selection eﬀect and, as a result, a quota in favor of disadvantaged results in welfare losses. Whereas, for
suﬃciently low values of ̃ , the selection eﬀect prevails over the eﬀort eﬀect and a reservation quota in
favor of disadvantaged can increase the social welfare. Note that the tuition fee  aﬀects the eﬀort and
selection eﬀects only through ̃ . Moreover, a rise in  reduces the performance cutoﬀ ̃ . Thus, we know:
Proposition 6 There exists a value of the tuition fee,   , such that an increase in the quota for the
disadvantaged group evaluated at the non-discrimination level, ∗  raises welfare if and only if     .
Intuitively, a higher tuition level reduces the magnitude of the eﬀort eﬀect and, as a result, a quota
in favor of the disadvantaged is more likely to be welfare improving. For this reason, the model suggests

22

that aﬃrmative action is likely to reduce welfare in a setting where education is subsidized. In India,
for example, backward castes and tribes have a share of seats (given by their population share) reserved
for them in publicly funded higher education. These reservations result in cutoﬀ entrance exam scores
that are much lower for these groups than for the general category.23 As public higher education is
not only much cheaper than private, and as the very best institutions are public and seats are scarce,
competition to get in is extreme. In such a setting, reservations are likely to be welfare reducing. Higher
education is also subsidized in many European countries. However, supply is abundant, and as a result,
eﬀort expended to get in is far less than in the Indian context. In the U.S., State Universities tend to be
cheaper than private ones of a similar quality. However, the emphasis on need blind admissions and the
availability of financial aid significantly reduces the diﬀerence in price.
In the next section we turn to some simulations that help us better understand the model. We continue
to use the linear setup used in the example in our simulations.

4.2

Simulations

In this subsection, we simulate the model for a number of diﬀerent values of the parameters. In particular,
we assume that the production function  ( ) and the payoﬀ function () are again linear:  ( ) =
 +  and () = . In this case,
∗ ( ̃ ) = max(0 ̃ − )
In addition, we assume that the cost of eﬀort is quadratic: () = 2 . As a result, the equilibrium
conditions are given by
¡
¢
  1 −   (∗ ) =  
³
´2
for  = 1 2
∗ −  =  max(0 ̃ − ∗ )
The first condition gives the ability cutoﬀ for each group, while the second equates the benefit from getting
in with its full cost for the marginal agent and defines the cutoﬀ performance level for each group. Note
that the above implies that a proportional change in ,  , and  does not change either the cutoﬀ ability
or the performance cutoﬀ. Therefore, we set  and  to one and leave  to vary in the simulations. We
also assume that  = 1. In fact, the choice of  does not aﬀect the qualitative implications of the model,
as changes in  only shift the welfare function downward or upward and do not aﬀect the equilibrium.
In our simulations, we assume that the distributions of natural and acquired ability take a Gamma
form. A Gamma distribution has a density function:
 (  ) =
2 3 In

1 1 −1 −
 

  Γ()

the celebrated Indian Institutes of Technology, the entrance exam marks for the general category are in the high

nineties and while they are in the low fifties for the reserved category.

23

It is characterized by the shape parameter  and the scale parameter . It has a mean of  and a variance
of  2  There are two advantages of using a Gamma distribution. First, a Gamma distribution has the
P
following property: if  has a Gamma distribution with   and , then
 has a Gamma distribution

P
with
  and . That is, if the distributions of natural and acquired ability are Gamma with the same


scale parameter, then the distribution of total ability is Gamma as well. The second advantage is that
if the shape parameter  is less than or equal to one, then the density function is decreasing, i.e., the

cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) is concave. For  = 1, we have the exponential distribution as
a special case. Its c.d.f. is also concave. However, for   1 the density at zero is zero, and the density
function is first increasing and then decreasing. Thus, the cumulative density is locally convex and then
concave. This property is important, as the curvature of the c.d.f. of total ability seems to determine
the curvature of the welfare function (see the experiments below). We will assume that  = 1 for all
distributions. Then, the density functions are given by
 ( ) =
 ( ) =
 () =

1
 −1 − 
Γ(  )

1
 −1 −  and
Γ(  )

1
 + −1 − 

Γ(  +   )

where   and   take on diﬀerent values in the simulations. Table 1 summarizes the parametrization.
Parameters that are varied in the simulations are in italics.
It is useful to write welfare slightly diﬀerently as done below. Given the form we use, welfare is easily
broken down into its value when  = 1 plus an adjustment factor to account for the diﬀerent weights
placed on acquired ability by society and by individual agents. Specifically,
´
³
X Z

 =

( )
( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃ )) −   ( )


=

X




Z

 + ≥∗

max

∗


−(1 − )

´
³
 − (∗ ( ̃ )) −    ()

X





Z


max

0


 (1 −  (∗ −  ))
( ) +  ( −  ) 

Note that we use the fact that () is linear in the above. The first part in the expression above stands
for private welfare, which is the sum of the private payoﬀs from being educated. Let us call this   for
private welfare. The second term in the welfare function, which is given by
 = −(1 − )

X




Z

0


max


 (1 −  (∗ −  ))
( ) +  ( −  ) ,

is the diﬀerence between social welfare and private welfare. For instance, if the private gains from
education are equal to the social gains (i.e.,  is equal to one), then the welfare is equal to private welfare

24

Table 1: Parametrization

Variable

Parametrization

Score Production Function:

 ( ) =  + 

Cost of Eﬀort:

() = 2   = 1

Tuition:

 =1

Social Cost of Education:

 =1

Scale Parameter of Gamma:

=1

Share of Population in Group  :

 1 =  2 = 05

Shape Parameters of Gamma:

    = 1 2   = 5

Payoﬀ Function:

() = 

Weight on Acquired Ability in Welfare:



Share of Seats in Group  :

   = 1 2

Seats Available:



25

if  =  We call this term the "selection" component of welfare and denote it by . Thus,
 =   + .
ª
©
Next, we construct the welfare as a function of quota  for diﬀerent values of      =12 .
4.2.1

Simulations with only the Eﬀort Eﬀect

In this subsection, we consider the case when  is equal to one. In this case, social welfare is given by
´
X Z max ³

 − (∗ ( ̃ ))   () − 
 =   +  ( −  ) =


∗


We examine two subcases: when the groups have identical distributions of acquired ability (the symmetric
case) and when the groups are diﬀerent in terms of the distributions of acquired ability (the asymmetric
case).24
The Symmetric Case When the groups are identical ( 1 =  2 ), our analytical results show that the
derivative of welfare with respect to the quota, evaluated at the non-discrimination quota, is equal to
zero (see Proposition 2). This implies that if the welfare function is concave (or single-peaked), then
the non-discrimination quota is optimal. Recall that the non-discrimination quota when the groups are
symmetric is equal to the size of each group (given by   ). Simulations verify this result when   +  ≤ 1
which ensures that the c.d.f. of total ability is concave which seems to make the welfare function concave
as well.
When   +    1, interesting things happen. In the figures in this section, the horizontal axis is the
quota in favor of the disadvantaged group. In Figures 5 and 6, we consider the case when  1 =  2 = 1.
In this case, the shape parameter of the distribution of total ability is 15 and, therefore, the c.d.f. is not
concave, nor is welfare. The values of  are 110 and 130 in Figure 5 and 6, respectively. The welfare
function still has a zero derivative at the non-discrimination quota (as predicted), but this could deliver
a local minimum rather than a local maximum.
As can be seen from Figures 5 and 6, there are two global maxima so that it is optimal to discriminate
in favor of one group or the other as the two groups are of the same size. In Figure 5 it is optimal not to
give all seats to one group. As  rises, we move to Figure 6 and it becomes optimal to exclude one group
completely.
Why does this happen? Let us consider what happens, for example, when we move a seat from group
1 to group 2 when the density function is decreasing at the cutoﬀ ability under the non-discrimination
quota. As a result of this, the cutoﬀ score for group 2 falls and that for group 1 rises, and the ability of
the marginal agent rises in group 1 and falls in group 2. As the density function is decreasing in ability
at the cutoﬀ ability, the cutoﬀ for group 2 falls by a smaller amount than the cutoﬀ for group 1 increases
2 4 Note

that only the distribution of total ability matters for welfare in this case.

26

Figure 5: Social Welfare (no selection eﬀect, the symmetric case)

47.4

47.395

social welfare

47.39

47.385

47.38

47.375

47.37

47.365

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 1,  = 03,  1 =  2 = 1, and  = 110.

Figure 6: Social Welfare (no selection eﬀect, the symmetric case)

55.38
55.36
55.34

social welfare

55.32
55.3
55.28
55.26
55.24
55.22
55.2

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 1,  = 03,  1 =  2 = 1, and  = 130.

even when the two groups are of the same size (as illustrated in Figure 7). This happens because there
are fewer agents to the right of the cutoﬀ (as the density is decreasing) than to the left. The more the
cutoﬀ falls (rises) the more the eﬀort expended falls (rises). As a result, the increase in eﬀort by the
agents in group 1 (which reduces surplus and so welfare) is more than the decrease in eﬀort by agents
in group 2 (which raises surplus and welfare). Consequently, welfare falls as this reallocation is made so
that non discrimination is optimal.
This is depicted in Figure 8. The surplus
() − (∗ ( ̃ )) − 
27

Figure 7: Decreasing Density: Cutoﬀ Eﬀects
6

¾
0

-

∗2 ∗

∗1



Figure 8: Decreasing Density: Surplus Changes

() − (∗ ( ̃ )) −  6




0

∗2 ∗

∗1



Figure 9: Increasing Density: Cutoﬀ Eﬀects
6

¾
0

∗2

∗ ∗1

28



is zero for the marginal agent and is increasing in ability. With the above reallocation the eﬀort function
for group 2 shifts down while that for group 1 shifts up so that their surplus moves in the opposite
direction from their eﬀort. As can be seen, the total losses of group 1 (the area ∗1 ∗ ) are greater than
the total gains of group 2 (the area ∗2 ∗ ).
However, if the density function is increasing in ability at the cutoﬀ ability under the non-discrimination
quota, then the opposite happens (see Figure 9). The increase in eﬀort by the agents in group 1 (which
reduces welfare) is less than the decrease in eﬀort by agents in group 2 (which raises welfare), so that
welfare rises as this reallocation is made. Thus, non discrimination is a minimum of welfare not a maximum as depicted in Figures 5 and 6. To summarize, if the density function has a single peak (like the
normal distribution), then whether welfare locally rises or falls depends on what side of the peak the non
discrimination cutoﬀ ability lies. Of course, this cutoﬀ falls as the number of available seats rises.
Our argument also explains why greater discrimination is optimal when  rises (see Figures 5 and
6). As  rises, the eﬀort expended to get in rises and this is increasingly costly due to the convex cost
of eﬀort posited. As a result, the saving from reduced eﬀort by discriminating in favor of one group is
higher and more discrimination is called for as  rises.
Armed with this understanding let us see what happens when  rises from being 03. At  = 03 we
have two peaks as in Figure 5. It may actually become optimal to exclude one group or the other as 
rises. The reason is that giving all the seats to one group reduces the eﬀort of that group a lot. It also
makes the eﬀort of the other group zero as that group has no seats. This is what is depicted in Figure 10
for  = 05 If  is even higher, then if all seats are given to one group, there may not be enough agents
in this group who wish to avail themselves of the seats (given the tuition level) so that some seats are
wasted. In this case, giving fewer seats to this group will raise welfare as depicted in Figure 11 where
 = 08.
More generally, the simulations suggest that even when there are no diﬀerences between agents, it
may be welfare increasing to create them by allowing some agents access to education while denying it
to others. By granting a smaller share of agents access, surplus per capita in the resulting competition is
higher, though of course, the number granted access is lower. What happens to total welfare depends on
how fast surplus per capita rises as access is restricted, i.e., its elasticity. This observation is interesting
in terms of policy. In practice, diﬀerential access to education is the norm and the welfare implications of
such diﬀerential access is poorly understood. Advantaged groups tend to have better access to education
than others. For example, the better oﬀ and better connected may have superior information about how
and where to apply. These simulations suggest a novel reason why (even when groups are identical ex
ante) diﬀerential access (perhaps via a lottery) may be welfare improving.
The Asymmetric Case If groups have diﬀerent distributions of acquired ability and  is equal to
one, then, by Propositions 3 and 4, the derivative of the social welfare function at the non-discrimination
29

Figure 10: Social Welfare (no selection eﬀect, the symmetric case)

81.5

81

social welfare

80.5

80

79.5

79

78.5

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 1,  = 05,  1 =  2 = 1, and  = 110.

Figure 11: Social Welfare (no selection eﬀect, the symmetric case)

130
125
120

social welfare

115
110
105
100
95
90
85

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 1,  = 08,  1 =  2 = 1, and  = 110.

quota is negative. If the welfare function is concave, this means that the optimal quota should be smaller
than the non discrimination quota25 , i.e., it should discriminate in favor of the advantaged group. Thus,
in this case,  should be less than non discrimination level.
1
2
Under our parametrization, 
( ) º 
( ) if  1   2 . In our experiments, we assume that

 1 = 05  2 = 02, and   = 05 Thus,   +    1 implying that the density functions of total ability
for both groups are decreasing. We also assume that the groups are of the same size:  1 =  2 = 05.
2 5 Recall

that  is the quota in favor of the disadvantaged group.

30

Then, the non-discrimination quota solves the following system of equations:
⎧
⎨  = 1 −   1 (∗ ) −   2 (∗ )
1
2
∗
⎩
2 ∗
 =  (1 −  ( ))
2

The first equation sets demand for seats under non discrimination equal to the supply to obtain the
common cutoﬀ. The second equation sets the fraction of seats that go to the less privileged group at this
common cutoﬀ equal, by definition, to the non-discrimination quota. Given the values of the parameters,
the non-discrimination quota is equal to 03932.
Figures 12 and 13 depict the welfare function for diﬀerent values of . In Figure 12,  = 10 and in
Figure 13,  = 100. As expected, the optimal quota is always less than the non-discrimination quota (as
suggested by the theory). Moreover, as can be seen in 12 and 13, the higher is , the lower the optimal
quota. This is explained by the fact that a higher  implies higher performance cutoﬀs and, thereby,
more eﬀort put in by the agents. This in turn increases the welfare losses due to wasted eﬀort. As a
result, a larger quota for the advantaged group (which on average put in less eﬀort) is optimal as  rises.
Figure 12: Social Welfare (no selection eﬀect, the asymmetric case)

4.4

4.2

social welfare

4

3.8

3.6

3.4

3.2

3

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 1,  = 03,  1 = 05,  2 = 02, and  = 10.

Note that if the distributions of total ability were not concave, then, similar to the symmetric case,
the welfare function could be not concave as well. However, in this case, imposing a quota in favor of the
advantaged group is still optimal, though the optimal quota is very likely to be equal to zero, i.e., it is
optimal to ban the disadvantaged group.
4.2.2

Simulations with the Selection Eﬀect

In this subsection, we assume that  is strictly less than one. In this case, the selection component of
the welfare is not zero and, as a result, the optimal quota comes from the interplay of the eﬀort and
31

Figure 13: Social Welfare (no selection eﬀect, the asymmetric case)

35
34

social welfare

33
32
31
30
29
28
27

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

theta

The parametrization:  = 1,  = 03,  1 = 05,  2 = 02, and  = 100.

selection eﬀects. In particular, the selection eﬀect provides a rationale to discriminate in favor of the less
advantaged group. We will first consider the symmetric case.
The Symmetric Case When the distribution of acquired ability is the same in both groups, the
selection eﬀect evaluated at the non-discrimination quota is equal to zero. This implies that if the total
welfare function is concave, then the non-discrimination quota is optimal. Figure 14 illustrates this
idea. It depicts the welfare function for the following set of parameters:  1 =  2 = 04,   = 05,
 1 =  2 = 05,  = 10,  = 03, and  = 05. As can be seen, the non-discrimination quota maximizes
the welfare.
Figure 14: Social Welfare (with the selection eﬀect, the symmetric case)

2.8

2.75

social welfare

2.7

2.65

2.6

2.55

2.5

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 05,  = 03,  1 =  2 = 04, and  = 10.

32

However, in this case it is not enough for the density function to be decreasing for total welfare to be
concave. The selection part of the welfare is an additional source of non-concavity of the welfare function
(besides the non-concavity of the distributions of total ability). Even though, the distributions of total
ability are concave (as in this example), the presence of the selection part of the welfare can make the
welfare function non-concave. The idea behind this is as follows. The selection part of welfare is given by
 = −(1 − )

X





Z


max

0


 (1 −  (∗ −  ))
( ) +  ( −  ) ,

which according to our experiments is usually convex in . Thus, the welfare function is the sum of a
concave (the private component of welfare) and convex (the selection component of welfare) function.
As a result, the curvature of the social welfare function is not pinned down when   1 even if private
welfare is concave. Moreover, the lower is the value of , the more likely it is that the convex component
dominates, so that the social welfare function is not concave.
Figure 15 depicts the private part of the welfare (the upper curve) and the negative of the selection
components of welfare taken (− ) for  = 0. As can be inferred, both of these curves are concave with
a maximum at the non-discrimination quota. However, the welfare function is the diﬀerence between
these two curves and, therefore, could be convex or concave. Figure 16 depicts the resulting total welfare
function which, as can be seen, is maximized at the corners.
Figure 15: Private and Selection Components of Welfare (the symmetric case)

private and selection parts of the welfare

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 0,  = 03,  1 =  2 = 04, and  = 10.

Thus, if agents are symmetric, the density of ability is decreasing, and  is close to unity, then (by
continuity arguments) no discrimination will be optimal as depicted in Figure 14. If  is very small, so
that acquired ability does not matter, then giving all the seats to one group or the other could be optimal.
When is such a policy optimal? Intuitively, if there is a lot of wasted eﬀort (wasted eﬀort is large
33

Figure 16: Social Welfare (with the selection eﬀect, the symmetric case)

1.51
1.5

social welfare

1.49
1.48
1.47
1.46
1.45
1.44
1.43

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 0,  = 03,  1 =  2 = 04, and  = 10.

when  is high and/or the number of seats is low), then the private component of welfare is relatively
flat. Once it is flat enough, and  is small enough, then the selection component dominates so that giving
all seats to one group or the other increases welfare. Figures 17 and 18 illustrate this intuition. In Figure
17 we only increase  from 03 to 05, in Figure 18 we only decrease  from 10 to 5. As can be seen, in
both cases the welfare function is concave and, as a result, the non-discrimination quota is optimal.
Figure 17: Social Welfare (with the selection eﬀect, the symmetric case)

2.8
2.7

social welfare

2.6
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.2
2.1
2

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 0,  = 05,  1 =  2 = 04, and  = 10.

The Asymmetric Case When the groups are diﬀerent in terms of their acquired ability distribution
and   1, then both forces are at play. The presence of the selection eﬀect shifts the optimal quota
34

Figure 18: Social Welfare (with the selection eﬀect, the symmetric case)

0.81
0.8

social welfare

0.79
0.78
0.77
0.76
0.75
0.74
0.73

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = 0,  = 03,  1 =  2 = 04, and  = 5.

towards the disadvantaged group. However, the eﬀort eﬀect shifts the quota in favor of the advantaged
group. Figure 19 depicts the social welfare function for diﬀerent values of . The upper curve is the
welfare function when  = 08. As can be seen, in this case the optimal quota is in favor of the advantaged
group (optimal  is lower than the non-discrimination quota given by 03932). That is, the eﬀort eﬀect
is stronger than the selection eﬀect. When  is equal to 05 (the middle curve), the two eﬀects are of
the same magnitude and, therefore, the optimal quota is close to the non-discrimination quota. Finally,
when  = 02, one can see that the optimal quota is in favor of the disadvantaged group as the selection
eﬀect prevails over the eﬀort eﬀect.
Figure 19: Social Welfare (with the selection eﬀect, the asymmetric case)

1.9
1.8
1.7

social welfare

1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
theta

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

The parametrization:  = {08 05 02},  = 03,  1 = 05,  2 = 02, and  = 5.

35

5

Extensions

In our model, we make several assumptions and it is important to understand the extent to which our
results depend on them. First, we assume no uncertainty in terms of the performance in the exam. As a
result, agents expend just enough eﬀort to get in, so that more able agents exert less eﬀort, and all agents
above an ability threshold get in. Those agents with abilities below this threshold do not get in, nor do
they exert any eﬀort. The eﬀort eﬀect follows basically from this: reallocating seats to the advantaged
group reduces total eﬀort as this group has higher average total ability and, therefore, tends to expend
less (wasteful) eﬀort. This intuition goes through for small enough levels of randomness in performance.
In general, with randomness the eﬀort function becomes hump shaped over ability. The least able
put in little or no eﬀort and rely on luck to get in, while the most able need to put in little eﬀort to get
in. Those in between need to work to get in. As a result, the disadvantaged could put in more or less
eﬀort than the advantaged on average so that the results depend on the position of the hump and the
distribution of abilities. If the less advantaged put in more eﬀort, then discriminating against them helps
and vice versa.
The selection eﬀect is more general. The exam selects on the basis of total ability which is on average
higher in the advantaged group. Society values native ability more than the exam does. Conditional
on getting in, the native ability of those from the disadvantaged group is higher and this is true with
or without uncertainty. Consequently, in general, the selection eﬀect makes it welfare increasing to
discriminate in favor of the less advantaged.
Second, we assume that there is only one school. It is relatively straightforward to show that the
intuition remains valid with more schools. When one discriminates in favor of the less advantaged, their
cutoﬀs fall in each school. As a result, they put in less eﬀort. The opposite occurs in the more advantaged
group. As the more advantaged on average put in less eﬀort, welfare falls due to the eﬀort eﬀect. The
selection eﬀect of course generalizes (these results are available in the Appendix).

6

Conclusion

Most of the work on preferences and aﬃrmative action has focused on statistical discrimination. Given
preferences, blacks may work less hard and so on average be worse than whites precisely because of
preferences. Employers then prefer to hire whites as race is observable. However, if the basis on which
preferences are given is not observable, then this model is less valid. In India for example, it is not always
easy to tell caste, especially in the cities, as caste based last names are not always used. If preferences
are based on background, or parental income, as has been proposed, then again those given preferences

36

may not be easily identifiable.26 In such settings we show that while there is no one size fits all policy,
we can provide some guidance on when aﬃrmative action might be welfare improving.
We identify two distortions: an eﬀort distortion that arises from wasteful eﬀort, and a selection
distortion that arises from society placing a greater weight on native ability than does the placement
system. How these two play oﬀ against each other and interact results in a one size does not fit all
answer. Preferences may be good for one society and bad for another. The disadvantaged group puts
in more eﬀort to get in on average than the advantaged one. Given the number of seats, preferences
in favor of the disadvantaged group raise the average eﬀort level and this reduces welfare. This eﬀect
is large when tuition is low and potential surplus is dissipated via eﬀort. However, if society puts more
weight on natural ability than does the placement algorithm, then there is an additional selection eﬀect
that operates. The disadvantaged group, that gets in, on average has greater natural ability. This makes
preferences in their favor desirable. The former eﬀect dominates when tuition is low and the latter when
it is high. As a result, our work suggests that while preferences may be a good idea in the US where
tuition tends to be high, it may be a very bad idea in India where tuition is very low.
2 6 After

all, after going through a university education a native accent is often shed in favor of a one that blends in more

easily.

37

References
Acemoglu, Daron and J. Angrist (2000) “How Large are Human Capital Externalities? Evidence From
Compulsory Schooling Laws,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15, pp. 9-59.
Alon, Sigal and Marta Tienda (2007), “Diversity, Opportunity and the Shifting Meritocracy in Higher
Education,” American Sociological Review 72, No. 4.
Amrein, Audrey L. and David C. Berliner. (2002) “High-Stakes Testing, Uncertainty, and Student Learning”. Education Policy Analysis Archives, Volume 10, Number 18, pp. 1-74.
Arrow, Kenneth J., (1973). “The Theory of Discrimination”. In: Ashenfelter, O., Rees, A. (Eds.), Discrimination in Labor Markets. Princeton University Press, pp. 3—33.
Arcidiacano, Peter; Aucejo, Esteban and Ken Spenner. (2012) “What Happens After Enrollment? An
Analysis of the Time Path of Racial Diﬀerences in GPA and Major Choice.” IZA Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 1, Article 5.
Chade, Hector; Lewis, Gregory and Lones Smith. (2011) “Student Portfolios and the College Admissions
Problem”. Mimeo.
Cestau, Dario; Epple, Dennis; and Holger Sieg. (2012) “Admitting Students to Selective Education
Programs: Merit, Profiling and Aﬃrmative Action”. Mimeo.
Chan, Jimmy and Erik Eyster (2003) “Does Banning Aﬃrmative Action Lower College Student Quality?”
The American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 3, pp. 858-872.
Coate, Stephen and Glenn C. Loury. (1993) "Will Aﬃrmative-Action Policies Eliminate Negative Stereotypes?" American Economics Review, 83(5), pp. 1220-1240.
Fang, Hanming and Andrea Moro (2011) “Theories of Statistical Discrimination and Aﬃrmative Action:
A Survey”. Chapter 5 in Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1A. North Holland.
Ferman, Bruno and Juliano Assuncao (2005) “Aﬃrmative Action in University Admission and High
School Students’ Proficiency”. Mimeo. Department of Economics, PUC-Rio.
Fernández, Raquel and Jordi Galí (1999) “To Each According to...? Markets, Tournaments, and the
Matching Problem with Borrowing Constraints.” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 66, No. 4, pp.
799-824.
Fain, James R. (2009) “Aﬃrmative Action Can Increase Eﬀort”. Journal of Labor Research. Vol 30, pp.
168—175.

38

Frisancho Robles, Veronica and Kala Krishna (2012) “Aﬃrmative Action in Higher Education in India:
Targeting, Catch Up, and Mismatch,” NBER Working Paper No. 17727.
Fryer, Roland and Glenn Loury (2005). “Aﬃrmative Action in Winner Take All Markets.”Journal of
Economic Inequality, Vol 3, pp. 263-280. Springer.
Fryer R, Loury G, Yuret T. (2008). “An Economic Analysis of Color-Blind Aﬃrmative Action.” Journal
of Law, Economics, and Organization. Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 319-355.
Fryer, Roland and Glenn Loury (2013) “Valuing Diversity”. Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.
Fu, Qiang (2006) “ A Theory of Aﬃrmative Action in College Admissions”. Economic Inquiry, Vol. 44,
No. 3, July, pp.420—428.
Hickman, Brent (2011) "Eﬀort, Race Gaps, and Aﬃrmative Action: a Game-Theoretic Analysis of College
Admission," Mimeo.
Kenderov, Petar S. (2006) “Competitions and Mathematics Education,” Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians, pp. 1583-1598.-355.
Loury, Linda Datcher, and David Garman. (1993). “Aﬃrmative Action in Higher Education.” American
Economic Review. Vol. 83, No. 2, pp. 99—103.
Lochner, Lance and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. (2012) “Credit Constraints in Education.” Annual Review
of Economics. 2012. 4:225—56.
Moro, Andrea, (2003). “The Eﬀect of Statistical Discrimination on Black-White Wage Inequality: Estimating a Model with Multiple Equilibria”. International Economic Review. 44 (2), 457—500.
Moro, Andrea and Peter Norman. (2003). “Aﬃrmative Action in a Competitive Economy”. Journal of
Public Economics. 87 (3—4), 567—594.
Phelps, E., (1972). The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism. American Economic Review. 62, 659—
661.
Rothstein, Jesse M. and Albert Yoon (2008) “Aﬃrmative Action in Law School Admissions: What Do
Racial Preferences Do?” University of Chicago Law Review 75(2), pp. 649-714.
Seigel, Ron (2009) “All Pay Actions”, Econometrica, 77(1), pp71—92.
Seigel, Ron (2013) “Asymmetric Contests with Head Starts and Non-Monotonic Costs.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, forthcoming.
Shaked, M. and Shanthikumar, G. J. (2007) “Stochastic Orders,” Springer Series in Statistics.

39

Appendix A
This Appendix contains the proofs of the results in the body of the paper.
Proof of Lemma 1. Follows from performing comparative statics on equations
1 − (∗ ) = 
(∗ ) − 

= (∗ (∗  ̃ ))

Totally diﬀerentiating them gives

−(∗ )∗
{0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ ))∗ (∗  ̃ )}∗ − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ ))∗̃ (∗  ̃ )̃

= 
= 

where 0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ ))∗ (∗  ̃ )  0 as ∗ (∗  ̃ )  0 and ∗̃ (∗  ̃ )  0 Thus,
⎤
⎤⎡
⎤⎡
⎤ ⎡
⎡

∗
1 0
−(∗ )
0
⎦
⎦⎣
⎦⎣
⎦=⎣
⎣

0 1
0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ ))∗ (∗  ̃ ) −0 (∗ (∗  ̃ ))∗̃ (∗  ̃ )
̃
so that

⎡
⎣

∗


∗


̃


̃


⎤

⎡

⎦=⎣

− (1∗ )

0

0 ()−0 (∗ ())∗ ()

− (∗ )0 (∗ ())∗()
̃

1
− 0 (∗ ())
∗ ()
̃

⎤

⎦

Proof of Proposition 1. 1. Basics
Recall that social welfare is given by
Z
´
³
 =
( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃ )) −   ( ) ( )
 + ≥∗

As the cutoﬀ ability ∗ does not depend on  , the derivative of the welfare function with respect to  is
Z
 ̃

∗ ( +   ̃ )
=−
0 (∗ ( +   ̃ ))
 ( ) ( )

  + ≥∗
 ̃
>From Lemma 1 in the paper,  ̃  0. In addition, ∗ ( ̃ ) ̃  0. This immediately implies
that   0. Thus, increasing  , as long as this leaves the ability cutoﬀ unaﬀected, raises welfare.
Once tuition is such that
(∗ ) −  = 0
that is, if tuition is so high that with zero eﬀort needed to get in and the number of seats is just filled,
further increases in tuition will result in an excess supply of seats. The optimal tuition, given the share
of seats going to each group, is therefore equal to (∗ ). If the tuition is set at this level, then the
equilibrium is determined by the following equations:
1 − (∗ ) = 
∗ (∗  ̃ ) = 0 ⇐⇒ ̃ =  (∗  0)
40

The first line gives the identity of the marginal agent, ∗ . The second line defines the performance cutoﬀ
̃ .
2. The Optimal Number of Seats
Given the optimal choice of  , social welfare is given by
Z
 =
(( +  ) −  )  ( ) ( )
 + ≥∗

The latter can be rewritten in the following way:
Z  ÃZ 
max

!

max

 =

∗ −

0

(( +  ) −  )  ( )  ( )

This implies that the derivative of the social welfare with respect to  is given by
∗

=−



Z


max

0

 (∗ −  ) ((∗ − (1 − ) ) −  )  ( )

∗

As − 
 is positive, the optimal (if it is interior)  solves
Z


max

0

 (∗ −  ) ((∗ − (1 − ) ) −  )  ( ) = 0,

where ∗ is  −1 (1 − ). We assume that the functions are such that the second order condition is
satisfied.
Note that if  = 1, then
Z


max
0

 (∗ −  ) ((∗ − (1 − ) ) −  )  ( ) = 0 ⇐⇒
(∗ ) = 

That is, the optimal  is such that
( −1 (1 − )) = 
In other words, the optimal number of seats is such that, when tuition is set at the full cost of education,
all seats are demanded and no one puts in any eﬀort. It is straightforward to check that the second order
condition is satisfied in this case.

Proof of Proposition 2
Recall that the social welfare is given by
Z
´
³
1
 = 1
( )
( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃1 )) −   ( )
 + ≥∗
1

+ 2

Z

 + ≥∗
2

´
³
2
( )
( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃2 )) −   ( )

41

This can be rewritten in the following way (by adding and subtracting  for each agent):
!
ÃZ 
Z 
´
max ³
max1
∗
1
 = 1
( )
( +  ) − ( ( +   ̃1 )) −   ( ) 
∗
1 −

0

+ 2

Z


max2

0

+( −  )

ÃZ


max

∗
2 −

³

∗

´

!

2
( )
( +  ) − ( ( +   ̃2 )) −   ( ) 

Then, adding and subtracting ( +  ) to each of the above terms under the integral gives
⎛
⎛
⎞
⎞
Z 
Z 
max1
max
( +  ) − ( +  )
1
⎝
⎝
⎠  ( )⎠ 
( )
 = 1
∗
0
∗
−
+(

+

)
−
(
(
+


̃
))
−

1




1
⎛
⎛
⎞
⎞
Z 
Z 
max2
max
( +  ) − ( +  )
2
⎝
⎝
⎠  ( )⎠ 
+ 2
( )
∗
0
∗
−
+(
+

)
−
(
(
+


̃
))
−


2




2
+( −  )

Noting that
Z 
´
max ³

∗
+

)
−
(
+

)
+
(
+

)
−
(
(
+


̃
))
−

 ( )
(









∗ ∗ −
´
³
= − (∗ − (1 − ) ) − (∗ ) + (∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃ )) −   (∗ −  )

and that at the cutoﬀ for total ability, the marginal agent is indiﬀerent between paying tuition and getting
in and not, so that (∗ (∗  ̃ )) = (∗ ) −  it follows that
(
!
ÃZ 
Z 
max
∗ ( +   ̃1 )
 ̃1 max1

0 ∗
1
=
− 1
 ( ( +   ̃1 ))
( )
 ( ) 

 0

̃
∗
−

1
!
)
ÃZ 
Z 
max
∗

 ̃2 max2
(
+


̃
)


2
2
− 2
0 (∗ ( +   ̃2 ))
( )
 ( ) 
 0
 ̃
∗
2 −
(
Z 
∗ max1
1
+ 1 1
((∗1 ) − (∗1 − (1 − )  ))  (∗1 −  )
( )
 0
)
Z 
∗2 max2
2
+ 2
((∗2 ) − (∗2 − (1 − )  ))  (∗2 −  )
( ) 
 0
Hence,

=  + 

where , the eﬀort eﬀect, is the first term in curly brackets and , the selection eﬀect is the second.
Let us define ∗ as the non-discrimination quota. Under the non-discrimination quota, ̃1 = ̃2 ≡ ̃

1
2
and ∗1 = ∗2 ≡ ∗ . Moreover, if 
( ) ≡ 
( ), then  1 () ≡  2 (). Then, from the equilibrium

conditions given by
¡
¢
  1 −   (∗ ) =  
(∗ ) − 

= (∗ (∗  ̃ )) where  = 1 2
42

(15)
(16)

we obtain that
1
1
=
⇔  =   .
2
2
That is, the non-discrimination quota is equal to the share of the group in the total mass of agents. This
makes sense as if the two groups are identical then their non discriminating quota share will be the same
as their population weight.



1
2
Next, we assume that 
( ) ≡ 
( ) and evaluate

at the non-discrimination quota. >From

(15), it is straightforward to show that
∗1
 =∗
∗2
 =∗
Hence, if  1 () ≡  2 (),
1


 0 and
 1 1 (∗ )

 0.
= −
 2 2 (∗ )
=

(17)
(18)

∗1
∗2
=
−
.
2
 =∗
 =∗

This implies that  evaluated at  = ∗ is equal to zero. From (16), it is also possible to show that
∗

 ̃1
 =∗

=

 ̃2
 =∗

=

(∗ ̃ )

∗ (∗ ̃ )
0
∗
∗
 ( (  ̃ ))  ̃
∗
∗
̃ )
0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ ))  (

∗
∗
0 (∗ (∗  ̃ ))  (̃ ̃ )

0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ )) 

∗1
 0, and
 =∗

(19)

∗2
 0.
 =∗

(20)

This then implies that
1

 ̃1
 ̃2
= − 2

∗
 =
 =∗

1
2
As a result,  is also equal to zero. To summarize, if 
( ) ≡ 
( ), then for all 

 ()
= 0.
 =∗
Thus, if  is well-behaved, i.e., it has a single peak as a function of  social welfare is maximized at
 = ∗ . However, this could also be a minimum, not a maximum as explored in the simulations.

The Proof of Proposition 3
Using the results derived in Proposition 2, the eﬀort eﬀect evaluated at the non-discrimination quota ∗
is given by
=∗

!
∗ ( +   ̃ )
1
 ( ( +   ̃ ))
( )
 ( ) 
∗

̃
0
 −
!
ÃZ 
Z 
max
∗

 ̃2 max2
(
+


̃
)


2
− 2
0 (∗ ( +   ̃ ))
( )
 ( ) 
 0
 ̃
∗ −

 ̃1
= − 1


Z


max1

ÃZ


max

0

∗

43

as when  is non discriminatory, ∗1 = ∗2 = ∗ and ̃1 = ̃2 = ̃ . Note that27
!
ÃZ 
Z 
max
∗
max

(
+


̃
)



0 (∗ ( +   ̃ ))
( )
 ( ) 
 ̃
0
∗ −
Z
∗ ( +   ̃ )

0 (∗ ( +   ̃ ))
( )
 ( )
=
 ̃
 + ≥∗
Z max
∗ ( ̃ )
0 (∗ ( ̃ ))
=
  ()
∗

̃

where   () is the distribution of the total ability (on [0 max ]) in group .
Thus, the eﬀort eﬀect can be written as:
Z
Z
∗ ( ̃ )
∗ ( ̃ )
 ̃1 max1 0 ∗
 ̃2 max2 0 ∗
1
=∗ = − 1
 ( ( ̃ ))
 ( ( ̃ ))
 () −  2
 2 ()
 ∗
 ∗
 ̃
 ̃
Substituting the expressions for

=∗

=

⎡

 ̃


(see (19), (20) and (17), (18)), we obtain that
⎤

¸ Z max1
∙
(∗ ̃ )

∗ ( ̃ )
0 ∗

⎦ { 1
−⎣

(
(
̃
))
 1 ()
1 (∗ )
∗ (∗ ̃ )


∗
0
∗
∗

̃

1
 ( (  ̃ ))  ̃
¸ Z max2
∙

∗ ( ̃ )
0 ∗

(
(
̃
))
− 2
 2 ()}
 2 2 (∗ ) ∗
 ̃
∗

0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ )) 

Thus,

=∗

⎛R

= ⎝
= 

2 7 By

∗
max2 0 ∗
̃ )
 ( ( ̃ ))  (
 2 ()
∗
̃
2 (∗ )

ÃR 

max2
∗

( ̃ ) 2 ()
−
2 (∗ )

definition,
1 −   ()

=



max



=



max



=



=

 ()
 

∗

max

0


max

0



R max1


max

0

 ( )

−

R max1
∗

∗

̃ )
0 (∗ ( ̃ ))  (
 1 ()
̃

( ̃ ) 1 ()
1 (∗ )

1 (∗ )
!



⎞

⎠ (21)
(22)



 ( −  ) ( ) 



max




 ( −  ) 

 ( ) [ (max −  ) −  ( −  )]  

As max −  ≥ 
max for any  ,  (max −  ) = 1. Hence,
 max
 
max
 () =
 ( ) [1 −  ( −  )] 

0
 

 
max

=

0

=



0


max

 ( )



max

−

max

 ( ) 

−

 ( ) ( )  

Thus, when we integrate the change in eﬀort over all agents whose eﬀort changes, there is more than one way to do so: as
above or alternatively, we could integrate  () over all  above ∗ .

44

∗

̃ )
where recall ( ̃ ) = 0 (∗ ( ̃ ))  (
is positive (as
̃

∗ (̃ )
 ̃

=

 0) and

∗

=

(∗ ̃ )

∗ (∗ ̃ )
0
∗
∗
 ( (  ̃ ))  ̃

1
 ()

0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ )) 

 0

1
2
( ) º 
( ) and the distribution of the natural ability is log-concave, we
Recall that, as 

know that  1 () º  2 () so that

2 ()
1 ()
 2 ∗ for any  ∗ :   ∗ .
1
∗
 ( )
 ( )


1
2
Moreover, as max = 
max + max and  ( ) º  ( ), max1 ≥ max2 . Hence, we have that
R max2
R max1
( ̃ ) 1 ()
( ̃ ) 1 ()
∗
∗
≥
1 (∗ )
1 (∗ )
Z max2
1 ()
( ̃ ) 1 ∗ 
=
 ( )
∗
Z max2
2 ()

( ̃ ) 2 ∗ 
 ( )
∗
R max2
( ̃ ) 2 ()
∗
=

2 (∗ )

This implies that =∗  0.

The Proof of Proposition 4
>From previous sections, the selection eﬀect evaluated at the non-discrimination quota (which ensures
∗1 = ∗2 = ∗ ) is given by
=∗

= 1

∗1


Z


max1

0

Z

∗
+ 2 2

Substituting the expressions for
=∗

=


1
 (∗ )

1
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  ))  (∗ −  )
( )


max2

0

∗



Z

(see (17) and (18)), we obtain that


max1

0


− 2 ∗
 ( )

Z

1
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  ))  (∗ −  )
( )


max2

0

Taking into account that


2
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  ))  (∗ −  )
( )

∗

 ( ) =

(23)

2
((∗ ) − (∗2 − (1 − )  ))  (∗ −  )
( )

Z

0


max

 (∗ − ) ()

the selection eﬀect can be written as follows:
Z 
max1
1 ( ) (∗ −  )

=∗ = 
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) R  
max1
∗ − )1 ()
0

(

0

Z 
2
∗
max2

(
)
(
−
 )
 
 
−
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) R  
max2
∗ − )2 ()
0

(

0

45

(24)

Next, we define
 ( ) (∗ −  )

̃ (  ∗ ) ≡ R  
max
 (∗ − ) ()
0

Suppressing ∗ in the notation, we replace ̃ (  ∗ ) with ̃ ( ) Notice that ̃ ( ) is a density

1
2
function. Let ̃
( ) be its associated distribution function. As 
( ) º 
( ),

2 ( ) (∗ −  )
1 ( ) (∗ −  )
̃2 ( )
̃1 ( )
≥
=
=
for any  ,  :  ≥ 
1
2
 () (∗ − )
 () (∗ − )
̃1 ()
̃2 ()
1
2
1
2
( ) º ̃
( ) implying ̃
( ) º1 ̃
( ).
That is, ̃

Then, the selection eﬀect can be rewritten in the following way:

=∗

= 

Z


max1

0

−

Z

1
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )


max2

0

2
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )

1
2

Equivalently, as 
( ) º 
( ) implies 
max1 ≥ max2
Z 
max1
1
=∗ = 
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )

max2

+

Z


max2

0

³
´
1
2
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  ))  ̃
( ) − ̃
( ) 

Integrating the second term above by parts implies that
Z 
max1
1
=∗ = 
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )

max2

´
¢³
¡
1

)
(
)
− (∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − ) 
1
−
̃
max2
 max2
Z 
´
³
max2
2
1
+ (1 − )
( ) − ̃
( ) 0 (∗ − (1 − )  )
̃
0

 0

2
1
Why? The third term is positive as 0 (·) is positive and ̃
( ) ≥ ̃
( ) for any  (recall that

1
2
̃
( ) º1 ̃
( )).

The sum of the first two terms is also positive as shown next. As (·) is increasing, we know that
( ) ≡ (∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )  0
and ( ) is increasing in  . Thus, the average area under the curve ( ),
Z 
max1
̃1 ( )
´   (∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − ) 
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ³
max2 )
1


1 − ̃ (max2 )
max2

which is its value at the lowest point. Thus, we have that
Z 
max1
¡
¢
1
1

((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( ) ≥  (∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − ) 

max2 ) (1 − ̃ (max2 ))

max2

Thus, it is straightforward to see that =∗  0. Notice that if  = 1, then =∗ = 0.
46

The Proof of Proposition 5 (Example)
>From (21), the eﬀort eﬀect evaluated at the non-discrimination quota is given by
⎞
⎛R
R max1 0 ∗
max2 0 ∗
∗ (̃ )
∗ (̃ )
2
1

(
(
̃
))

()

(
(
̃
))

()
∗
∗
 ̃
 ̃
⎠
− 
=∗ =  ⎝ 
2 (∗ )
1 (∗ )
where

∗

=

(∗ ̃ )

∗ (∗ ̃ )
0
∗
∗
 ( (  ̃ ))  ̃

0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃ )) 

.

Given the assumptions, the eﬀort eﬀect can be written as follows (recall that agents with total ability
higher than ̃ put in zero eﬀort and, therefore, the upper bound of the integrals is min(̃ max )) :
⎞
⎛R
R min(̃max1 ) 1
min(̃max2 ) 2

()

()
∗
∗
⎠
− 
=∗ =  ( + ) ⎝ 
2 (∗ )
1 (∗ )
Recall that



 () =

Z


max

0

implying that


 () =

Z


max

0


(·) are uniform,
Since  (·) and 

Z


 ( − )
()

 ( − ) ()

min(
max )


min(
max  ) − max(0  − max )


max 
max(0−
max
max )
¤
£


This implies that if  ≥ ∗ ≥ max 
max1  max2  max (as assumed), then

 () =

1



max max

 =

 () =

=



max + max − 


max max
max − 



max max


where max = 
max + max . Hence,

Z

min(̃max )

∗

 () =

³
´2
(max − ∗ )2 − max − min(̃ max )

2
max max



Substituting the latter in the expression for the eﬀort eﬀect, we derive that
³
´2
∗ 2
(
−

)
−

−
min(
̃

)
max1
max1
max1
 ( + )
=∗ = −
2
max1 − ∗
³
´2
∗ 2
(
−

)
−

−
min(
̃

)
max2
max2
max2
 ( + )
+
2
max2 − ∗
⎛
³
´2 ³
´2 ⎞


−
min(
̃

)
−
min(
̃

)
max2
max2
max1
max1
 ( + ) ⎜ 
⎟

= −
−
⎠
⎝max1 − max2 +
∗
∗
2
max2 − 
max1 − 
47

>From (23), the selection eﬀect is given by
=∗


1
 (∗ )

=

Z


− 2 ∗
 ( )


max1

0

Z

1
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  ))  (∗ −  )
( )


max2

0

2
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  ))  (∗ −  )
( )

Taking into account the assumptions about the functional forms, the latter can be written as follows:
⎞
⎛R 
R 
max1
∗
1
∗
2
max2


(
−

)
(
)


(
−

)
(
)
 

 

 
  ⎠
− 0

=∗ = (1 − ) ⎝ 0
1 (∗ )
2 (∗ )
We have that (recall ∗  
max )
R 
max
0


  (∗ −  )
( )

∗
 ( )

=
=

R 
max

 
∗ −
max

∗

max + max − 
∗


max +  − max
2



Therefore,
=∗

Ã

∗

∗



max1 +  − max
max2 +  − max
−
= (1 − )
2
2
¢
¡ 

(1 − ) max1 − max2

=
2

!

When Eﬀort Aﬀects the Payoﬀs from Education
In this section, we modify the model so that the eﬀort put in is not fully wasted. We assume that the
private gains from education are given by () −  + ( ), where ( ) represents additional payoﬀs

from eﬀort.28 We assume that ( ) is increasing in both  and , concave in  ( ( )  0), and the
cross derivative  ( ) is positive (which means that more able agents gain more from putting in more
eﬀort).
The sequence of actions is the same as in the benchmark model. An agent decides whether to take

the exam or not and how much eﬀort to put in (if she takes the exam). Let ∗ ( ̃ ) be the eﬀort required
to get in. It is defined as the solution of
̃ =  ( ).
As can be seen, it is decreasing in .
Let ̂() be the eﬀort chosen if admission was ensured, i.e., eﬀort independent of any considerations
of admission. It is the solution of
max {() −  + ( ) − ()} ,


2 8 This

setup is equivalent to that where the function (·) depends not only on , but also on .

48

Figure 20: Eﬀort in the Model with Additional Payoﬀs from Eﬀort
( ̃ ) 6

̃ 6

t

∗ (∗  ̃ )
̂( )

0

t

t

t

t

t
∗

t

̂(̃ )





which is defined by
 ( ̂) − 0 (̂) = 0
Also,  ( ) − 00 ()  0 so that  ( ) − 0 ()  0 for   ̂() Also, as  ( ) is positive, ̂() is

increasing in . Since ∗ ( ̃ ) is decreasing in , there exists a unique ability where the two are equal.
This cutoﬀ ability is implicitly defined by
∗ ( ̃ ) = ̂()
and denoted by ̂(̃ ).

The equilibrium eﬀort function is a composite one made up of ∗ ( ̃ ) and ̂() Agents with ability
above ̂(̃ ) want to put in more eﬀort than they need to to get in and so choose to put in what they want
to independent of admission considerations. Agents with ability below ̂(̃ ) want to put in less eﬀort
than they need to to get in and are forced to put in what is needed to be admitted. Hence, the agent
with total ability  expends eﬀort
( ̃ ) = max{∗ ( ̃ ) ̂()}
⎧
⎨ ∗ ( ̃ ) if  ≤ ̂(̃ )

=
⎩ ̂()
if   ̂(̃ )

(25)
(26)

As depicted in Figure 20, ( ̃ ) is decreasing in  till ̂(̃ ) and then increasing. A higher cutoﬀ
performance shifts the decreasing part of the curve upwards and to the right and does not eﬀect the
increasing part.
What about surplus? The surplus of an agent with ability  who decides to take the exam is given by
 ( ̃ ) = () −  + ( ( ̃ )) − (( ̃ ))
49

Figure 21: The Surplus Function in the Model with Additional Payoﬀs from Eﬀort
 ( ̃ ) 6

t

t

̃ 6
0

∗

̂(̃ )





Taking into account the expression for ( ̃ ),
⎧
⎨ () −  + ( ∗ ( ̃ )) − (∗ ( ̃ )) if  ≤ ̂(̃ )

 ( ̃ ) =
⎩ () −  + ( ̂()) − (̂())
if   ̂(̃ )

It is straightforward to show that if   ̂(̃ ),  ( ̃ ) is increasing in . Indeed, by the envelope theorem,
for   ̂(̃ )
 ( ̃ ) = 0 () +  ( ̂())  0
Next we show that  ( ̃ ) is increasing in  for  ≤ ̂(̃ ) as well. For  ≤ ̂(̃ ),
 ( ̃ ) = 0 () +  ( ∗ ( ̃ )) + ( () − 0 ()) ∗ ( ̃ )
Note that for  ≤ ̂(̃ ), ( ̃ )) = ∗ ( ̃ )  ̂(). That is, in this region eﬀort is excessive so that

( () − 0 ())  0. Since ∗ ( ̃ )  0 ( () − 0 ()) ∗ ( ̃ )  0 As a result, it follows that for  ≤ ̂(̃ ),
̂ ( ̃ )  0 Thus, we have shown that  ( ̃ ) is increasing in . Notice that a rise in ̃ raises the
eﬀort needed to get in and shifts  ( ̃ ) downwards (for  ≤ ̂(̃ )) and ̂(̃ ) up. This is depicted in
Figure 21.
Finally, an agent with total ability  takes the exam if and only if her surplus from doing so is positive.
Since this surplus is increasing in , all agents with ability more that a some level take the exam. The
cutoﬀ ability, ∗ , satisfies
 (∗  ̃ ) = (∗ ) −  + (∗  (∗  ̃ )) − ((∗  ̃ )) = 0,

(27)

as the outside option has been set at 0.
Hence, in the model when eﬀort can be useful, there is still some wasted eﬀort (when ∗  ̂(̃ )
in equilibrium). This occurs among the lower ability agents taking the exam. As a result, the eﬀort
50

distortion will again suggest that one discriminates in favor of the advantaged as they put in less wasteful
eﬀort. Hence, our results regarding the eﬀort eﬀect on welfare derived in the benchmark model can be
derived in this modification of the model as well.

Appendix B
In this Appendix, we consider the extension of the benchmark model with two universities of diﬀerent
quality.

The Model
We assume that the universities are diﬀerent in that they oﬀer education of diﬀerent qualities, which
aﬀects the payoﬀs from being educated. As a result, in equilibrium, the performance cutoﬀ for a better
university is higher so that it takes more eﬀort to be accepted to the higher quality university. The payoﬀs
from being educated at university  are given by   (), where   is the measure of quality of university
 (as before,  is the total ability). Here,  ∈ { }. The net payoﬀs are given by
  () −  − (∗ ( ̃  ))
where  is the tuition fee and ̃  is the performance cutoﬀ at university  (̃  is assumed to be higher
than ̃  (see the discussion below)), ∗ ( ̃  ) is the eﬀort level put in to be accepted. () is weakly
convex.
Lemma 2 below shows that the diﬀerence between the net payoﬀs from studying in the better university
is increasing in ability. As a result, more able agents are matched with better universities.
Lemma 2 For any given performance cutoﬀs,
³
´
(; ̃   ̃  ) =   () −  − (∗ ( ̃  )) −   () −  − (∗ ( ̃  ))
= 4() − 4 − (∗ ( ̃  )) + (∗ ( ̃  ))

where 4 =   −    0 and 4 =  −  . Then,
Ã
"
!#
∗

∗



(; ̃   ̃  )
(
̃
)
(
̃
)
= 40 () + −0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
− −0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
(28)



h
i ∗ ( ̃  )
(29)
= 40 () − 0 (∗ ( ̃  )) − 0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
Ã
! 
∗ ( ̃  ) ∗ ( ̃  )
+0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
−
(30)


 0

(31)

51

Proof. Using the fact that
 ( ∗ ( ̃ )) = ̃
it is easy to see that
∗̃ ( ̃ ) =

1
 0
 ( ∗ ( ̃ ))

That is, meeting a higher cutoﬀ requires greater eﬀort from any agent. Thus, as (·) is convex, 0 (∗ ( ̃  )) 
0 (∗ ( ̃  )) In addition,
∗ ( ̃ ) = −
This implies that

Finally,

 ( ∗ ( ̃ ))
 0
 ( ∗ ( ̃ ))

h
i ∗ ( ̃  )
 0
− 0 (∗ ( ̃  )) − 0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

∗̃ ( ̃ ) = −

 ( ∗ ( ̃ )) +  ( ∗ ( ̃ ))∗ ( ̃ )
 0,
´2
³
 ( ∗ ( ̃ ))

as   0, ∗ ( ̃ )  0, and   0. This in turn means that ∗ ( ̃  )  ∗ ( ̃  ), implying that
Ã
!
∗ ( ̃  ) ∗ ( ̃  )
0 ∗

−
 ( ( ̃ ))
 0.


Summarizing the above findings, it follows that
(; ̃   ̃  )
 0


It is probably easiest to see what we have in a picture like Figure 22. We have that   () is steeper
than   (), as      and () is increasing in ability so that more able individuals earn more at any
given education level, and this is more so at better institutions. In order to get in to school  (or ),
each agent must put in ∗ ( ̃  ) (or ∗ ( ̃  )) and this means costs of (∗ ( ̃  )) (and (∗ ( ̃  )))
be incurred. These costs are decreasing in ability as the more able need to put in less eﬀort to meet any
given performance cutoﬀ. Moreover, they decrease faster in ability when the cutoﬀ is higher (as shown in
Lemma 2). This happens because the higher performance cutoﬀ requires more eﬀort from all individuals,
but due to the complementarity between ability and eﬀort in creating performance, more able agents
need to put in less eﬀort to attain the higher cutoﬀ. As they are putting in less eﬀort to get the lower
performance cutoﬀ anyway, this increased eﬀort to meet a higher cutoﬀ is also less costly for them.
Thus, the net surplus (the benefit less the cost) from going to school is increasing in ability, and more
so for the better school as depicted in Figure 22. This means that when we add tuition cost which are
independent of ability, the net benefit of going to the better school rises faster than that of the worse
school so that these curves can cross at most once and better students must select into the better school.

52

Figure 22: Payoﬀs from Education: Two Schools
6
  () −   − (∗ ( ̃  ))
  () −   − (∗ ( ̃  ))

0

∗

∗





Note this is independent of tuition, though too high a tuition could make the payoﬀ from that school lie
entirely below that of the other so no one goes there.
Next we consider the equilibrium and comparative statics of the model. In the equilibrium, there
are two total ability cutoﬀs: ∗ and ∗ . Agents with ability lower than ∗ choose the outside option.
The cutoﬀs are determined by taking the number of seats in the better school and finding ∗ such that
these seats are filled. ∗ is then defined by its seats being filled by lower ability agents. This gives the
equilibrium conditions:
1 − (∗ ) =  

(32)

(∗ ) − (∗ ) =  ,

(33)

where  is the number of seats in university  and () is the distribution of total ability. As before,
we assume that the natural and acquired abilities are independently distributed across the agents. The

distribution functions are given by  ( ) and  ( ) on [0 
max ] and [0 max ], respectively. Then,

the distribution function for the total ability  is () on [0 max ], where
() =

Z

0


max

 ( − ) ()


and max = 
max + max .

The agent at ∗ must be indiﬀerent between the worse school and the outside option of zero which
pins down (∗ (∗  ̃  )) and defines ̃   The agent at ∗ must be indiﬀerent between the two schools

53

which pins down (∗ (∗  ̃  )) and defines ̃  . Thus
  (∗ ) −  − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) = 0

(34)

4(∗ ) − 4 − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) + (∗ (∗  ̃  )) = 0

(35)

Thus, we have four unknowns: ∗ , ∗ , ̃  , ̃  ; and four equilibrium equations. Note that the condition,
̃   ̃  , is equivalent to (∗ (∗  ̃  ))−(∗ (∗  ̃  ))  0. Therefore, from the equilibrium conditions,
we can infer that ̃   ̃  if and only if 4(∗ ) − 4  0. In other words, that the diﬀerence in the
tuition levels is not set too high relative to the diﬀerence in quality.
Next, we explore how changes in  aﬀect the equilibrium outcome. The following lemma holds.
Lemma 3 1) The cutoﬀs, ∗ and ∗ , do not depend on the tuition fees,  and  .
2) A rise in  does not aﬀect ̃  and decreases ̃  .
3) A rise in  decreases ̃  and increases ̃  .
4) A rise in  and  (such that 4 does not change) decreases ̃  and ̃  .
Proof. 1)-2) and 4) directly follow from the equilibrium equations. Let us prove the third statement in
the lemma. From the equilibrium, we have that
1
 ̃ 
´ ∗ ∗   0
=− ³
 ( ̃ )

0 ∗ (∗  ̃  )


In addition,


 ̃


 ̃

´ ∗ ∗ 
´ ∗ ∗ 
³
³
 ( ̃ )  ̃ 
 ( ̃ )  ̃ 
0
∗ ∗

−0 ∗ (∗  ̃  )

−
1
(

̃
)



 + 1
 ̃
 ̃
´ ∗ ∗ 
´ ∗ ∗ 
³
³
=−
=

 ( ̃ )
0 ∗ (∗  ̃  )  ( ̃ )
0 ∗ (∗  ̃  )


 ̃
 ̃

Hence, the sign of the derivative is the same as the sign of the numerator (as the denominator is positive).
The numerator is in turn equal to
´ ∗ ∗ 
³
 ( ̃ )
´ ∗ (∗  ̃  )  ̃ 
³
0 ∗ (∗  ̃  )
 ̃

´ ∗ ∗  
0 ∗ (∗  ̃  )
+1=1− ³
 ( ̃ )

∗
0
∗

 ̃
  (  ̃ )
 ̃

´
´
³
³
Note that as ∗  ∗ , ∗ (∗  ̃  )  ∗ (∗  ̃  ) implying that 0 ∗ (∗  ̃  )  0 ∗ (∗  ̃  ) .
´
³
∗
̃ )
∗
Moreover, since  (
=
1
(
̃
)
,



̃

∗ (∗
 ̃ )
 ̃

∗ (∗
 ̃ )
 ̃

´
³
 ∗  ∗ (∗  ̃  )
´  1,
= ³
 ∗  ∗ (∗  ̃  )

as   0 and   0. That is, the sign of the numerator is positive. This proves the statement.
The intuition behind 1) and 2) in the lemma is straightforward. The idea behind 3) is as follows.
Keep the performance cutoﬀs fixed. An increase in  shifts the payoﬀ curve for  down and reduces ∗
54

while raising ∗ . As a result, more agents apply for the seats in the high-quality university and fewer for
the low quality one. As the number of seats remains the same, ̃  must rise and ̃  fall.
The intuition behind 4 is simple. Suppose we increase tuition fees by the same amount. At given
performance cutoﬀs, this change does not aﬀect the intersection of the two curves as both sift down by
the same amount, but raises ∗  This reduces the demand for school  below its capacity which reduces
the performance cutoﬀ of  This fall in ’s performance cutoﬀ must shift the payoﬀ for  back up so
that it goes through the original level of ∗  However, the fall in ’s performance cutoﬀ has a smaller
impact on the payoﬀ for higher ability agents and so makes it flatter. This reduces ∗ from its original
level, requiring a fall in ’s performance cutoﬀ as well.29
Next, we explore the eﬀects of changes in the number of available seats on the equilibrium outcomes.
Using the equilibrium equations we see that a rise in  does not change ∗ (as it is pinned down by
 ) and decreases ∗ . This in turn means that ̃  and ̃  fall. Intuitively, more available seats in
the low-quality university reduces the performance cutoﬀ in that university, making it more attractable
compared to the high-quality university. As the number of seats in the high-quality university does not
change, the performance cutoﬀ, ̃  , must fall to compensate for the decrease in ̃  .
A rise in  in turn decreases both the ability cutoﬀs, ∗ and ∗ . The decrease in ∗ in turn results
in lower ̃  . The low-quality university has to reduce its performance cutoﬀ in order to fill in the all
available seats. The impact on ̃  is also straightforward. The direct eﬀect of a rise in  decreases
∗ , reducing ̃  . In addition, the rise in  decreases ̃  , which further reduces ̃  (see (34)). As can
be seen, both eﬀects work in the same direction. As a result, ̃  falls. The following lemma summarizes
the above reasoning.
Lemma 4 1) A rise in  does not change ∗ and decreases ∗ , ̃  , and ̃  .
2) A rise in  decreases ∗ and ∗ and ̃  and ̃  .
Next, we examine the welfare implications of changes in the parameters in the model.
Social Welfare
As before, we allow the private gains from education to diﬀer from the social gains. Specifically, for an
individual, natural and acquired abilities are of the same importance but for the society natural ability
is more important than acquired ability.
Social welfare is given by (the outside option is normalized to zero)
Z
´
³
 =
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( ) ( )
 + ≥∗


+
2 9 Formally,

Z

∗
∗
 ≤ + 

³

´
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( ) ( )

this result comes from the impact of  on ̃  being stronger than that of  .

55

(36)

where  is the social cost of education per student. Note that as the tuition is a lump-sum transfer, 
does not directly aﬀect the welfare. It only aﬀects it via the eﬀort put in by agents.
Next, we explore the eﬀects of the tuition fees on the social welfare. First, we examine how changes
in  and  aﬀect the welfare. Then, we find the values of  and  that maximize the social welfare
function. It is straightforward to see that
³
´
Z
   ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) − 

=
 ( ) ( )


 + ≥∗

³
´
Z
   ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) − 
 ( ) ( )
+
∗

∗
 ≤ + 
Here, we take into account that the ability cutoﬀs do not depend on the tuition fees (see Lemma 2)).
>From the results stated in Lemma 2, we can conclude that (recall that
 ̃ 

=−



Z

0 (∗ ( +   ̃  ))

 + ≥∗


 ̃ 


= 0)

∗ ( +   ̃  )
 ( ) ( )  0
 ̃

while



= −
−

 ̃ 

 ̃ 


Z

Z

0 (∗ ( +   ̃  ))
 + ≥∗


∗ ( +   ̃  )
 ( ) ( )
 ̃

0 (∗ ( +   ̃  ))

∗
∗
 ≤ + 

The sign of the latter expression is ambiguous, as

 ̃ 


∗ ( +   ̃  )
 ( ) ( )
 ̃

 0 and

 ̃ 


 0.

As can be seen, the impact of  on welfare is similar to that in the model with one university:



 0. The intuition is similar as well. A rise in  reduces the eﬀort put in the agents who decide

to apply for the high-quality university and does not change the eﬀort of the agents who apply for the
low-quality university. As a result, welfare rises. The impact of  is ambiguous in general. A rise in
 reduces the eﬀort put in by the agents applying for the low-quality university and increases the eﬀort
put in by the agents applying for the high-quality university. As a result, given  , there exists a certain
optimal level of  such that




= 0 (unless the condition




= 0 delivers the minimum).

However, if the goal is to describe the value of the pair (   ) that delivers the maximum, the
outcome will be exactly the same as in the case with one university. In other words, the social welfare
as a function of  and  is maximized when the eﬀort put in by the marginal agents is equal to zero.
That is, ∗ (∗  ̃  ) = 0 and ∗ (∗  ̃  ) = 0. This can be obviously seen from the expression for the
social welfare (36), which is maximized when there is no wasted eﬀort. The conditions of having zero
eﬀort put in by the marginal agents can be written as follows:
 − 

4
(∗ ) =    

(∗ ) =

56

(37)
(38)

Since the ability cutoﬀs are determined by the number of seats in the universities, from the above equations
we can find the optimal values of the tuition levels.
Note that if we assume that  =  =  , then the welfare function will be increasing in  . However,
the optimal value of  does not elicit the zero eﬀort put in by all agents. Indeed, a rise in  reduces ̃ 
and, thereby, ̃  (recall that 4 = 0). In this case, it is straightforward to show that the social welfare

is increasing in  . Therefore, we keep increasing  till the eﬀort put in by the marginal agent ∗ (a

further increase in  does not aﬀect welfare, as ̃  is not aﬀected anymore). The equilibrium conditions
in this case are
4(∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) + (∗ (∗  ̃  )) = 0
  (∗ ) − 

= 0

As (∗ (∗  ̃  ) is equal to zero, (∗ (∗  ̃  )) is equal to zero as well. Therefore, the equilibrium
conditions can be written as follows:
4(∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) = 0
  (∗ ) − 

= 0

As can be seen, ∗ (∗  ̃  ) is strictly positive in the equilibrium. That is, the agents applying for the
high-quality university put in some positive eﬀort. The corresponding value of ̃  can be found from
the first equation in the latter system of equations.
Finally, similar to the benchmark case with one university, the distortion caused by selection into
education can not be completely removed, as the social gains from education are diﬀerent from the
private gains.

The Case with Quotas
In this section, we introduce educational quotas in the above framework. We assume there are two groups
of agents indexed by  ∈ {1 2}, which have identical distributions of natural ability and potentially
diﬀerent distributions of acquired ability. The latter is motivated by the fact that agents with diﬀerent
social backgrounds have had diﬀerent educational inputs prior to taking the exam, which in turn results
1
2
in diﬀerent acquired abilities on their part. In particular, we assume that 
( ) = 
( ) ≡  ( ),
1
2
while 
( ) º 
( ) where º stands for the likelihood stochastic order. Hence,

2 ( )
1 ( )
 2
for any    :   .
1
 ()
 ()
This means that group 1 is more favored in terms of acquired ability than group 2. In addition, we
assume that the distribution of natural ability has a log-concave density. This assumption is needed to
ensure the likelihood stochastic order of the distributions of total ability: i.e.,  1 () º  2 ().
57

The share of each group in the total mass of agents (which is normalized to unity) is denoted by   ,
where  1 +  2 = 1. We then define  as a share of available seats reserved for group  in university :
1 + 2 = 1 for  ∈ { }. If these quotas are binding, then the cutoﬀs for the two groups will diﬀer.
Note that the quota given to a certain group can be in general diﬀerent in diﬀerent universities. The
equilibrium conditions can be then written as follows:
¡
¢
  1 −   (∗ ) =   
¡
¢
    (∗ ) −   (∗ ) =   

  (∗ ) −  − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) = 0
4(∗ ) − 4 − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) + (∗ (∗  ̃  )) = 0
where  ∈ {1 2}.

We define by a non-discrimination quota in university , ∗ (the quota in favor of group 1, the

corresponding quota in favor of group 2 is 1 − ∗ ), such that the quota leads to ̃ 1 = ̃ 2 : i.e., the
performance cutoﬀs are the same for both groups. If both universities set the non-discrimination quotas,
then it is straightforward to see that
∗1

= ∗2 

∗1

= ∗2 

If in addition  1 () ≡  2 () = (), then
∗ = ∗ =  1 
This is similar to the case with one university.
Next, we write down the social welfare under the presence of two groups of agents. In particular, we
have the following expression:
´
³
X Z

 =

( )
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( )


+
=

X

X


+





X


 + ≥∗



Z

Z

∗
∗
 ≤ + 

 + ≥∗




Z

(39)

´
³

( )
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( )

³
´

( )
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( )

∗
∗
 ≤ + 

³
´

( )
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( )

+ ( −  ) +  ( −  )

In the next sections, we explore the behavior of social welfare (as a function of the quotas) around the
non-discrimination quotas.

58

Symmetric Groups with no Selection Eﬀect
In this subsection, we assume that the groups are symmetric:  1 () ≡  2 () = (); and examine how
uniform changes in the quotas set by the universities locally aﬀect the social welfare in the case of no
selection eﬀect. In particular, we assume that
1

= ∗ , implying that

2

= 1 − ∗ .

This specification allows us consider uniform changes in the quotas set by the universities. Moreover, if
 = 1, then both universities set the non-discrimination quotas ∗ . If  = 0, then in both universities all
seats are given to the second group. Finally, if  = 1 1  1, then all seats in both universities are given
to the first group (recall that if  1 () ≡  2 (), ∗ = ∗ =  1 ). Next, we consider the social welfare as
a function of  in the case of no selection eﬀect:  = 1.
Taking into account (39), the derivative of the social welfare function with respect to  can be written
as follows. Note that  =  (̃   ̃   ∗  ∗ ) Thus:
 ()


 ()


= −
−
−

X


X

 ̃ 




 ̃ 




∗




X

=



 ()  ̃ 
 ()  ̃ 
+
 ̃  
 ̃  
 ()  ̃ 
 () ∗
+

+
∗
 
∗ 
Z

Z

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

≥∗


∗ ( ̃  )
  ()
 ̃

∗ ( ̃  )
  ()
∗

̃
∗
≤


´
³
  (∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ )
0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

´
∗ ³  ∗
 ( ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ )


´
X ∗ ³
     (∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ )
−



+

X



59

Taking into account the equilibrium conditions for the marginal agents, these can be written as follows:
X  ̃  Z
∗ ( ̃  )
 ()
= −

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
  ()
∗



̃
≥

X  ̃  Z
∗ ( ̃  )

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
  ()
−
∗ ≤∗


̃




´
X ∗ ³
     (∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ )
−


´
X ∗ ³
     (∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ )
+


X ∗
   (0)  (∗ )
−


(as agent ∗ is indiﬀerent between schools) so that




= −
−

X


X


 ̃ 




 ̃ 


Z

Z

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

≥∗


∗ ( ̃  )
  ()
 ̃

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
∗
∗
 ≤

∗ ( ̃  )
  ()
 ̃

Let us then find the derivative of ̃  with respect to . >From the equilibrium conditions, we have
∗ (∗ ̃  )


 0 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))
 ̃ 

=
 )
∗ (∗

 ̃
0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))



Taking into account that

we derive that

∗



 ̃

¡
¢
  +   =   1 −   (∗ ) 
∗1

∗2


∗  + ∗ 
 0
 1 (∗1 )
∗  + ∗ 
 0
 2 (∗2 )

= −
=

This implies that
 ̃ 1


=

 ̃ 2


=

1
∗ (∗
) ∗
1 ̃
  + ∗ 

−
 0
∗
∗
1
 (1 ̃ )
 1 (∗1 )
0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))
 ̃
2
∗ (∗
) ∗
2 ̃
 0 (∗2 ) − 0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))
  + ∗ 

 0.
2 )
∗ (∗
 2 (∗2 )
2 ̃
0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))
 ̃

 0 (∗1 ) − 0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))

As can be seen, at the non-discrimination quotas (when  = 1),
1

 ̃ 1
 ̃ 2
= − 2



60

implying that (recall that  1 () ≡  2 ())
X


 ̃ 



Z

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

∗
∗
 ≤

∗ ( ̃  )
  () = 0
 ̃

Next, we consider the derivative of ̃  with respect to . >From the equilibrium conditions, we
have that


 ̃


=

h

40 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))

+


∗ (∗
)
 ̃


0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))

∗ (∗
)  ̃ 
 ̃

 ̃
∗ (∗ ̃  )

∗

0 (∗ (  ̃  ))
 ̃

0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))

+ 0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))


∗ (∗
)
 ̃


 )
∗ (∗
 ̃
 ̃

i

∗





In addition, we have that
 ∗ 
∗2
∗ 
∗1
=−  ∗
 0
=
 0

 1 (1 )

 2 (∗2 )
Summarizing all the previous results, we can see that
 ̃ 2
 ̃ 1
 0 and
 0


The latter follows from the fact that

 ̃ 1


40 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))

 0,

 ̃ 2


 0, and

∗ (∗  ̃  )
∗ (∗  ̃  )
+ 0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))
 0.



Moreover, if  = 1, it is straightforward to see that
1
implying that

X


Thus, we have that

 ̃ 



Z

 ̃ 1
 ̃ 2
= − 2




0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
≥∗


∗ ( ̃  )
  () = 0
 ̃


|=1 = 0.

That is, non-discrimination delivers a local extremum. In the case of concave welfare social welfare,
non-discrimination is globally optimal. Next, we explore the case when the groups are asymmetric in
terms of the distribution of total ability.
Intuitively the logic is exactly the same. When the two groups are the same, the losses of one group
exactly make up for the gains of the other for slight changes. Thus, if welfare is concave, this is a local
maximum.

61

Asymmetric Groups with no Selection Eﬀect
Assume now that  1 () º  2 (). Using the results derived in the above section, the derivative of
welfare with respect to  is given by



= −
−

X


X

 ̃ 


 ̃ 






Z

Z

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

≥∗


∗ ( ̃  )
  ()
 ̃

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
∗
∗
 ≤

∗ ( ̃  )
  ()
 ̃

Consider the second component of the derivative:
X  ̃  Z
∗ ( ̃  )

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
−
  ()
∗ ≤∗


̃




⎡
1 )
∗ (∗
0 ∗
∗
1
R
∗
1 ̃
 0 (∗
))
̃ 1 ) 1 ()
1 )− ( (1 ̃

0 (∗ ( ̃ 1 ))  (

∗ ≤∗
∗ (∗ ̃ 1 )
⎢

1 (∗


̃
1
1 )
1 ))
1
1
0 (∗ (∗
⎢
∗
∗
1 ̃

̃
= (  +   ) ⎢
∗ ∗ ̃ 2 )
R
∗
⎣  0 (∗2 )−0 (∗ (∗2 ̃ 2 ))  (2
̃ 2 ) 2 ()

0 (∗ ( ̃ 2 ))  (
−
∗
∗
 (
̃ 2 )
2 (∗ ) 
∗ ≤∗
 ̃
2 ))
0 (∗ (∗
2 ̃

2
 ̃

2

2

2

At the non-discrimination quota, ∗2 = ∗1 and ̃ 2 = ̃ 1 . This implies that
2
∗ (∗
)
2 ̃

∗
∗
2
 (2 ̃ )
0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))
 ̃

 0 (∗2 ) − 0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))

=

1
∗ (∗
)
1 ̃

∗
∗
1
 (1 ̃ )
0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))
 ̃

 0 (∗1 ) − 0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))

.

Moreover, as  1 () º  2 (),
2 ()
1 ()
≥
for any   ∗1 = ∗2 .
1 (∗1 )
2 (∗2 )
Thus,
Z

0 (∗ ( ̃ 1 ))

∗
∗
1 ≤1

implying that
−

X


∗ ( ̃ 1 ) 1 ()
 
1 (∗1 )
 ̃



 ̃ 


Z

Z

0 (∗ ( ̃ 2 ))
∗
∗
2 ≤2

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

∗
∗
 ≤

∗ ( ̃ 2 ) 2 ()

2 (∗2 )
 ̃

∗ ( ̃  )
  ()  0
 ̃

when evaluated at the non-discrimination quota ( = 1).
Consider then the first component of the derivative, which is given by
X  ̃  Z
∗ ( ̃  )

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
−
  ()
∗


̃
≥


>From the previous section, we have that
h
i


∗ (∗
)
∗ (∗
) ∗
 ̃
 ̃

40 (∗ ) − 0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))
+ 0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))



 ̃ 
=
 )
∗ (∗

 ̃
0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))



∗ (∗
)  ̃ 
 ̃
0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))

 ̃
+
∗ (∗ ̃  )


0 (∗ (∗  ̃  ))
 ̃

62

 ̃



⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

This means that at the non-discrimination quotas,
 ̃ 1
1


= −


1
∗ (∗
)
∗ (∗
)
1 ̃
1 ̃
+ 0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))


1 )
∗ (∗
1 ̃
0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))
 ̃

40 (∗1 ) − 0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))
1
∗ (∗
)
1 ̃
0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))
 ̃

−
2

 ̃ 2


=

Ã

1 )
∗ (∗
1 ̃

∗ (∗ ̃ 1 )
1
1 ))
0 (∗ (∗
1 ̃
 ̃

0 ∗
∗
1
 0 (∗
))
1 )− ( (1 ̃

0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))

0

4

0

(∗2 )

 (

∗

0

−  (

∗

!

1 )
∗ (∗
1 ̃

∗  + ∗ 
,
1 (∗1 )

 ̃
∗
∗
2
2
)
∗ (∗
)
∗
2  (2 ̃
2 ̃
(2  ̃ ))
+ 0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))


2 )
∗ (∗
2 ̃
0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))
 ̃


∗ (∗
)
2 ̃
(∗2  ̃  ))
 ̃

+

Ã

2 )
∗ (∗
2 ̃

∗ (∗ ̃ 2 )
2
2 ))
0 (∗ (∗
2 ̃
 ̃

0 ∗
∗
2
 0 (∗
))
2 )− ( (2 ̃

0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))

2 )
∗ (∗
2 ̃

 ̃

!

∗ 
1 (∗1 )

∗ 
2 (∗2 )

∗  + ∗ 

2 (∗2 )

Note that at the non-discrimination quota:
∗ 
= ∗ 


1
∗ (∗
)
∗ (∗
)
1 ̃
1 ̃
+ 0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))


1 )
∗ (∗
1 ̃
0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))
 ̃
2
2
∗ (∗
)
∗ (∗
)
2 ̃
2 ̃
0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))
+ 0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))


2 )
∗ (∗
2 ̃
0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))
 ̃

40 (∗1 ) − 0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))
40 (∗2 ) −

≡ 

Moreover, at the non-disrimination quota:
0

∗

 (
(∗ 

+

∗  )
0

∗

 (
=

(∗ 

+

1
∗ (∗
)
1 ̃
(∗1  ̃ 1 ))
 ̃

Ã

1 )
∗ (∗
1 ̃

∗
∗
1
 (
̃
)
1
1 ))
0 (∗ (∗
1 ̃
 ̃

0 ∗
∗
1
 0 (∗
))
1 )− ( (1 ̃

0 (∗ (∗1  ̃ 1 ))
Ã


∗ (∗
)
2 ̃
(∗2  ̃  ))
 ̃

∗  )

1 )
∗ (∗
1 ̃
 ̃

2 )
∗ (∗
2 ̃

∗ (∗ ̃ 2 )
2
2 ))
0 (∗ (∗
2 ̃
 ̃

0 ∗
∗
2
 0 (∗
))
2 )− ( (2 ̃

0 (∗ (∗2  ̃ 2 ))

2 )
∗ (∗
2 ̃
 ̃

Thus, at the non-disrimination quota:
1

 ̃ 1


= −

2

 ̃ 2


=



−

1 (∗ ) 1 (∗ )


2 (∗ )

+




2 (∗ )

As a result, at the non-disrimination quota:
X  ̃  Z
∗ ( ̃  )

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
  ()
−
∗


̃
≥


¶Z
µ
∗



0 ∗
  ( ̃ ) 1
+

(
(
̃
))
 ()
=
1 (∗ ) 1 (∗ )
 ̃
≥∗

¶Z
µ
∗



0 ∗
  ( ̃ ) 2
+

(
(
̃
))
−
 ()
2 (∗ ) 2 (∗ )
 ̃
≥∗

63

!
!

≡ 

Taking into account the stochastic order of the distributions of total ability, it is straightforward to
see that
Z


0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

≥∗




Z

∗ ( ̃  ) 1 ()
  
1 (∗ )
 ̃

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
≥∗


∗



1

 ( ̃ )  ()
  
1 (∗ )
 ̃

Z

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

∗ ( ̃  ) 2 ()

2 (∗ )
 ̃

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))

∗ ( ̃  ) 2 ()

2 (∗ )
 ̃

≥∗


Z

≥∗


In other words, at the non-discrimination quota:
X  ̃  Z
∗ ( ̃  )
−

0 (∗ ( ̃  ))
  ()  0.
∗


̃
≥


To sum up, we have shown that the derivative of social welfare with respect to  evaluated at the
non-discrimination quota is positive. This means that discriminating in favor of group 1 locally increases
the social welfare. This results is the same as that in the case of one university. That is, the eﬀort eﬀect
works in favor of the advantaged group.
=1  0.
This makes sense as weaker students need to put in more eﬀort to get in and this eﬀort is wasteful. So
discriminating against the less advantaged group raises welfare. Next, we explore the role of the selection
eﬀect.
The Selection Eﬀect
Recall that the social welfare when   1 is given by
´
³
X Z

 =

( )
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( )


+

X

X

=



+

 + ≥∗






Z



X

Z

∗
∗
 ≤ + 

 + ≥∗






Z

´
³

( )
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( )

³
´

( )
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( )

∗
∗
 ≤ + 

³
´

( )
  ( +  ) − (∗ ( +   ̃  )) −   ( )

+ ( −  ) +  ( −  )

The latter can be written as follows:
!
ÃZ 
max
³
´
X Z 
max

∗


 =

( )
 ( +  ) − ( ( +   ̃ )) −   ( ) 
+

∗
 −

0



X




Z


max

0

ÃZ

∗
 −

∗
 −

!
³
´

∗


( )
 ( +  ) − ( ( +   ̃ )) −   ( ) 

+ ( −  ) +  ( −  ).

64

When we explore the selection eﬀect only, by definition we look at the eﬀect via the cutoﬀs directly
and not via the performance cutoﬀs. Thus, the selection eﬀect is as follows:
´
X ∗ Z 
max ³

 = −
  
( )
  (∗ −  +  ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ −  )

0

´
X ∗ Z 
max ³

+
  
( )
  (∗ −  +  ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ −  )
 0

´
X ∗ Z 
max ³

−
  
( )
  (∗ −  +  ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ −  )

0

⎞
⎛
∗
∗ ∗

X ∗ Z 
max
4(
−

+

)
−
(
(

̃
))





⎠  (∗ −  )
⎝
  
( )
= −
∗
∗


0
+( (  ̃ )) − 4



−

X




Z

∗



max

0

³
´

( )
  (∗ −  +  ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) −   (∗ −  )

Taking into account the equilibrium conditions, we know that
4(∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) + (∗ (∗  ̃  )) − 4

= 0

  (∗ ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) − 

= 0

so that have
4(∗ −  +  ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) + (∗ (∗  ̃  )) − 4
= 4 ((∗ −  +  ) − (∗ ))  and
  (∗ −  +  ) − (∗ (∗  ̃  )) − 
=   ((∗ −  +  ) − (∗ )) 
Hence,


Z 
∗ max

((∗ −  +  ) − (∗ ))  (∗ −  )
( )

0

X ∗ Z 
max


−
  
((∗ −  +  ) − (∗ ))  (∗ −  )
( )

0


= −4

X



(40)

Note that in the case of one university we have only the second component of the above expression.
However, we can apply the technique developed for the case with one university to both components, as
they have similar functional forms.
Consider, for instance, the first term in the above expression given by:
X ∗ Z 
max

1 = − 4 
  
((∗ −  +  ) − (∗ ))  (∗ −  )
( )

0

Recall that

 ∗ 
∗2
∗ 
∗1
=−  ∗
 0
=
 0

 1 (1 )

 2 (∗2 )
65

Hence, 1 (evaluated at the non-discrimination quota) can be written as follows:
Z 
max1
 (∗ −  )1 ( )
∗
∗

1 |= = 4 
((∗ −  +  ) − (∗ ))
(∗ )
0
Z 
max2
 (∗ −  )2 ( )
 
− 4  ∗
((∗ −  +  ) − (∗ ))
(∗ )
0
As in the benchmark case, we consider the following density functions:
 ( ) (∗ −  )

̃ ( ) ≡ R  
max
∗ − ) ()

(

0




1
2
( ) be its associated distribution function. As 
( ) º 
( ),
Let ̃

2 ( ) (∗ −  )
1 ( ) (∗ −  )
̃1 ( )
̃2 ( )
≥
=
=
for any  ,  :  ≥ 
1 () (∗ − )
2 () (∗ − )
̃1 ()
̃2 ()
1
2
1
2
That is, ̃
( ) º ̃
( ) implying ̃
( ) º1 ̃
( ).

Then, 1 can be rewritten in the following way:

1 |=∗

= − 4  ∗
+ 4  ∗

Z


max1

0

Z


max2

0

1
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )
2
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )

1
2

( ) º 
( ) implies 
Equivalently, as 
max1 ≥ max2

1 |=∗

= −4

 ∗

− 4  ∗

Z


max1


max2

Z


max2

0

1
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )

³
´
1
2
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  ))  ̃
( ) − ̃
( ) 

Integrating the second term above by parts implies that
Z 
max1
∗
1
∗
1 |= = − 4  
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )

max2

´
¡
¢³
1
(
+ 4  ∗ (∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − ) 
1 − ̃
max2 )
max2 )
Z 
´
max2 ³
∗
2
1
− 4   (1 − )
( ) − ̃
( ) 0 (∗ − (1 − )  )
̃
0

 0

2
1
1
2
( ) ≥ ̃
( ) for any  (recall that ̃
( ) º1 ̃
( )) and, moreover,
as 0 (·) is positive and ̃

Z


max1


max2

´
¡
¢³
1
1
((∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − )  )) ̃
( )  (∗ ) − (∗ − (1 − ) 
(
1 − ̃
max2 )
max2 ) .

Similarly, we can show that the second term in (40) evaluated at the non-discrimination quota:
X ∗ Z 
max

2 |=∗ = − 
  
((∗ −  +  ) − (∗ ))  (∗ −  )
( ),

0

66

is negative as well (the proof is exactly the same as that for 1 ). As a result, we can show that the
selection eﬀect evaluated at the non-discrimination quotas is negative, suggesting that we need to give
quotas to the disadvantaged group. Moreover, if the groups are symmetric, then the selection eﬀect is
equal to zero at the non-discrimination quotas.

67

