NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LINKAGES ACROSS SOVEREIGN DEBT MARKETS
Cristina Arellano
Yan Bai
Working Paper 19548
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19548

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Cristina Arellano and Yan Bai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Linkages across Sovereign Debt Markets
Cristina Arellano and Yan Bai
NBER Working Paper No. 19548
October 2013
JEL No. F3,G01
ABSTRACT
We develop a multicountry model in which default in one country triggers default in other countries.
Countries are linked to one another by borrowing from and renegotiating with common lenders with
concave payoffs. A foreign default increases incentives to default at home because it makes new borrowing
more expensive and defaulting less costly. Foreign defaults tighten home bond prices because they
lower lenders' payoffs. Foreign defaults make home default less costly by lowering future recoveries,
because countries can extract more surplus if they renegotiate simultaneously. In our model, the home
country may default only because the foreign country is defaulting. This dependency arises during
fundamental foreign defaults, where the foreign country defaults because of high debt and low income,
and also during self-fulfilling defaults, where both countries default only because the other is defaulting.
The simultaneity in defaults induces a correlation in interest rate spreads across countries. The model
can rationalize some of the recent economic events in Europe.

Cristina Arellano
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
arellano.cristina@gmail.com
Yan Bai
University of Rochester
Department of Economics
216 Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY, 14627
yanbai06@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Sovereign debt crises tend to occur in tandem. During the 1980s, almost all Latin American
countries defaulted and subsequently renegotiated their sovereign debt. Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Portugal, and Spain have been struggling with their sovereign debt throughout the
recent European debt crises, and Greece defaulted in 2012. During these crises, interest rates
increased simultaneously for multiple countries. As Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) show, such
clustering of default crises has been present throughout history for the last 200 years. Yet,
despite sovereign debt crises occurring in tandem, theoretical work on sovereign default has
mainly studied countries in isolation.
This paper develops a multicountry model in which default in one country triggers default
in other countries. Countries are linked to one another by borrowing from and renegotiating
with common lenders. A foreign default increases incentives to default at home because it
makes new borrowing more expensive and defaulting less costly. Foreign defaults make it
more difficult for the home country to service the debt because these defaults lower lenders’
payoffs, which in turn tightens bond prices at home. Foreign defaults also make home default
less costly by lowering future recoveries, because countries can extract more surplus if they
renegotiate simultaneously. In our model, the home country may default only because the
foreign country is defaulting. This dependency arises during fundamental foreign defaults,
where the foreign country defaults because of high debt and low income, and also during
self-fulfilling defaults, where both countries default only because the other is defaulting.
The model economy consists of two symmetric countries that borrow, default, and renegotiate their debt with competitive lenders that have concave payoffs. The price of debt reflects
the risk-adjusted compensation for the loss lenders face in case of default. Default entails
costs in terms of access to financial markets and direct output costs. After default, countries
can renegotiate with a committee of lenders through Nash bargaining. Countries then pay
the debt recovery and default costs are lifted. When multiple countries renegotiate, they do
it simultaneously with lenders. We consider a dynamic recursive Markov equilibrium.
Countries are linked because the prices of debt and the recovery are determined jointly
and depend on countries’ choices of default, borrowing, and renegotiation, as well as on their
states, which are their level of debt, credit standing, and income. Importantly, borrowing
countries are strategically large players and understand that their choices have an impact
on all debt prices and recoveries. They engage in Cournot competition between each other
when optimizing.
The bond price schedule incorporates the lenders’ cost of funds, the risk-adjusted default
probability, and the risk-adjusted recovery rate. When the foreign country borrows a large
2

loan or especially when it defaults, the bond price schedule worsens at home because lenders’
marginal valuation rises, which increases the cost of funds, and because of higher future
default probabilities and and lower future recovery rates at home. Such tightening of the
price schedule increases incentives to default at home.
Recoveries also respond to other countries’ choices and states. All parties renegotiating in
a given period renegotiate simultaneously with Nash bargaining. If two countries renegotiate
with lenders, their recoveries are lower than when only one renegotiates because the outside
option for lenders is lower. During simultaneous renegotiations, the threat value for lenders in
case of renegotiation failure is autarky, whereas during single renegotiations, this threat value
consists of the value that arises from continuing to trade with the other country.1 Hence,
anytime the foreign country defaults, the home country’s default incentive increases to take
advantage of the lower recovery. Foreign defaults also delay renegotiations at home, because
renegotiating simultaneously in the future is worth to wait.
We parameterize the model to Europe. To focus on our mechanisms, we study the case of
uncorrelated income shocks across countries. The important parameters that determine the
extent of debt market linkages are the curvature of lenders’ payoff function and the parameters
controlling the bargaining process. We calibrate these parameters to the observed volatility of
the risk-free rate, the average recovery rate, and the lower recovery observed during multiplecountry renegotiations taken from the historical data set of recoveries provided by Cruces and
Trebesch (2013). Other parameters of the model are calibrated to match observed spreads
in Greece.
We find that about 25% of the defaults at home occur only because the foreign country
is defaulting. About 11% of these induced defaults happen because of fundamental foreign
defaults, where the foreign country defaults due to high debt or low income. In 14% of these
defaults, however, the dependency is self-fulfilling in that the foreign country defaults only
because the home country is defaulting too. Repayment in the foreign country also induces
repayment at home. This beneficial dependency arises 27% of the time the home country is
repaying. Almost all of the renegotiations in our model are dependent on the foreign country
renegotiating or repaying.
The model predicts that country interest rate spreads comove. The cross-country correlation of spreads across countries in the model is 0.43, which implies that about half of
the correlation of spreads between Italy and Greece of 0.97 can be attributed to linkages in
1

In practice, countries also renegotiate together when frequently in default. The Brady Plan of the early
1990s is an example in which many Latin American countries renegotiated together and received an unusually
good deal. These countries were able to exchange their defaulted debt for new Brady bonds with principal
collateralized by the U.S. government.

3

their debt markets. Our model also predicts that the correlation of countries’ borrowing is
positive, as shown in the data of Greece and Italy, and equal to 0.3 and 0.56 in the model
and data, respectively.
The positive correlation in spreads arises largely because countries default together. The
probability of default at home rises from an average of 4.5% to over 37% in states when
the foreign country defaults. A second reason for the positive correlation in spreads is that
large foreign borrowing also increases home default probabilities because large foreign loans
tighten the home bond price schedule. When the foreign country borrows heavily and has
spreads above its median, the default incidence at home is about 1.3%, higher than when
foreign spreads are below the median. Hence, current foreign defaults not only induce home
defaults today but also home defaults in the near future.
The model also predicts that foreign defaults hinder renegotiations at home because
recoveries spike. Recoveries for the home country during foreign defaults increase from an
average of 66% to 90%. These recoveries reduce the probability of renegotiation from 98% to
1%. The lack of foreign renegotiations also reduces home renegotiations to zero if the home
country is in bad credit standing and increases default probabilities to 100% if the home
country is in good credit standing.
Through comparative static exercises, we find that the majority of the correlation in
spreads arises because of the strategic interactions between the two countries in default and
renegotiation. If countries were linked only by common risk-free rates and were small and
non-strategic, the correlation in spreads would drop from 0.43 to 0.17. Moreover, the fact that
countries want to renegotiate together to take advantage of lower recoveries is quantitatively
important. This effect alone would deliver a positive correlation across spreads of 0.28, as
shown in an exercise in which lenders have linear payoffs. Nevertheless, concavity in the
lenders’ payoff function does increase the correlation across spreads as in the benchmark
because the bond price functions at home respond not only to foreign defaults but also to
the level of foreign borrowing.
The mechanism of the model rests on the idea that having a common lender generates
financial linkages across countries. A large empirical literature on contagion has found support for the common lender theory. Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) and Van Rijckeghem
and Weder (2001) provide evidence that countries that borrow from the same lender as the
country where the crisis started are more vulnerable to contagion than those countries that
borrow from other lenders. Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2003) also show that spillovers
through bank lending, as opposed to trade linkages and country characteristics, can help explain contagion in the Mexican, Thai, and Russian crises. Using a disaggregated database on

4

mutual funds that hold emerging markets securities, Broner, Gelos, and Reinhart (2006) find
that the extent of the mutual fund exposure to countries’ shares helps explain the pattern of
stock market comovement across countries as well as the pattern of contagion during crises.
The model in this paper builds on the benchmark model of equilibrium default with
incomplete markets analyzed in Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008), and in a
seminal paper on sovereign debt by Eaton and Gersovitz (1981). These papers analyze the
case of risk-neutral lenders, abstract from recovery, and focus on the default experiences of
single countries. Borri and Verdelhan (2009) and Lizarazo (2013) study the case of risk-averse
lenders, and Pauzo and Presno (2011) study the case of lenders with uncertainty aversion.
They show that deviations from risk neutrality allow the model to generate spreads larger
than default probabilities, which is a feature of the data. Borri and Verdelhan also show
empirically that a common factor drives a substantial portion of the variation observed.
Lizarazo (2009) and Park (2013) study contagion in a model similar to ours in which multiple
borrowers trade with risk-averse lenders. Their model can generate comovement in spreads
across borrowing countries; however, they abstract from any debt renegotiation and strategic
interactions because they both consider competitive borrowers. Yue (2010), D’Erasmo (2011),
and Benjamin and Wright (2009) study debt renegotiation in a model with risk-neutral
lenders. They find that debt renegotiation allows the model to better match the default
frequencies and the debt-to-output ratios.
Our model also presents new types of self-fulfilling equilibria that lead to sovereign defaults. Coordination failures have been popular explanations for sovereign debt crises. The
main channel analyzed in the literature, however, emphasizes coordination failures among
lenders, whereas we focus on coordination issues among borrowers.2 Cole and Kehoe (2000),
for example, develop a model with multiple equilibria in which defaults are self fulling: lenders
refuse to completely roll over the country’s debt because they think that countries will default on the debt, which in turn leads to default. Relatedly, Lorenzoni and Werning (2013)
develop a dynamic model with self-fulfilling defaults arising from high interest rates. Lenders
charge higher interest rates because they predict high default rates. These high rates lead to
faster debt accumulation and self-fulfilling high default rates. In contrast, the self-fulfilling
equilibria of our model arise because of strategic interactions among large borrowers, which
we view as also relevant for the case in which sovereign countries borrow from international
lenders.

2

In the context of private borrowing, Arellano and Kocherlakota (2012) present a model in which borrowers default when other borrowers are also defaulting in environments in which private debtors cannot be
punished when many are in default.

5

2

Model

Consider an economy in which two symmetric countries, Home and Foreign, borrow from a
continuum of foreign lenders. Countries are strategically large players who borrow, default,
and renegotiate their debt. Lenders are competitive and have a concave payoff function.
Countries that default receive a bad credit standing, are excluded from borrowing, and suffer
a direct output cost. Countries in bad credit standing can renegotiate their debt with a
committee of lenders and bargain over the debt recovery. After renegotiation is complete,
countries regain their good credit standing.
The current period payoff to each borrowing country i is u(cit ), and the current payoff to
lenders is g(cLt ) where cit is the consumption of the representative household in each country
and cLt is the dividend to lenders. The functions u(•) and g(•) are increasing and concave.
P
t
The lifetime payoff to each borrowing country i is E ∞
t=0 β u(cit ), and the payoff to lenders
P∞ t
is E t=0 δ g(cLt ). Borrowing countries are more impatient than lenders: 0 < β < δ < 1.
Each borrowing country receives a stochastic endowment each period. Let y = {yi }∀i
be the vector of endowments for each country in a period. These shocks follow a Markov
process with transition matrix π(y 0 , y). We assume that lenders face no additional shocks.
The endogenous aggregate states consist of the vector of countries’ debt holdings b = {bi }∀i
and their credit standing h = {hi }∀i . The economy-wide state s incorporates the endogenous
and exogenous states: s = {b, h, y}.

2.1

Borrowing Countries

The government of each country is benevolent, and its objective is to maximize household utility. The government trades one-period discount bonds with foreign lenders, decides whether
to repay or default on its debt, and after a default, decides whether or not to renegotiate
the debt. The government rebates back to households all the proceedings from its credit
operations in a lump-sum fashion. We label country i as Home and country −i as Foreign.
Below we describe in detail the problem for the home country. The problem for the foreign
country is symmetric.
We consider a Markov equilibrium where the governments take as given future decisions.
The current strategy for the government at Home incorporates its repayment or renegotiation
decision di and its borrowing decision b0i . When the country is in good credit standing hi = 0,
it decides to repay the debt by setting di = 0. Only after deciding to repay can the country
choose its new borrowing b0i . If the government decides to default by setting di = 1, the
government cannot borrow and its credit standing changes to bad the following period. When
6

the home government is in bad credit standing hi = 1, it decides to renegotiate by setting
di = 0. Renegotiation changes the next period’s credit standing of the government to good.
After renegotiation the government starts with zero debt, b0i = 0. The current strategy for
both countries is summarized by {b0 , d} = {b0i , di }∀i .
The home prices for loans qi (s, b0 , d) and recovery φi (s, b0 , d) are functions that depend on
the current strategies for both countries as well as the aggregate state. In making decisions,
the governments take as given the price and recovery functions. The bond price function
compensates the lender for the risk-adjusted loss in case of default and depends on the
strategies of both countries and the aggregate states because the lenders’ kernel, and future
defaults, renegotiations, and recoveries depend on all of these variables. The recovery function
is the result of a bargaining process, the outcome of which depends on the countries’ strategies
and the aggregate state. Below we specify how the bond price and recovery functions are
determined.
The current home consumption depends on the aggregate state and the current strategies
of both countries ci (s, b0 , d). Consider a case where the home country is in good credit
standing, hi = 0, and an arbitrary strategy to repay di = 0 and to borrow b0i . Consumption
in this case is
ci = yi − bi + qi (s, b0 , d)b0i
(1)
Note that consumption for country i also depends on the state and strategy of the other
country by their effect on the price qi . Now consider consumption with a strategy to default,
such that di = 1. Default results in exclusion from trading international bonds and output
costs yi − yid , with yid ≤ yi . Consumption equals output during these periods:
ci = yid .

(2)

Following Arellano (2008) we assume that borrowers lose a fraction λ of output if output is
above a threshold:
(
yt
if yt ≤ (1 − λ)ȳ
ytd =
(1 − λ)ȳ if yt > (1 − λ)ȳ
where ȳ is the mean level of output.
Finally, consider the case when country i is in bad credit standing such that hi = 1. When
renegotiation is chosen, di = 0, the country pays the recovery φi (s, b0 , d), starts tomorrow with
zero debt, b0i = 0, and consumption is
ci = yi − φi (s, b0 , d)

7

(3)

Here, the state and strategy of the other country also affect home consumption by their effect
on the recovery. If the home country does not renegotiate, then consumption satisfies (2).
We represent the home borrowing country’s payoffs as a dynamic programming problem.
The government today takes as given all the decisions of future governments, which are
summarized by the continuation value function from tomorrow on vi,t+1 (s0 ) when the state
tomorrow is s0 . The lifetime payoff of the home country today when the state today is s for
arbitrary current strategies (b0 , d) is
wi,t (s, b0 , d; vt+1 ) = {u(ci (s, b0 , d)) + β

X

π(y 0 , y)vi,t+1 (s0 )}.

(4)

y0

Tomorrow’s state s0 = {b0 , h0 , y 0 } depends on the current strategy of both countries.
Specifically, the future credit standing and debt tomorrow depend on the default and renegotiation of each country, as follows
(
h0i =

1 if di = 1
0 otherwise


0

 bi if hi = 0 and di = 0
b0i =
bi
if di = 1


0
otherwise

f or all i

f or all i

(5)

(6)

In our model, each borrowing country internalizes the effects its strategies have on bond
prices and recoveries. The intraperiod game between the two countries has two stages. In
the first stage, countries make their default and renegotiation decisions. In the second stage,
if countries chose to repay in the first stage, they make their borrowing decisions and engage
in Cournot competition with one another.3
To develop the intraperiod game, we start with the second borrowing stage after default
and renegotiation decisions d have been made. The nature of this subgame depends on the
credit standing of countries and their repayment decisions. When all countries are in good
credit standing and repay, {di = 0}∀i , equilibrium borrowing strategies B(s, d) = {Bi (s, d)}∀i
are Nash in that {Bi = xbi (B−i , s, d)}∀i , where xbi (b0−i , s, d) is the borrowing best response of
each country i for arbitrary borrowing strategies b0−i , given states s and repayment choices d,
xbi (b0−i , s, d) = {b0i : max
wi (s, b0 , d; vi (s0 ))} for all i.
0

(7)

bi

3

We subdivide the intraperiod game between the two countries into a repayment and borrowing stage
because it substantially simplifies our computational algorithm.

8

When each country starts with a bad credit standing or it defaults, it cannot borrow and
hence does not enter the second borrowing stage of the game. Here, the remaining country
i chooses its borrowing to satisfy (7), where b0−i equals b−i or 0 according to the default and
renegotiation choices given by (6).
In the first stage of the game, each country i chooses its repayment strategy di taking as given the equilibrium borrowing strategies of the second stage. The equilibrium repayment strategies D(s) = {Di (s)}∀i are Nash in that {Di = xdi (D−i , s, B(s, D)}∀i , where
xdi (d−i , s, B(s, d)} is the repayment best response of each country i for arbitrary repayment
strategies d−i , given states s and taking into account the outcome of the second borrowing
stage B(s, d):
xdi (d−i , s, B(s, d)) = {di : max wi (s, B(s, d), d; vi (s0 ))}
di

for all i.

(8)

The resulting outcome of the intraperiod game is summarized by the repayment and
borrowing functions {D(s)} and {B(s) = B(s, D(s))}, as well as the consumptions c(s) =
{ci (s)}∀i and values v(s) = {vi (s)}∀i .
Definition 1. A Markov partial equilibrium takes as given price functions {qi (s, b0 , d)}∀i
and recovery functions {φi (s, b0 , d)}∀i and consists of equilibrium strategies {B(s), D(s)} and
payoffs c(s) and v(s) such that
(1) Given future value functions v(s0 ), period equilibrium strategies {B(s), D(s)} are the
solution of the intraperiod game such that they satisfy (7), (8), and (6).
(2) Equilibrium payoffs v(s) implied by equilibrium strategies {B(s), D(s)} are a fixed point
vi (s) = wi (s, B(s), D(s); vi (s0 ))

2.2

for all i.

Lenders

Competitive lenders trade bonds with the two borrowing countries. Every period lenders
receive a constant payoff from the net operations of other loans rL L and deposits rd D, which
we summarize by yL = rL L − rd D. We assume that lenders honor all financial contracts.
Lenders take as given the evolution of the aggregate state,
s0 = H(s)

(9)

and the corresponding decision rules for debt, default and renegotiation, {B(s), D(s)}. Lenders
choose optimal dividends cL and loans to the borrowing countries `0 = {`0i }∀i , taking as given
9

the prices of bonds Q = {Qi }∀i and recoveries Φ = {Φi }∀i . The value function for the lender
is given by
X
{g(c
)
+
δ
π(y 0 , y)v L (`0 , s0 )}.
(10)
v L (`, s) =
max
L
0
0
{cL ,`i if hi =hi =0}∀i

y0

Lenders maximize their value subject to their budget constraint that depends on the credit
standing of each borrowing country and whether they repay,
cL = y L +

X
i



Φi `i
0
,
(1 − Di (s)) (1 − hi )(`i − Qi `i ) + hi
bi

(11)

the evolution of the endogenous states when they do not trade with each country,
(
`0i =

`i if h0i = 1
0 if (hi = 1 and h0i = 0)

for all i,

(12)

and the evolution of the aggregate state (9).
Using the first order conditions and envelope conditions for the lenders’ problem, one can
show that bond prices satisfy
Qi =

X

[m(s0 , s)(1 − Di (s0 )(1 − ζi (s0 ))]

for all i,

(13)

s0

where ζi (s0 ) is the present value of recoveries and is defined recursively by

0
X
0
0 Φi (s )
0
0
ζi (s) =
m(s , s)(1 − Di (s )) 0 + Di (s )ζi (s )
bi
0
s

for all i.

(14)

and m(s0 , s) is the lenders’ stochastic discount factor or pricing kernel,
m(s0 , s) =

δπ(y 0 , y)g 0 (cL (s0 ))
,
g 0 (cL (s))

where cL (s) are the equilibrium dividends in state s.
The bond prices in (13) and the values of recoveries in (14) are easily interpretable. The
bond price contains two elements: the payoff in nondefault states Di (s0 ) = 0 and the payoff
in default states Di (s0 ) = 1. The lender discounts cash flows by the pricing kernel m(s0 , s) and
hence states are weighted by m(s0 , s). For every unit of loan `0i , the lender gets one unit in the
nondefault states and the value of recovery ζi (s0 ) in default states. The recovery value is the
expected payoff from defaulted debt the following period. It also contains two parts. If the
country renegotiates next period, Di (s0 ) = 0, and the value of recovery for every unit of loan
10

0

is Φib(s0 ) . If the country does not renegotiate, Di (s0 ) = 1, and the present value of recovery
i
is the discounted value of future recovery given by ζi (s0 ). These future recovery values are
weighted by the pricing kernel m(s0 , s), which implies that recovery values are weighted more
heavily for states s0 that feature a higher pricing kernel.
The bond price compensates the lender for any covariation between its kernel and the
bond payoffs. If default happens in states when m(s0 , s) is low, the price contains a positive
risk premia for low payoff in the default event. Moreover, if the value of recovery is low when
m(s0 , s) is low, the price also contains positive risk premia for the covariation of recovery.

2.3

Renegotiation Protocol

During renegotiation, countries renegotiate their debt with a committee of lenders. The
renegotiation protocol we consider is one in which the committee of lenders bargain simultaneously with all the countries renegotiating using Nash bargaining.4
First consider the case in which only country i renegotiates its debt. Consider a candidate
recovery value φ̂i . The payoff for lenders from renegotiating and receiving recovery φ̂i equals
the value of the representative lender evaluated at the aggregate debt values, V L (s; φ̂i ) ≡
v L (b, s; φ̂i ). The payoff for the borrower from renegotiation is vi (s; φ̂i ) for this candidate
value of recovery φ̂i . If the two parties do not reach an agreement, the defaulter country is
in permanent financial autarky with yi = yid and gets a threat value equal to
vi,aut (y) = {u(yid ) + β

X

π(y 0 , y)vi,aut (y 0 )}.

yi0

All lenders recover zero debt and are permanently precluded from trading with the defaulter
country. Lenders, however, will still have access to financial trading with the other nondefaulting country. Let VfLail (s−i ) be the value to all lenders from trading only with the nondefaulting country. This value arises from the single-country Markov equilibrium described in
detail in Appendix I.
The recovery φi maximizes the weighted surplus for borrowing country i and the lenders.
The bargaining power for the borrower is θ and that for lenders is (1 − θ). Recovery φi solves

1−θ
max [vi (s; φi ) − vi,aut (y)]θ V L (s; φi ) − VfLail (s−i )

(15)

φi [0,1]

subject to both parties receiving a nonnegative surplus from the renegotiation: vi (s; φi ) −
4

Such bargaining protocol has often been used in industrial organization models of multifirms. See Dobson
(1994) and Horn and Wolinsky (1988) for details.

11

vi,aut (yi ) ≥ 0, and V L (s; φi ) − VfLail (s−i ) ≥ 0, and law of motion (9).
Now consider states when both countries renegotiate simultanously with the committee
of all lenders. If the parties do not reach an agreement, all parties remain in financial autarky
thereafter. The recoveries {φi } for all i solve


L 1−θ
for all i
max [vi (s; φi ) − vi,aut (y)]θ V L (s; φi , φ−i ) − Vaut

(16)

φi [0,1]

subject to all parties receiving a nonnegative surplus from the renegotiation and law of motion
L)
L
(9). The outside option for the lenders in this case is autarky Vaut
= g(y
. The interpretation
1−δ
for lenders having autarky as their outside option is that countries have an agreement exante
on a cooperative bargaining strategy to send offers to the committee of lenders, and the
committee has to accept or reject both offers simultaneously.
An important aspect of the renegotiation protocol we consider is the simultaneity in
bargaining between the committee of lenders and all countries renegotiating. Under such
protocol, countries send offers to lenders, and they have to accept or reject all offers simultaneously.5 Such simultaneity implies that the threat value for lenders depends on whether
only one country renegotiates or two countries renegotiate. The differences between these
two threat values have implications for the simultaneity of defaults and renegotiations across
countries.

2.4

Functions for Bond Prices and Recoveries

The lenders’ problem and the renegotiation protocol determine the functions for bond prices
and recoveries. First consider the case when both countries are in good credit standing,
{hi = 0}∀i . Here, bond price functions q(s, b0 , d) = {qi (s, b0 , d)}∀i solve the demand system
determined by lenders’ first order conditions:
qi =

X

[m(s0 , s; q, b0 , d)(1 − Di (s0 )(1 − ζi (s0 ))] for all i,

(17)

s0

where the state tomorrow s0 = {b0 , h0 , y 0 } depends on countries’ current strategies (b0 , d)
and the lenders’ kernel m(s0 , s; q, b0 , d) is itself a function of prices, countries’ strategies, and
current and future states.
Now consider the case when country i is in good credit standing and country −i is in bad
credit standing, hi = 0 and h−i = 1. The bond price function for country i and the recovery
5

Dobson (1994) describes such protocol as strict simultaneous bargaining, where countries have an agreement beforehand to eliminate any other alternative bargaining strategy for lenders.

12

function derived from (15) for country −i, {qi (s, b0 , d), φ−i (s, b0 , d)} solve
qi =

X

[m(s0 , s; q, b0 , d)(1 − Di (s0 )(1 − ζi (s0 ))]

(18)

s0



θu0 (y−i − φ−i )
(1 − θ)g 0 (cL (s, qi , φ−i , b0 , d))

=
v−i (s; φ−i ) − v−i ,aut (y−i )
V L (s, qi , φ−i , b0 , d) − VfLail (si )

where the lender’s dividends and values are evaluated for every strategy and corresponding
price and recovery.
Finally, when both countries are in bad credit standing, {hi = 1}∀i recovery functions
φ(s, b0 , d) = {φi (s, b0 , d)}∀i are derived from (16) and solve
θu0 (yi − φi )
(1 − θ)g 0 (s, qi , φ−i , b0 , d)
for all i.
=
L
[vi (s; φi ) − vi ,aut (y)]
[V L (s, φ, d) − Vaut
]

2.5

(19)

Equilibrium

We focus on recursive Markov equilibria in which all decision rules are functions only of the
state variable s.
Definition 2. A recursive Markov equilibrium for this economy consists of (i) countries’
policy functions for repayment, borrowing, and consumption, {B(s), D(s), C(s)}, and values
v(s); (ii) lenders’ policy functions for lending choices and dividends {`0 (`, s), cL (`, s)} and
value function v L (`, s); (iii) the functions for bond prices and recoveries {q(s, b0 , d), φ(s, b0 , d)};
(iv) the equilibrium prices of debt Q(s) and recovery rates Φ(s); (v) the evolution of the aggreL
gate state H(s); and (vi) the lenders’ value in the case of renegotiation failure {vi,f
ail (`i , si )}∀i
such that given b0 = `0 :

1. Taking as given the bond price and recovery functions, the policy and value functions
for countries satisfy the Markov partial equilibrium in definition (1).
2. Taking as given the bond prices Q(s), recoveries Φ(s), and the evolution of the aggregate
states H(s), the policy functions and value functions for the lenders {`0 (`, s), cL (`, s),
v L (`, s)} satisfy their optimization problem.
3. Taking as given countries’ policy and value functions, bond price and recovery functions
{q(s, b0 , d), φ(s, b0 , d)} satisfy (17), (18), and (19).

13

4. The prices of debt Q(s) clear the bond market for every country,
`0i (s) = Bi (s) for all i.
5. The recoveries Φ(s) exhaust all the recovered funds
φi (s, B(s), D(s)) = Φi (s) for all i.
6. The goods market clears
c1 + c2 + cL = y 1 + y 2 + y L .
7. The law of motion for the evolution aggregate states (9) is consistent with countries’
decision rules and shocks.
L
8. The lenders’ value in the case of renegotiation failure {vi,f
ail (`i , si )}∀i arises from the
single-country Markov equilibrium.

3

Joint Defaults

In this section, we develop a simple two-period example to illustrate why countries have
incentives to default together.
Consider a two-period version of our model with no uncertainty, where countries have
c1−α −1
identical endowment paths y and y 0 . The lenders’ payoff function is g(cL ) = L1−α . In
period 1 the two countries with debt bi and b−i are in good credit standing and are deciding
whether to repay their current debt or default on it. If countries repay their debt, they choose
to borrow. In period 2, countries either repay their debts if they borrowed in period 1 or pay
the recovery φ0 if they defaulted in period 1. In this example without uncertainty, in period
2 countries with good credit always repay and countries with bad credit always renegotiate,
{d0i = 0}∀i . Default does not happen in equilibrium in period 2 because default would be
perfectly foreseen and the price of such a loan would be zero. Default incentives in period 2,
however, limit the borrowing possibilities for period 1. In particular, in period 1 countries
effectively face a borrowing limit b̄, which is the maximum repayment that countries would
be willing to make and equals the default penalty in period 2, b̄ = y 0 − y d , where y d < y 0 is
the income in case of default.
In this example, we assume that β is sufficiently less than δ such that it is optimal for
14

countries to borrow to the limit in period 1. Hence, we abstract from the interdependence
across countries in the borrowing decisions and focus on the interdependence in their repayment/default decisions. In this simplified environment, the relevant states for bond prices are
the debt states b and the default decisions of both countries d, {qi (b, d)}∀i . The relevant states
for recovery tomorrow are the credit standing of both countries h0 , which is determined by d,
{φ0i (h0 )}∀i . This example has these reduced states because we are assuming that endowments
are constant for the countries. Here again, we label i as Home and −i as Foreign.
In period 1, each country repays and sets di = 0 if the value of repayment is greater than
the value of default:
u(y − bi + qi (b, d)b̄) + βu(y 0 − b̄) ≥ u(y d ) + βu(y 0 − φ0i (h0 )) for all i.

(20)

It is apparent that default is more likely for country i when debt bi is high, the price qi
is low, and the recovery tomorrow φ0i is low. The default decisions of the two countries are
linked because bond prices today and recoveries tomorrow depend on the decisions of both
countries through the lenders’ problem.
It is useful to derive the home country’s default best response conditional on the foreign
country’s default decision, xdi (d−i , b). The foreign default decision affects the home country’s
future recovery φ0i and current debt price qi . A foreign default today decreases the home
recovery φ0i tomorrow because the surplus from renegotiating is higher when both countries
renegotiate together, φ0i (h0−i = 1) < φ0i (h0−i = 0). A foreign repayment increases the recovery
because here the country borrows b̄ in period 1 and repays it in period 2. The b̄ payment
gives the lender a high outside option during renegotiation with the home country, which in
turn increases the equilibrium φ0i (h−i = 0). This force implies that a foreign default d−i = 1
increases the right-hand side of equation (20) and thus increases the incentive to default for
the home country.
Proposition 3. Suppose α ≥ 1. When two countries renegotiate simultaneously, recovery is
smaller than when one country renegotiates alone: φ0i (h0−i = 1) < φ0i (h0−i = 0).

Proof. See Appendix II.
The second effect to consider is how a foreign default affects price qi . This effect depends
on the net capital flows that lenders forgo with the foreign default, b−i − q−i b̄. The larger
the foreign forgone capital flows, the more unfavorable the home bond price becomes with a
foreign default. The following proposition shows that capital flows are increasing with b−i ,
and the effect of a foreign default is increasingly detrimental for qi the higher b−i .
15

Proposition 4. Home bond prices increase with the foreign country’s debt when the foreign
country repays: qi (b, d) is increasing in b−i when d−i = 0.
Proof. See Appendix II.
b

b

i

i

Dependency	  zone	  
di = 0

di = 0 if d

i

=0

di = 1 if d

i

=1

di = 1

di = 0
d

di = 1

i

d

=1

i

=1
di = 1

Mul$ple	  equilibrium	  

di = 0

b̂ i (bi , di = 0)
d

i

d

di = 0, d i = 0
di = 1, d i = 1

i

=1

=0

b̂ i (bi , di = 1)
di = 0
di = 0
d

b̂(b i , d

i

= 1) b̂(b i , d

i

(a) Home Best Response

i

di = 1

=0

d

=0

b̂(b i , d

bi

= 0)

i

d

i

= 1) b̂(b i , d

i

= 0)

i

=0

bi

(b) Equilibrium

Figure 1: Debt Linkages
As in single-country default models, the home country will default when its current debt
bi is sufficiently high. It is useful to consider two home debt cutoffs b̂(b−i , d−i = 0) and
b̂(b−i , d−i = 1), which depend on the foreign state and default decision. Home defaults when
its debt level is above these two cutoffs.
The effects of a foreign default on the price qi and the future recovery φ0i imply that
b̂(b−i , d−i = 0) is increasing in b−i and that b̂(b−i , d−i = 1) is independent of b−i . The ranking
of b̂(b−i , d−i = 0) and b̂(b−i , d−i = 1) at b−i = 0 depends on the details of the utility of lenders.
We assume that the effect of default on recovery is strong enough such that b̂(b−i = 0, d−i =
0) > b̂(b−i = 0, d−i = 1).
To summarize this analysis, Figure 1(a) plots the home best responses for default as
a function of its own debt level bi and the foreign country’s debt level b−i conditional on
the foreign default decision d−i . For sufficiently low (or high) levels bi , the home country
always repays (or defaults) independently of the foreign decision. For intermediate levels of
bi , however, the home country repays only if the foreign country repays. We label this region
the dependency zone. By symmetry, the best response of the foreign country is identical to
that of the home country, such that for intermediate levels of debt, the foreign country repays
only if the home country repays.
Figure 1(b) illustrates the equilibrium in this example by considering both best response
functions. The figure shows that in the dependency zones, both countries have joint repayments and joint defaults. Consider the dependency zone for country 1. When the foreign
16

debt is low enough, the foreign repayment guarantees a home repayment. For high foreign
debt, a foreign default guarantees a home default. When the foreign debt is in the intermediate region, our model features multiple equilibrium: either both countries default or
both countries repay. Nevertheless, even in this region the equilibrium features either joint
defaults or joint repayments.
This example has highlighted the forces that in our model lead to joint defaults due to a
common lender. The main idea is that foreign defaults lead to home defaults because foreign
defaults lead to lower future recoveries and tighter current bond prices for the home country.
Joint defaults and joint repayments occur for fundamental and self-fulfilling reasons. In this
example, however, we have abstracted from debt dynamics and have considered an arbitrary
level of initial debt. In practice, the level of debt is endogenous to countries’ decisions and
their choices interact with defaults and renegotiations. In the following section, we analyze
the general dynamic model with endogenous borrowing and default.

4

Quantitative Analysis

We solve the model numerically and analyze the linkages across the two borrowing countries
in terms of spreads, defaults, recoveries, and renegotiations. Debt market linkages are quantitatively important and can generate strong positive comovements among spreads and debt
exposures.

4.1

Calibration

c1−σ
. We set the intertemporal
1−σ
elasticity of substitution (IES) 1/σ to 1/2, which is a common value used in real business
c1−α
L
cycle studies. The utility for lenders is g(cL ) = 1−α
. The IES for lenders 1/α is calibrated
below.
The length of a period is one year. We assume the stochastic process for output for the
borrowing countries is independent of one another and follows a lognormal AR(1) process:
log(yt+1 ) = ρ log(yt ) + εt+1 with E[ε2 ] = η 2 . We discretize the shocks into a nine-state
Markov chain using a quadrature-based procedure (Tauchen and Hussey, 1991). To calibrate
the volatility and persistence of output, we use an annual series of linearly detrended GDP
for Greece for the period of 1960–2011, taken from the World Development Indicators .
We calibrate six parameters: the lenders’ and borrowers’ discount rates δ and β , the
lenders’ IES 1/α, the lenders’ endowment yL , the default cost λ, and the borrower’s bargaining
parameter θ, to match seven moments: the average yield and volatility of German one-year
The utility function for the borrowing countries is u(c) =

17

bonds of 4% and 1.4%, the average spread and volatility of Greek euro bonds of 1.5% and
2.6%, the volatility of German exposure to Greek debt of 15%, the average recovery of
60% and the difference between recoveries when many countries renegotiate their debt, and
recoveries in single-country renegotiations of 16%.
The German exposure to Greek debt is measured as the total level of Greek debt held by
the German financial sector. The series is taken from the Bank of International Settlements
data set on cross-border claims. The volatility is computed from a log and linearly detrended
series.
The average recovery of 60% is the one reported in Cruces and Trebesch (2013) across 182
sovereign restructures for the period 1970-2010. With this data set we compute the difference
in recoveries for single renegotiations and joint renegotiations. We find that recoveries are
16 percentage points lower when the recovery occurs in a year during which four or more
countries finish their renegotiations. To construct this moment, we regress the recovery rate
for each renegotiation episode between 1970 and 2010, recoveryi ,t , on a dummy variable that
takes the value of 1 if in the renegotiation year there were four or more final renegotiations,
multii . The estimated regression is
recoveryit = 0.76 − 0.16 ∗ multit + it .
The coefficient on the dummy variable is statistically significant at the 5% level. Introducing
country fixed effects in the regression changes only slightly the coefficient on multit to -0.17,
and it continues to be significant. 6
Table 1 summarizes the parameter values.
We solve the model as the limit of a finite horizon model in which each period both countries engage in Cournot competition with one another, taking as given the future decisions
that are encoded in the future values. As in the simple example, for a certain region of
the parameter space, our model features multiple equilibria. We select the equilibrium that
maximizes the joint values for the two borrowing countries, v1 + v2 . The numerical algorithm
is explained in detail in Appendix III.

4.2

Main Calibration Results

We simulate the model and report statistics summarizing debt markets for the home country.
Because of symmetry, statistics for the foreign country are equal.
6

We found similar results using an alternative data set of renegotiations provided by Benjamin and Wright
(2009). In this data set, recovery rates are 13% lower in multiple-country renegotiations.

18

Table 1: Parameter Values
Value
Target
Borrowers’ IES
1/σ = 1/2
Stochastic structure for shocks ρ = 0.88, η = 0.03
Calibrated parameters

Output cost after default
λ = 0.016




Borrowers’ discount factor
β = 0.82



Lenders’ discount factor
δ = 0.96
Lenders’ endowment
yL = 1.4




Lenders’ IES
1/α = 1/0.65



Bargaining power
θ = 0.38

Standard value
Greek output
German yield:
mean and volatility
Greek spread:
mean and volatility
Recovery rate:
mean and conditional
Volatility of exposure

Table 2 reports the calibration results as well as the correlation of spreads and exposures
across countries predicted in the model and their empirical counterparts. The risk-free rate
is defined as the inverse of the lender’s kernel rf = 1/Em − 1. Spreads are defined as the
difference between the country interest rate and the risk-free rate spr = 1/q −rf −1. Recovery
rates are defined as the recovery relative to the debt in default 100 × φ/b. Exposure equals
the market value of debt every period, qb0 .
The calibration generates a fairly tight fit between the model predictions and the targets.
In the model, the mean and volatility of the risk-free rate are 4.2% and 1.6%, which are close
to the data statistics of 4.0% and 1.4%. In the model, the mean and volatility of the spread
are 1.6% and 1.8%. The mean spread is close to its empirical counterpart of 1.4%, whereas
volatility in the model is lower than the 2.6% found in the data. The volatility of detrended
exposure in the model is 16%, close to 15% in the data. In the model, the average recovery
and the difference in recoveries between single and multiple renegotiations are 66% and -13%,
which are in line with the empirical estimates of 60% and -16%.
Although the calibrated moments are jointly controlled by all parameters, certain parameters affect certain moments more. The mean risk-free rate is mostly determined by the
lenders’ discount factor. The mean spread is mainly controlled by the borrowers’ discount
factor and the output cost of default. The volatility of the risk-free rate is controlled by the
lenders’ average output and their IES. The volatility of exposure is controlled by the lenders’
IES, the borrowers’ discount factor, and the output cost of default. The mean recovery and
the recovery difference are controlled by the bargaining power and by the output cost of
default.

19

Table 2: Main Statistics
Data
Calibrated moments:
Mean risk-free rate
4.0
Mean spread
1.4
Volatility risk-free rate
1.4
Volatility spread
2.6
Volatility of exposure
15
Mean recovery
60
Change in recovery with
-16
multiple renegotiations
Other moments:
Correlation of spreads
0.97
Correlation of exposure
0.56

Model
4.2
1.6
1.6
1.8
16
66
-13

0.43
0.30

Table 2 also shows that the model generates a substantial cross-country correlation of
spreads and exposure of 0.43 and 0.30. The correlations of Greek spreads and those for
Italy, Portugal, and Spain are 0.96, 0.97, and 0.97, respectively. The correlations of German
exposure to Greek debt and German exposure of debt from Italy, Portugal, and Spain are 0.78,
0.31, and 0.58, respectively. Recall that the process for output is assumed to be uncorrelated
and that the model generates positive correlations only because of the debt market linkages
across countries. Hence, through the lens of our model, about half of the correlations in
spreads and exposures across countries are attributed to the linkages in lending, default, and
renegotiation.

4.3

Prices and Recoveries

In our model, the shapes of bond price and recovery functions determine the linkages across
countries in their default, renegotiation, and borrowing. We now explain these functions in
detail.
Figure 2 plots the bond price schedules for the home country qi (s, b0 , d) as a function
of their borrowing level, b0i . The schedules are for a level of income that is two standard
deviations lower than the mean and debt at the mean bi = b−i = 0.06 for both countries. We
plot the schedules as a function of the two foreign credit states h−i = {0, 1} and for various
foreign choices for loans b0−i and repay/renegotiate d−i . For any foreign state or choice, bond
prices are always decreasing in borrowing levels because both default probabilities and riskfree rates increase with larger loans. Risk-free rates increase with loans because the lenders’
marginal utility increases with larger transfers to the home country. Nevertheless, foreign
20

states and choices change the bond price schedule at home.
First consider the case in which the foreign country is in good credit standing. We plot
the schedule for three foreign choices: the optimal borrowing choice b0−i = B(s, d), a large
borrowing choice 30% larger than optimal, and default d−i = 1. When the foreign country
repays and borrows an optimal amount, which is modest here, the schedule for the home
country is the most favorable. When foreign borowing is large or when the foreign country
defaults, the schedule is tighter because of the increase in the risk-free rate and because of
higher default probabilities in the future. The change in the risk-free rate can be read from
the vertical distance in the bond price schedule for small home borrowing levels. Risk-free
rates rise with large foreign borrowing but especially with foreign defaults because these
choices tilt the lenders’ consumption path upward. With default, lenders’ consumption is
lower today because they lose the transfer of the defaulted debt and is higher tomorrow
because of the recovery lenders obtain during renegotiation.
Large foreign borrowing and foreign default also increase the probabilities that the home
country defaults the next period, as illustrated by the steeper slope of the bond price function
at small levels of debt. These foreign actions increase future default incentives at home
because debt renegotiation after default is more beneficial when renegotiating simultaneously
with the foreign country. When the foreign country borrows a large amount, it naturally has
a higher default probability the next period.

1.1
Foreign repay: optimal borrowing

1
Foreign rene.

0.9
Foreign repay: large borrowing

0.8
Foreign default
Foreign not rene.

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04
0.05
Home Borrowing

0.06

0.07

0.08

Figure 2: Bond Price Functions
Figure 2 also plots the price function when the foreign country has bad credit h−i = 1.
It considers two foreign choices, renegotiate d−i = 1 and not renegotiate d−i = 0. The bond
21

price schedule at home is most lenient when the foreign country renegotiates. Here risk-free
rates are very low because there is no possibility of an immediate default for the foreign
country that just renegotiated. The bond price schedule for not renegotiating is tight and
coincides with that for default. Hence, the same forces as for the case of foreign default are
at play in this case.
We now turn the focus to recoveries. Figure 3 plots the recovery rate for the home
country φi (s, b0 , d)/bi as a function of the home country’s debt state bi . The levels of income
and foreign debt are as in the bond price figure. We plot the schedules as a function of the
two foreign credit states h−i = {0, 1} and for foreign choices for optimal loans b0−i = B(s, d)
and repay/renegotiate d−i .

1
Foreign default

0.9

Foreign not rene.

0.8

0.7
Foreign rene.

0.6

Foreign repay: optimal borrowing

0.5

0.4
0.04

0.05

0.06
Home Debt

0.07

0.08

Figure 3: Recovery Functions
Recovery rates are decreasing in the level of defaulted debt because the recovery level
φi (s, b0 , d) is independent of bi . The home country faces the most lenient recovery function
when the foreign country is also renegotiating because with joint renegotiations, the outside
option of lenders, which is autarky, is lower. With single renegotiations, the outside value for
lenders is the value of trading with the foreign country. As long as lenders attach any positive
value from holding the foreign country debt (which are lenders’ assets), the outside option of
lenders is higher with single renegotiations than it is with joint renegotiations. Nevertheless,
the extent of this effect is controlled by the bargaining parameters. For example, if lenders
have all the bargaining power, then their outside options are irrelevant for the equilibrium.
The recovery functions are the tightest if the foreign country would default or not renegotiate. In these cases, the lenders’ outside option relative to the value of renegotiation is the
22

highest because default or not renegotiating lowers the lenders’ value of renegotiation while
the outside option is fixed across these potential choices for a given state.
Foreign policies to default and borrow affect home countries’ bond prices and recoveries,
and these prices shape home default, borrowing, and renegotiation decisions. One implication
of this analysis is that, as in the example in Section 3, our model features joint defaults for
two reasons. First, a foreign default makes the home debt price schedule tighter, which makes
it harder to roll over the debt and hence can induce a default. Second, countries want to
renegotiate together because recoveries are lower with joint renegotiations. A foreign default
lowers the future recoveries for the home country, which can also induce a default. When
countries default together, their default probabilities and hence their spreads are correlated.

4.4

Debt Linkages

To further our understanding of debt market linkages, Table 3 reports observed debt market
statistics for the home country conditional on the debt market conditions of the foreign
country. We partition the limiting distribution into states when the foreign country is in
good credit standing and states when it is in bad credit standing. When the foreign country
is in good credit standing, we further partition the sample into states when its spreads are
above and below the median of 2.41 and states when it defaults. When the foreign country
is in bad credit standing, we partition the states into those when it renegotiates and states
when it does not renegotiate.

Home
Spread
Default prob.
Recovery
Renegotiation prob.
Risk-free rate

Overall
Average
1.6
4.5
66
98
4.2

Table 3: Debt Linkages
Foreign Good Credit
spr >p50 spr ≤p50 Default
2.7
3.9
67
100
4.3

1.3
2.6
72
100
4.3

1.9
37.3
90
1
6.3

Foreign Bad Credit
Renego Not Renego
1.1
0.03
58
100
-0.0

–
100
–
–
7.4

Note: spr denotes spreads and Renego denotes renegotiation.

Table 3 shows that foreign conditions affect home spreads, default probabilities, recoveries,
and renegotiation probabilities. First consider the states when the foreign country is in good
credit standing. Spreads are correlated: the average spread for the home country equals 2.7%
23

when the spread for the foreign country is above its median, whereas it is 1.3% when the
foreign country spread is below the median. As explained in the previous section, a major
reason for this positive correlation of spreads is the prevalence of joint defaults. The average
default probability for the home country jumps to about 37% when the foreign country
defaults. This strong incidence of joint defaults implies that high foreign spreads forecast
a foreign default and a home default, which in turn is priced in home spreads. A second
force that induces a positive correlation of spreads is that the home country is more likely to
default when the foreign country borrows heavily which coincides with high and persistent
spreads. As illustrated in the bond price schedules above, a large foreign loan tightens the
home bond price schedule, which leads to more defaults. The home country’s default rate
is 3.9% when foreign spreads are high compared with 2.6% when spreads are low. Given
that spreads are persistent, a high spread in the foreign country also predicts a default at
home in states when the foreign country repays and continues to have high spreads. The
correlation of spreads across countries is hence positive because of joint defaults and because
both countries induce each other to default when they borrow heavily.
Recoveries for home also vary with the conditions in the foreign country. When foreign
spreads are low, home recovery equals 72%; when foreign spreads are high, recoveries are
lower and equal to 67%; and when the foreign country defaults, recoveries are highest and
equal to 90%. Nevertheless, these high recoveries during foreign defaults are rarely observed
in equilibrium because the home country renegotiates during these states with less than 1%
probability. To obtain a lower recovery, the home country would rather delay renegotiation
and renegotiate the following period along with the foreign country. Lower recoveries at home
coincide with high foreign spreads because a low recovery tightens the price schedule for the
foreign country and leads to a higher spread.
Now consider the case when the foreign country is in bad credit standing because of a
previous default. When the foreign country renegotiates, the home country spreads are low,
and recoveries are the lowest across the board. Hence, with foreign renegotiations, the home
country almost never defaults if it is in good credit standing and always renegotiates if it is
in bad credit standing. When the foreign country does not renegotiate, the home country
always defaults if it is in good credit standing. The limiting distribution does not have any
mass in states in which both countries are in bad credit standing and only one renegotiates.
When countries are in bad credit standing, they renegotiate jointly.
Note that the risk-free rate does not vary much when countries are borrowing and repaying their debt. When countries default, however, the risk-free rate rises about 2%, and
during renegotiations, it drops to about zero. The risk-free rate is high during defaults be-

24

cause the lenders stop collecting their payments and have a lower marginal value. During
renegotiations, the opposite occurs: lenders receive the recovery, which lowers their marginal
value.
In analyzing these results, it is important to keep in mind that in the limiting distribution
of the model, the probability of different credit standing states varies. The probability that
both countries are borrowing and repaying their debt is the highest and equal to 86%. Each
country defaults alone about 2.6% of the time, and countries default together about 1.5% of
the time. Countries also renegotiate and repay together often. About 5% of the time, one
country is repaying its debt while the other country is renegotiating. When both countries
are in bad credit standing, they always renegotiate together, which happens about 1.8% of
the time.
Our model also provides a laboratory in which to analyze precisely whether the observed
defaults and renegotiations for the home country are induced by the defaults and renegotiations of the foreign country. We find that many defaults in one country could be avoided
if other countries were to not default, and most renegotiations can be facilitated if other
countries renegotiate. To conduct this experiment, we consider the home best responses for
default or renegotiation, xdi (d−i , s, B(s, d)), as a function of the foreign country strategy for
default or renegotiation d−i . We define home events as independent if the event continues to
occur even if the foreign country changes its strategy from default to repay, from renegotiate
to not renegotiate, or vice versa. If the home event changes when the foreign country changes
its default/renegotiation strategy, we label such events as dependent.7 Self-fulfilling events
are those dependent events that have two equilibria. Table 4 reports the fraction of the
defaults, repayments, renegotiations, and nonrenegotiations for the home country that are
independent and dependent. As the table shows, a substantial portion of the home events are
induced by the foreign country decisions; 25% of the defaults, 27% of the repayments, 93% of
the renegotiations, and 100% of the nonrenegotiations are dependent. Self-fulfilling equilibria
are a substantial portion of the equilibria during renegotiations and nonrenegotiations but
are also sizable for defaults. Nevertheless, the majority of the default and repayment events
are independent with a portion equal to 75% and 73%, respectively.

More precisely, default and renegotiation events are independent for country i if Di (s) = xdi (1 −
D−i (s), s, B(s, d)), where Di (s), and D−i (s) are the equilibrium policy functions, xdi is the home best response function, and B(s, d) is the outcome of the second stage intraperiod game when default/renegotiation
strategies are d−i = 1 − D−i (s) and di = xdi (1 − D−i (s), s, B(s, d)). If Di (s) 6= xdi (1 − D−i (s), s, B(s, d)), the
event is dependent.
7

25

Table 4: Types of Defaults and Renegotiations (%)
Default
Repay
Renegotiation
Nonrenegotiation
Independent
Dependent
Self-fulfilling

75
25
14

73
27
0

7
93
36

0
100
87

The dependent defaults at home happen mostly because the foreign country is defaulting,
although 2% of the defaults happen because the foreign country is not renegotiating. All of
the dependent repayments happen because the foreign country is repaying. Of the dependent
renegotiations at home, 55% happen because the foreign country is renegotiating and 39%
because the foreign country is repaying. Of the nonrenegotiations, 100% happen because the
foreign country is defaulting.

4.5

Comparative Statics

Standard quantitative default models as in Arellano (2008) abstract from debt linkages across
countries because each country is considered in isolation. Our model generates strong linkages
in debt markets across countries by deviating from a standard default model along three
dimensions. First, the standard model considers one large borrowing country, whereas we
consider two large borrowing countries, which leads to the analysis of the strategic interactions
among them. Second, the standard model considers risk-neutral lending, whereas we consider
lenders that have concave payoffs. Third, the standard model does not consider renegotiation,
whereas we add renegotiation in an environment with two borrowing countries interacting
with lenders.8
In this section we show that these three forces are important for our results and that they
interact with each other. To that end, we compute three versions of our model. We compute
a linear model, where we set α = 0. This version highlights the roles of two large borrowing
countries interacting with one another through renegotiation. We also compute a low IES
model by lowering the IES to 1/α = 1/5. This version explores the role of the elasticity of
substitution.9 Finally we compute a small country model, where we add a competitive small
8

As noted in the introduction, several papers have analyzed some of these extensions in isolation: Yue
(2010) and D’Erasmo (2011) study renegotiation in the case of one borrowing country, and Lizarazo (2013,
2009) studies the impact of risk-averse lenders.
9
With power utility, risk aversion and elasticity of substitution are controlled by the same parameter.
We focus on describing the effects of the elasticity of substitution because when we extended our analysis to
an Epstein-Zin utility function, we found that the key parameter controlling this result is the IES and not
risk aversion. We found that risk aversion playeds only a minor role.

26

country that is otherwise identical to the home country to the benchmark model.10 This
version highlights the role of strategic interactions.
Table 5: Sensitivity
Mean (%)
Default probability
Spread
Recovery
Recovery multiple − single
Debt service / GDP
Volatility (%)
Risk-free rate
Spread
Exposure
Correlations across countries
Spreads
Exposure
Default
Fraction dependent events (%)
Default
Repay
Renegotiation
Nonrenegotiation

Benchmark

Linear

Low IES

Small Country

4.5
1.6
66
-13
6.3

4.2
1.7
66
-10
6.3

1.3
0.6
62
-18
5.9

5.7
2.8
77
-2.5
7.4

1.6
1.8
15

0.0
1.7
15

4.0
1.2
17

1.6
5.4
8.5

0.42
0.30
0.34

0.28
0.34
0.45

0.52
0.51
0.32

0.17
0.07
0.11

25
27
93
100

35
27
94
100

31
22
95
100

–
–
–
–

Table 5 reports the sensitivity results for the three versions of our model as well as for
the benchmark model. First consider the results for the linear model. In terms of means
(default probabilities, spread, recovery, and debt), the linear model behaves very similarly
to the benchmark. Having linear lenders in our model, of course, implies a zero risk-free
rate volatility, which is far from that observed in the data. The volatilities of spreads and
exposures are comparable to the benchmark. The correlations of spreads are greatly reduced
in the linear model from 0.44 to 0.28 even though the correlation of defaults increases from
0.34 to 0.45. The reason for the increase in the default correlation is the higher incidence of
more dependent states. The fraction of defaults that are dependent increases from 25% to
35%, and such events are mainly due to foreign defaults.
In the linear model, the main force that operates for linkages is that countries want
to renegotiate together because their recoveries will be lower. The results from the linear
model show that this effect is powerful and important for the results in our benchmark model.
10

In Appendix I, we lay out the small country problem in detail .

27

Nevertheless, the correlation of spreads is lower in the linear model because foreign borrowing
does not affect the risk-free rates. Recall that in the benchmark model, a home default is
induced not only by a foreign default but also by large foreign loans, which increase the
risk-free rate. In the linear model, this effect is absent thereby lowering the correlation of
spreads.
Now consider the results from the low IES model. When lenders have low IES, the
bond price functions are much tighter, which limits borrowing and leads to a lower default
probability and spread in equilibrium. The volatility of the risk-free rate is the highest in this
model because risk-free prices are more sensitive to lenders’ consumption paths when they
have a low IES. This model generates a higher correlation of spreads than the benchmark,
0.52 relative to 0.42, despite generating a comparable correlation of defaults. More curvature
in lenders’ utility amplifies the effects from large foreign borrowings on home bond prices.
Finally, consider the results from the small country model. In this model, the small
country takes as given the evolution of the aggregate states and decisions of the two large
borrowing countries arising from the benchmark model. This assumption matters for the
small country because it determines the evolution of the risk-free rate. Moreover, the income
shock of the small country is identical to that of the home country. Table 5 reports the
statistics for the small country across its own limiting distribution of debt. The small country
borrows more, defaults more, and faces higher spreads because the small country does not
internalize that large borrowing increases the risk-free rate. The correlations across the
spreads and defaults of the small country and the foreign country are small and equal 0.17
and 0.11. The positive correlations reflect the fact that countries face common risk-free
rates. Nevertheless, correlations are small and less than half of that observed across the
home country and the foreign country because the small country does not engage in any
strategic interactions with the foreign country. This experiment shows that the large crosscountry correlations in the benchmark are mainly driven by the strategic interactions across
countries and that the modest variation in the lenders’ condition plays only a minor role
when countries are not strategic.

5

Conclusion

We developed a multicountry model of sovereign default and renegotiation in which default
in one country triggers default in other countries. Debt market conditions for borrowing
countries are linked to one another because they borrow from a common lender with concave
payoffs. In our model, country interest rates are correlated because countries tend to default

28

together. Joint defaults occur because a default abroad makes the price of debt more stringent
and recoveries lower at home. In this way, our model provides a framework in which to study
some of the recent economic events in Europe.

References
[1] Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath (2006). Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current
Account. Journal of International Economics, 69(1): 64–83.
[2] Arellano, C. (2008). Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies.
American Economic Review, 98(3): 690–712.
[3] Arellano, C. and N. Kocherlakota (2012). Internal Debt Crises and Sovereign Defaults.
Manuscript, Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
[4] Bank for International Settlements, Consolidated Banking Statistics,
http://www.bis.org/statistics/consstats.htm.
[5] Benjamin, D., and M. Wright (2009). Recovery Before Redemption: A Theory of Delays
in Sovereign Debt Renegotiations. Manuscript, State University of New York at Buffalo.
[6] Borri, N., and A. Verdelhan (2009). Sovereign Risk Premia. Manuscript, LUISS Guido
Carli University.
[7] Broner, F. A., R. G. Gelos, and C. M. Reinhart (2006). When in Peril, Retrench: Testing
the Portfolio Channel of Contagion. Journal of International Economics, 69(1): 203-230.
[8] Cole, H. L., and T. J. Kehoe (2000). Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises. Review of Economic
Studies, 67(1), 91–116.
[9] Cruces, J. J., and C. Trebesch (2013). Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3): 85-117.
[10] D’Erasmo, P. (2011). Government Reputation and Debt Repayment. Manuscript, University of Maryland.
[11] Dobson, P. W.(1994). Multifirm Unions and the Incentive to Adopt Pattern Bargaining
in Oligopoly. European Economic Review, 38(1): 87-100.

29

[12] Eaton, J., and M. Gersovitz (1981). Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
Empirical Analysis. Review of Economic Studies, 48(2): 289–309.
[13] Horn, H., and A. Wolinsky (1988). Bilateral Monopolies and Incentives for Merger.
RAND Journal of Economics, 19(3): 408-419.
[14] Kaminsky, G. L., and C. M. Reinhart 2000. On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion.
Journal of International Economics, 51(1): 145-168.
[15] Lizarazo, S. V. (2013). Default Risk and Risk Averse International Investors. Journal of
International Economics, 89(2): 317-330.
[16] Lizarazo, S. V. (2009). Contagion of Financial Crises in Sovereign Debt Markets. Working Paper no. 0906, Centro de Investigacion Economica, ITAM.
[17] Lorenzoni, G., and I. Werning (2013). Slow Moviing Debt Crises. Working Paper no.
13-18, MIT Department of Economics.
[18] Park, J. (2013). Contagion of Sovereign Default Risk: The Role of Two Financial Frictions. Manuscript, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
[19] Puozo. D., and I. Presno (2011). Sovereign Default Risk and Uncertainty Premia.
Manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.
[20] Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff (2011). From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis. American
Economic Review, 101(5): 1676-1706.
[21] Tauchen, G., and R. Hussey (1991). Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models. Econometrica, 59(2): 371-396.
[22] Van Rijckeghem, C., and B. Weder (2001). Sources of Contagion: Is It Finance or Trade?
Journal of International Economics, 54 (2): 293-308.
[23] Van Rijckeghem, C., and B. Weder (2003). Spillovers Through Banking Centers: A
Panel Data Analysis of Bank Flows. Journal of International Money and Finance, 22
(4): 483-509.
[24] World Bank, World Development
catalog/world-development-indicators.

Indicators,

http://data.worldbank.org/data-

[25] Yue, V. Z. (2010). Sovereign Default and Debt Renegotiation. Journal of International
Economics, 80(2): 176-187.

30

Appendix I. Auxiliary Models
One Large Country Model
L
Let vi,f
ail (`i , si ) be the value to the lender when trading only with country i:
L
vi,f
ail (`, si ) =

max
0

{g(cL ) + δ

{dL ,`i if hi =h0i =0}

X

L
0 0
π(yi0 , yi )vi,f
ail (` , si )},

(21)

yi0

subject to its budget constraint,


Φi `
cL = yL + [1 − Di (s)] (1 − hi )(` − Qi ` ) + hi
bi
0


,

the evolution of the endogenous states akin to equation (12), and a law of motion of aggregate
states for the case that country i is dealing alone with lenders s0i = Hf ail (si ). The optimal
solution of the lender is given by cL,f ail (`, si ) and `0f ail (`, si )
The problem for country i in the case when it trades alone with the lenders is similar
to one described in Section 2.1 with three main differences. First, its aggregate states are
only si = {bi , hi , yi }. Second, the price function qi,f ail (si , b0i , di ) and recovery φi,f ail (si , b0i , di )
depend only on its own states and its own strategies. Third, the intraperiod Nash game
between countries is absent. The decision rules for this problem are labeled Bi,f ail (si ) for
borrowing and Di,f ail (si ) for repayment. These decisions in turn determine the evolution of
the aggregate state s0i = Hf ail (si ).
When hi = 0, the price function qi,f ail (si , b0i , di ) solves
qi,f ail =

X

mf ail (s0i , si ; qi,f ail , b0i , di ) [1 − Di,f ail (s0i )(1 − ζi,f ail (s0i ))] .

(22)

s0

Here, the decision rules of the country and the lender’s kernel are those corresponding to the
problem when country i trades alone with the lender.
When the country is in bad credit standing and chooses to renegotiate, the recovery
function φi,f ail (si , di ) solves
(1 − θ)g 0 (si , φi,f ail , di )
θu0 (yi − φi,f ail )
= L
L
[vi (si ; φi,f ail ) − vi ,aut (yi )]
[V (si , φi,f ail , di ) − Vaut
]

(23)

Definition 5. A single-country recursive Markov equilibrium consists of (i) the country i’s
policy functions for repayment, borrowing, and consumption, {Bi,f ail (si ), Di,f ail (si ), Ci,f ail (si )},
and values vi,f ail (si ); (ii) lenders’ policy functions for lending choices and dividends {`0f ail (`, si ),
31

L
cL,f ail (`, si )} and value function vi,f
ail (`, si ); (iii) the functions for bond prices and recoveries
0
{qi,f ail (si , bi , di ), φi,f ail (si , di )}; (iv) the equilibrium prices of debt Qi,f ail (si ) and recovery rates
Φf ail (si ); (v) the evolution of the aggregate state Hf ail (si ) such that given b0 = `0 :

1. Taking as given the bond price and recovery functions, the country i’s policy functions
for repayment, borrowing, and consumption, {Bi,f ail (si ), Di,f ail (si ), Ci,f ail (si )}, and values vi,f ail (si ) solves country i’s problem when it trades alone with the lenders.
2. Taking as given the bond prices Qf ail (si ), recoveries Φf ail (si ), and the evolution of
the aggregate states Hf ail (si ), the policy functions and value functions for the lenders
L
{`0f ail (`, si ), cL,f ail (`, si )}, vi,f
ail (`, si )} satisfy lenders’ optimization problem in (21).
3. Taking as given countries’ policy and value functions, bond price and recovery functions
{qi,f ail (si , b0i , di ), φi,f ail (si , di )} satisfy (22) and (23).
4. The prices of debt Qf ail (si ) clear the bond market, `0i,f ail (bi , si ) = Bi,f ail (si ).
5. The recoveries Φi,f ail (si ) exhaust all the recovered funds: φi,f ail (si , Di,f ail (si )) = Φf ail (si ).
6. The law of motion for the evolution aggregate states Hf ail (si ) is consistent with country
i’s decision rules and shocks.
Small Country Model
The model for the small country is a one-country competitive version of the benchmark
model. This model is studied in Yue (2010), but here the risk-free rate is time varying and
depends on the evolution of the aggregate states. The recursive problem for the small country
takes as given the law of motion of aggregate states (9). Given the individual state (bs , ys , hs
and aggregate state s, the small country’s problem is given by
vs (bs , ys , hs = 0, s) = max {(1 − ds )vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 0, s) + ds vs1 (bs , ys , hs = 0, , s)}.
ds ={0,1}

If it repays, the small country chooses optimal consumption and savings:
{u(ys − bs + qs (b0s , ys , s)b0s ) + βEvs (b0s , ys0 , h0s = 0, s0 )}.
vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 0, s) = max
0
cs ,bs

If it defaults, the small country’s value is given by
vs1 (bs , ys , hs = 0, s) = {u(ysd ) + βEvs (bs , ys0 , h0s = 1, s0 )}.
32

(24)

If the country is in bad credit standing, it chooses whether to renegotiate according to
vs (bs , ys , hs = 1, s) = max {(1 − ds )vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 1, s) + ds vs1 (bs , ys , hs = 1, s)}.
ds ={0,1}

Its renegotiation value depends on the recovery φs (bs , y, s) and is given by
vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 1, s) = u(ys − φs (bs , y, s)) + βEvs (0, ys0 , h0s = 0, s0 ).
Without renegotiation, its value is the same as the default value given by equation (24).
In equilibrium, bond price and recovery functions for the small country satisfy the following equations
qs = E [1 − d0s (b0s , ys0 , h0s , s0 )(1 − ζs (b0s , ys0 , h0s , s0 ))] Em(s0 , s),
ζs (bs , ys , hs , s) = E[(1 − d0s (bs , ys0 , h0s , s0 ))
1−θ =

φs (bs , ys0 , h0s , s0 )
+ d0s (bs , ys0 , h0s , s0 )ζs (bs , ys0 , h0s , s0 )]E [m(s0 , s)] ,
bs

θu0 (ys − φs )
.
[vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 1, s; φs ) − vaut (ys )]

where m(s0 , s) is the equilibrium pricing kernel from the two-big-country problem.

Appendix II. Proofs
Proof for Proposition 3. Let us call φi2 and φ−i
2 the recovery values for country i and −i
respectively when the two countries renegotiate jointly with lenders, and φi1 be the recovery
value when country i renegotiates alone with lenders. Nash bargaining implies that φi2 satisfies
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φi2 + φ−i
θuc (y20i )
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φi2 + φ−i
2 )
2 )
.
=
≤
−i
−i
0i
d
i
i
u(y2 ) − u(y )
g(yL + φ2 + φ2 ) − g(yL )
g(yL + φ2 + φ2 ) − g(yL + φ−i
2 )
The inequality holds because g is an increasing function. Suppose the following condition
holds:
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φi2 + φ−i
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φi2 + b̄)
2 )
.
(25)
≤
−i
g(yL + φi2 + b̄) − g(yL + b̄)
g(yL + φi2 + φ−i
2 ) − g(yL + φ2 )
Then, the recovery under two borrowing countries φi2 satisfies
θuc (y20i )
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φi2 + b̄)
≤
u(y20i ) − u(y d )
g(yL + φi2 + b̄) − g(yL + b̄)

33

where recovery alone φi1 satisfies
θuc (y10i )
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φi1 + b̄)
=
.
u(y10i ) − u(y d )
g(yL + φi1 + b̄) − g(yL + b̄)
It is easy to show by contradiction that φi2 ≤ φi1 due to concavity of u and g.
We still need to show that inequality (25) holds. Given b̄ ≥ φ−i
2 , we need to show that the
g 0 (yH +x)
i
function g(yH +x)−g(yL +x) with yH = yL + φ2 ≥ yL increases with x. Given g(c) = c1−α /(1 − α),
we need to show

α−1

α

yH + x
α−1
yH + x
−1−
−1 ≤0
yL + x
α
yL + x
When α ≥ 1 and yH ≥ yL , the above inequality holds. Q.E.D.
Proof for Proposition 4. Conditional on repaying, country i’s net capital flow to lenders
increases with its initial debt holding bi . To see this, let ωL (b−i , d−i ) and ωL0 (d−i ) be the
lenders’ wealth from trading with the other country −i in period 1 and period 2, respectively.
In particular,
ωL (b−i , d−i ) ≡ yL + (1 − d−i )T B(b−i )
We can define the net capital flow from country i as T Bi = bi − qi b̄, where qi solves
qi =

δg 0 [ωL0 (d−i ) + b̄]
.
g 0 [ωL (b−i , d−i ) + bi − qi b̄i ]

It is easy to show that
∂T Bi /∂bi =

g 0 [ωL (d−i ) + bi − qi b̄]
≥ 0.
g 0 (ωL (b−i , d−i ) + bi − qi b̄) − qi g 00 (ωL (b−i , d−i ) + bi − qi b̄)b̄

Higher b−i therefore leads to higher net capital flow T B−i and so higher lenders’ wealth from
country −i since ωL (b−i , d−i ). The bond price of country i thus increases with b−i conditional
on country −i repaying.

Appendix III. Computational Algorithm
We compute the model as the limit of a finite horizon model with T periods. In each period,
we compute two models: a single-country model facing a continuum of lenders and a twocountry model facing a continuum of lenders. We need to compute the first model, since
its equilibrium values are used in solving for the Nash bargaining allocations of the second
model.
34

We start with the last period T . Given that this is the last period, there will be no
borrowing and lending. First, we compute the equilibrium when lenders face only country i.
1
When the country is in good credit standing, it defaults Di,T
(s) = 1 if and only if the debt
d
L
is large enough bi > yi − yi . The value of lenders is therefore given by vi,T
(s) = g(yL + (1 −
1
1
Di,T
(s))bi ), and the stochastic discount factor is given by m1i,T (s) = g 0 (yL +(1−Di,T
(s))bi ). If
1
the country is in bad credit standing, its recovery value of debt φi,T (s) from Nash bargaining
satisfies
θuc (y − φ1i,T (s))
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φ1i,T (s))
=
.
g(yL + φ1i,T (s)) − g(yL )
u(y − φ1i,T (s)) − u(yid )
1
The country chooses to renegotiate with lenders Di,T
(s) = 0 if and only if u(y − φ1i,T (s)) ≥
L
1
= g(yL + (1 − Di,T
(s))φLi,T (s)).
u(yid ). Correspondingly, the lenders’ value is given by Vi,T
We then compute the equilibrium with two countries. A good-credit country i defaults
Di,T (s) = 1 if and only if bi > yi − yid . The value of country i is given by vi,T (s) =
u(yi − (1 − Di,T (s))bi ). For a bad-credit country i, its renegotiation decision depends on the
recovery value from the Nash bargaining. If country −i is in good credit standing, country
i’s recovery value φi,T (s) solves

θuc (yi − φi,T (s))
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φi,T (s) + (1 − D−i,T (s))b−i )
=
.
1
g(yL + φi,T (s) + (1 − D−i,T (s))b−i ) − g(yL + (1 − D−i,T (s))b−i )
u(yi − φi,T (s)) − u(yid )
Country i chooses to renegotiate Di,T (s) = 0 if and only if u(yi − φi,T (s)) ≥ u(yid ). If both
countries are in bad credit standing, we need to find the Nash equilibrium {Di,T (s), D−i,T (s)}
which jointly satisfies
Di,T (s) =
D−i,T (s) =

argmax{di } (1 − di )u(yi − φi,T (s, di , D−i,T (s))) + di u(yid )
d
argmax{d−i } (1 − d−i )u(y−i − φ−i,T (s, Di,T (s), d−i )) + d−i u(y−i
),

where {φi,T (s, di , d−i ), φ−i,T (s, di , d−i ) solve
θuc (yi − φi,T )
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φi,T + (1 − d−i )φ−i,T )
=
g(yL + φi,T + (1 − d−i )φ−i,T ) − g(yL )
u(yi − φi,T ) − u(yid )
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φ−i,T + (1 − di )φi,T )
θuc (y−i − φ−i,T )
=
.
d
g(yL + φ−i,T + (1 − di )φi,T ) − g(yL )
u(y−i − φ−i,T ) − u(y−i
)
In an abuse of notation, let us call the equilibrium recovery φi,T (s) = φi,T (s, Di,T (s), D−i,T (s)).
The bad-credit country i’s value is then given by
vi,T (s) = (1 − Di,T (s))u(yi − φi,T (s)) + Di,T u(yid ).
35

Finally, we update the expected discounted recovery value ζi,T for period T, ζi,T (s) =
g 0 (cL,t (s))(1 − Di,T (s))φi,T (s).
We now describe the algorithm for a generic period t < T . Again, let us first solve for the
case with only one country. If this country i is in good credit standing, it makes a default
decision and a borrowing decision to maximize its value:
1,r
1,d
1
vi,t
(s) = max
(1 − d)vi,t
(s, b0 ) + dvi,t
(s, b),
0
d,b

where
1,r
1
1
vi,t
(s, b0 ) = u(yi − bi + qi,t
(s, b0 )b0 ) + βEvi,t+1
(s0 )
1,d
1
vi,t
(s, b) = u(yid ) + βEvi,t+1
(s0 )
Z

1
0 0
1
0 0
qt (s, b )g [yL + b − qt (s, b )b ] =
δπ(y 0 |y)m1i,t+1 (y 0 , b0 ) dy 0 .
y ∗ (b0 )

If the country is in bad credit standing, it chooses whether to renegotiate:
1
1
1
1
1
vi,t
(s) = (1 − Di,t
(s))[u(y − φ1i,t (s)) + βEvi,t+1
(s0 )] + Di,t
(s)[u(yid ) + βEvi,t+1
(ŝ0 )],

where the recovery φ1i,t (s) solves
θuc (y − φ1i,t (s))
(1 − θ)g 0 (yL + φ1i,t (s))

.
=
L
1
g[yL + φ1i,t (s)] + δEvi,t+1
(s0 ) − g(yL )(1 + δ)
u(y − φ1i,t (s)) + βEvi,t+1
(0, s0 ) − u(yid ) + βEui,t+1 (yid )
The lender’s value is evaluated at optimal choices:

L
1
1
1
1
1
L
vi,t
(s) = g[yL +(1−hi )(1−Di,t
) bi − qi,t
(Bi,t
(s); s)Bi,t
(s) +hi (1−Di,t
(s))φ1i,t (s)]+δEvi,t+1
(s0 , s).
We then solve the equilibrium in period t with two countries in two steps. In the first
step, taking as given the default/renegotiation decisions of the two countries, we compute the
optimal borrowing decisions. When both countries are in good credit standing and choose
not to default, the Cournot equilibrium {Bi,t (s, d), B−i,t (s, d)} satisfies
Bi,t (s, d) = argmax{b0i } wi,t (s, b0i , B−i,t (s, d), d),
where wi,t (s, b0 , d) = u(yi −bi +qi,t (s, b0 , d)b0i )+β

P

36

y0

π(y 0 |y)vi,t+1 (s0 (b0 , d)) and the bond prices

{qi,t (s, b0 , d), q−i,t (s, b0 , d)} satisfy two equations, one for i
qi,t g 0 [yL + (bi − qi,t b0i ) + (1 − d−i )(b−i − q−i,t b0−i )] =
X
δπ(s0 |s) {g 0 (cL,t+1 (s0 (b0 , d))[1 − di,t+1 (s0 )] + di,t+1 (s0 )δEt ζi,t+2 (s00 )}
s0

and one for −i in a similar fashion. When both countries are in good credit standing but
country −i chooses to default and country i chooses not to, only country i can renew its debt
Bi,t (s, d) = argmax{b0i } wi,t (s, b0i , d). The bond price function {qi,t (s, b0 , d)} solves
qi,t g 0 [yL + (bi − qi,t b0i )] =

X

δπ(s0 |s) {g 0 (cL,t+1 (s0 (b0 , d))) [1 − di,t+1 (s0 )] + di,t+1 (s0 )δEt ζi,t+2 (s00 )} .

s0

The value of country i is given by wi,t (s, Bi,t (s, d), d), and the value of country −i is given
P
d
) + β s0 π(s0 |s)v−i,t+1 (s0 (Bi,t (s, d), d)).
by w−i,t (s, Bi,t (s, d), d) = u(y−i
When country i is in good credit standing and country −i is in bad credit standing, if
both choose to repay di,t = d−i,t = 0, the price functions {qi,t (s, b0 , d), φ−i,t (s, b0 , d)} satisfy
the following two equations jointly:
qi,t g 0 [yL + (bi − qi,t b0i ) + φ−i,t ] =

X

δπ(s0 |s) {g 0 (cL,t+1 (s0 )) [1 − di,t+1 (s0 )] + di,t+1 (s0 )δEt ζi,t+2 (s00 )}

s0
0

θu (y−i − φ−i,t )
(1 − θ)g 0 (s, qi , φ−i , b0 , d)
= L
.
v−i (s; φ−i,t ) − v−i,aut (y−i )
Vt (s, qi,t , φ−i,t , b0L
f ail (si )
Under these price functions, the good-credit country chooses Bi,t (s, d) to maximize its value
wi,t (s, b0 , d). If the bad-credit country chooses not to renegotiate already, the bond price
function of the good-credit country qi,t solves the following one equation alone:
qi,t g 0 [yL + (bi − qi,t b0i )] =

X

δπ(s0 |s) {g 0 (cL,t+1 (s0 )) [1 − di,t+1 (s0 )] + di,t+1 (s0 )δEt ζi,t+2 (s00 )} .

s0

If the good-credit country chooses to default, the recovery function of the bad-credit country
solves the following equation alone:
θu0 (y−i − φ−i,t )
(1 − θ)g 0 (s, φ−i , b0 , d)
=
.
v−i (s; φ−i,t ) − v−i,aut (y−i )
VtL (s, φ−i,t , b0L
f ail (si )
Similarly, when both countries are in bad credit standing, the two recovery functions solve
the Nash bargaining problem jointly. Otherwise, the two recovery functions are independent
of each other.
37

In the second step, we find the equilibrium default/renegotiation decisions {Di,t (s), D−i,t (s)}
that solve jointly
Di,t (s) ∈ argmax{di,t } wi,t (s; di,t , D−i,t (s), B(di,t , D−i,t (s)))
D−i,t (s) ∈ argmax{d−i,t } w−i,t (s; Di,t (s), d−i,t , B(Di,t (s), d−i,t )).
If there are multiple pairs of (Di,t , D−i,t ) as equilibrium for a state s, we take the pair
that maximizes wi,t (s, Di,t (s), Bi,t (s, Di,t (s))) + w−i,t (s, D−i,t (s), B−i,t (s, D−i,t (s))). We finally
update the period t value for each country i:
vi,t (s) = wi,t (s, D(s), B(s, D(s)))
and the expected discounted recovery ζ according to
ζi,t (s) = g 0 (cL,t (s))(1 − Di,t (s))φi,t (s) + Di,t (s)δEζi,t+1 (s0 ).
We continue the process until we reach the first period or until the value functions and
price functions converge.

38

