                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE ORIGINS OF EARLY CHILDHOOD ANTHROPOMETRIC PERSISTENCE

                                        Daniel L. Millimet
                                         Rusty Tchernis

                                       Working Paper 19554
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19554


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2013




This study was conducted by Georgia State University and Southern Methodist University under a
cooperative agreement with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Food
and Nutrition Assistance Research Program (agreement no. 58-5000-0-0080). The views expressed
here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the USDA or ERS. The authors
are grateful to Chris Ruhm for helpful comments and Lorenzo Almada for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Daniel L. Millimet and Rusty Tchernis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Origins of Early Childhood Anthropometric Persistence
Daniel L. Millimet and Rusty Tchernis
NBER Working Paper No. 19554
October 2013
JEL No. C23,I12,I18

                                                ABSTRACT

Rates of childhood obesity have increased dramatically in the last few decades. Non-causal evidence
suggests that childhood obesity is highly persistent over the life cycle. However little in known about
the origins of this persistence. In this paper we attempt to answer three questions. First, how do anthropometric
measures evolve from birth through primary school? Second, what is the causal effect of past anthropometric
outcomes on future anthropometric outcomes? In other words, how important is state dependence
in the evolution of anthropometric measures during the early part of the life cycle. Third, how important
are time-varying and time invariant factors in the dynamics of childhood anthropometric measures?
We find that anthropometric measures are highly persistent from infancy through primary school.
Moreover, most of this persistence is driven by unobserved, time invariant factors that are determined
prior to birth, consistent with the so-called fetal origins hypothesis. As such, policy interventions designed
to improve child anthropometric status will only have meaningful, long-run effects if these time invariant
factors are altered. Unfortunately, future research is needed to identify such factors, although evidence
suggests that maternal nutrition may play an important role.


Daniel L. Millimet
Dept of Economics
Box 0496
SMU
Dallas, TX 75275-0496
millimet@smu.edu

Rusty Tchernis
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
rtchernis@gsu.edu
1       Introduction
The rise in childhood obesity in the U.S. is well chronicled. Moreover, strong evidence suggests that childhood obesity
is highly persistent over the life cycle. However little in known about the origins of this persistence. In this paper
we attempt to answer three questions. First, how do weight and height evolve from birth through primary school?
Second, what is the causal eﬀect of past weight and height status on the future weight and height of children? In
other words, how important is state dependence in the evolution of anthropometric measures during the early part of
the life cycle. Third, how important are time-varying and time invariant factors in the dynamics of childhood weight
and height?
     These are important public health questions of vital importance to policymakers as the prevalence of obese
adolescents has tripled in the last thirty years; it has more than doubled for younger children. Defined as having an
age- and sex-adjusted body mass index (BMI) above the 95th percentile of the reference distribution, the prevalence
of obese children increased from 5% to 12.4% for 2-5 year old children and from 5% to 17.6% for 12 to 19 year-olds
between 1976 and 2006 (Ogden et al. 2008). In addition, vast diﬀerences in the time trends of BMI increases have
been documented: the incidence of obesity among white girls aged 12-19 has increased from 7.4% to 14.5% between
1988 and 2006, whereas the corresponding figures for African-American girls are 13.2% and 27.7% (Ogden et al.
2002; Ogden et al. 2008). Deckelbaum and Williams (2001, p. 242S) conclude that “childhood obesity is increasing
at epidemic rates, even among pre-school children...” More recently, Brisbois et al. (2012, p. 347) state: “Obesity is
considered to be a worldwide epidemic with little evidence that its incidence is declining or that it has even reached
a plateau.”
     While there exists some evidence that childhood obesity rates may have begun to recede in the U.S., concern over
childhood obesity remains high due to the well-documented consequences of obesity and the lack of understanding
pertaining to the turnaround.1 Obesity burdens individuals with severe physical, economic, and emotional suﬀering,
and puts children and adolescents at risk for a number of health problems such as those aﬀecting cardiovascular
health, the endocrine system, and mental health (Deckelbaum and Williams 2001; Krebs and Jacobson 2003). Dietz
and Gortmaker (2001) note that 60% of overweight children aged five to ten years old have at least one associated
cardiovascular disease risk factor.
     Perhaps the largest cost of childhood obesity comes from its impact on adult obesity. Currently, 60% of the total
U.S. population is overweight or obese and 50% is expected to be obese in 2030 at the current rate (Dor et al. 2010).
Walpole et al. (2012) calculate that North America accounts for 34% of the total human biomass in the world despite
containing only 6% of the world population. Moreover, the authors estimate that if the entire world had the same
BMI distribution as the U.S., this would be equivalent to an additional 935 million people in the world of average
BMI. Finkelstein and Zuckerman (2007) report that if the childhood obesity epidemic continues unabated at the
current rate, as many as 30-40% of the US population will develop Type 2 Diabetes during their lifetime. Mocan
and Tekin (2011) document the links between adult obesity and lower wages, productivity, and self-esteem. In the
U.S., the total cost attributable to obesity was over $75 billion in 2000 according to Finkelstein et al. (2004). More
    1 See                    http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/07/health/broad-decline-in-obesity-rate-seen-in-poor-young-
children.html?pagewanted=all.


                                                           1
recent estimates put the cost over $200 billion (Cawley and Meyerhoefer 2012).
    While the changes in childhood obesity rates across cohorts, as well as the consequences of these increases, are
well-documented, much less is known about how anthropometric measures of children evolve over the life cycle. A
growing literature has investigated persistence in anthropometric outcomes in a non-causal framework, stressing the
correlation in outcomes over time.2 Whitaker et al. (1997) found that the probability of an overweight six year-old
child becoming an obese adult is 50% compared to 10% for a non-overweight child. In addition, the risk of becoming
obese in adulthood is exacerbated by having an obese parent. Eriksson et al. (2001) found that individuals were
three times more likely to be obese as an adult if they had a BMI greater than 16, as opposed to below 14.5, at age
seven. Nader et al. (2007) find that children who were overweight prior to the age of five are five times as likely to
be overweight at 12 relative to children who were not overweight prior to the age of five.
    Freedman et al. (2001) also report a strong relationship between overweight status in childhood and adult BMI.
However, most striking is that obese adults who were overweight prior to age eight have a much higher BMI than
individuals suﬀering from adult onset obesity (41 versus 35). In a later study, Freedman et al. (2005) document
significant diﬀerences in the transmission of BMI from childhood to adulthood along racial lines. Gable et al. (2008)
analyze the relationship between socioeconomic status, overweight persistence, and school outcomes. The authors
find that family socioeconomic status is predictive of both the probability of a child being overweight and the
probability of persistence of overweight status. Van Cleave et al. (2010) analyze changes in the prevalence of obesity
and other chronic conditions (e.g., asthma, other physical and learning conditions). The authors find that prevalence
of obesity is increasing and is highly persistent over time. Conversely, many children with chronic conditions at ages
two through eight did not have the condition six years later. Finally, Millimet and Tchernis (2013) assess persistence
during infancy and primary school, documenting a significant increase in persistence upon entry into primary school.
Deckelbaum and Williams (2001, p. 239S) conclude: “Disturbingly, obesity in childhood, particularly in adolescence
is a key predictor for obesity in adulthood.” Similarly, Dietz and Gortmaker (2001, p. 340) state: “The best evidence
suggests that the majority of overweight adolescents go on to be overweight adults.”
    We build on this prior literature in an attempt to uncover the origins of the persistence in anthropometric
measures. Specifically, we revisit the question of persistence in early childhood health outcomes and investigate
the relative importance of state dependence (i.e., a causal eﬀect of past anthropometric status on future status),
unobserved heterogeneity (i.e., unobserved genetic or environmental risk factors), and observed heterogeneity (i.e.,
commonly measured risk factors) on this persistence. We then ask whether the origins of anthropometric persistence
vary by age, race, gender, or socioeconomic status. Our analysis is fundamentally important for researchers as well
as policymakers. If obesity has its origins early in life and is persistent over time, then early intervention is preferable
to waiting until adolescence or beyond.3 However, and perhaps most importantly, if persistence is due to persistent
   2 Iughetti  et al. (2008) provide an excellent review.
   3 For   instance, an article in the New York Times on March 22, 2010 states that some evidence now suggests that chil-
dren may become entrenched “on an obesity trajectory” even before kindergarten; however, the evidence is not “ironclad”
(http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/23/health/23obese.html.). Public health oﬃcials tend to advocate school-based reforms in light
of the near universal enrollment, yet others stress the importance of preschool interventions (e.g., Frisvold and Giri 2011; Dietz and
Gortmaker 2001; Davis and Christoﬀel 1994). Eriksson et al. (2001, p. 735) conclude that “obesity is initiated early in life.”




                                                                    2
underlying factors rather than state dependence, then only by altering these factors can children be moved to a
diﬀerent trajectory.
   To examine these fundamental questions, we estimate dynamic regression models using data from the Early Child-
hood Longitudinal Survey — Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K). The ECLS-K is a nationally representative longitudinal
survey of children entering kindergarten in Fall 1998. In addition to providing information on birthweight, anthro-
pometric data is collected at several points in time between kindergarten and eighth grade. We then supplement this
analysis by examining data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey — Birth Cohort (ECLS-B). The ECLS-B
is a nationally representative longitudinal survey of children born in the U.S. in 2001. Information is provided on
these children at ages 9 months, two years, four years, and five years. Thus, the ECLS-B sample allows for a more
refined examination of anthropometric trajectories prior to kindergarten entry.
   The analysis leads to two salient conclusions. First, weight, height, and BMI are highly persistent starting in early
infancy. Second, the vast majority of persistence is attributable to time invariant characteristics of children. This
finding is of critical importance as it implies that the only interventions that will have a substantive, long-run eﬀect
on a child’s anthropometric status are those that alter these salient, time invariant attributes. Thus, current policy
interventions may, at best, have a marginal impact in the short-run and, at worst, be destined to fail (see, e.g., Davis
and Gebremariam (2010)). Moreover, while it is diﬃcult to say what these critical, time invariant attributes are
given the data at hand, we find some evidence that fetal nutrition — as proxied by mother’s pre-pregnancy weight and
weight gain during pregnancy, gestation age, birth status (singleton, twin, or higher order birth), and birthweight
— impacts the evolution of anthropometric measures over the early life cycle. However, unobserved, time invariant
attributes play a much more prominent role.
   The notion that attributes determined at or shortly after birth, and thus time invariant over the life of an
individual, play a dominant role in the evolution of obesity is consistent with the strong evidence in economics and
elsewhere on the so-called fetal origins hypothesis (see, e.g., Almond and Currie 2011).4 The fetal origins hypothesis,
also referred to as the thrifty phenotype hypothesis or Barker’s hypothesis (due to Barker’s original publication in
1992), posits long-run eﬀects of conditions in utero during critical periods of development through “programmed”
changes in the physiology and metabolism of individuals (Barker 1997). An article in Time on September 22, 2010
summarizes5 :

      “[P]ioneers assert that the nine months of gestation constitute the most consequential period of our lives,
      permanently influencing the wiring of the brain and the functioning of organs such as the heart, liver
      and pancreas. The conditions we encounter in utero, they claim, shape our susceptibility to disease, our
      appetite and metabolism, our intelligence and temperament. In the literature on the subject, which has
      exploded over the past 10 years, you can find references to the fetal origins of cancer, cardiovascular
      disease, allergies, asthma, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, mental illness – even of conditions associated
      with old age like arthritis, osteoporosis and cognitive decline.”
  4 While   the findings here are consistent with the fetal origins hypothesis, we cannot eliminate other possible explanations for what
these salient, unobserved attributes entail.
   5 See http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2021065,00.html.




                                                                   3
Our analysis is consistent with this view, the implications of which are quite profound. If correct, the most eﬃcient
interventions to curb obesity may need to start prior to childbirth. Deckelbaum & Williams (2001, p. 239S) conclude:

      “Novel approaches in the prevention and treatment of childhood overweight and obesity are urgently
      required. With the strong evidence that a lifecycle perspective is important in obesity development and
      its consequences, consideration must be focused on prevention of obesity in women of child-bearing age,
      excessive weight gain during pregnancy, and the role of breast-feeding in reducing later obesity in children
      and adults. Consideration must be given to family behavior patterns, diet after weaning, and the use of
      new methods of information dissemination to help reduce the impact of childhood obesity worldwide.”

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of the prior literature.
Section 3 presents the empirical methodology and data overview. Section 4 discusses the results and their implications.
Section 5 concludes.



2     Related Literature
In addition to the literature already discussed pertaining to the correlations between childhood weight status and
adult obesity, two other prior strands of literature are worth discussing. The first strand includes investigations
on the persistence in health among adolescents and adults in a causal framework. For example, Halliday (2008)
investigates persistence in self-reported health status among white adults age 22-60 using data from the PSID and
allows the parameters of the model to vary. The results suggest that the degree of state dependence — the causal
eﬀect of past states on one’s current state — in health is modest for half the population, yet it explains much of the
observed persistence in health for the other half. Ham et al. (2013) analyze persistence in bulimia nervosa in young
women. The authors find a substantial role for state dependence in the persistence of bulimia nervosa, thus justifying
the importance of early intervention. Our analysis follows the logic of these studies.
    The second strand focuses explicitly on the fetal origins hypothesis. As stated earlier, beginning with Barker’s
work, there is a strong belief that in utero events may determine whether a fetus ends up on an “obesity trajectory.”
Deckelbaum & Williams (2001, p. 239S) note that “emerging data suggest associations between the influence of
maternal and fetal factors during intrauterine growth and growth during the first year of life, on risk of later
development of adult obesity and its comorbidities.” More recently, Brisbois et al. (2012, p. 347) state: “Based on
recent evidence, early-life experiences in utero and postnatal influences may induce permanent changes in physiologic
function that programme the long-term regulation of energy balance. This subsequently may adversely impact obesity
risk in later life.”
    Which factors may induce such permanent changes in order to set a fetus upon an “obesity trajectory” is the
subject of on-going research. While initial hypotheses focused on undernutrition and oxygen supply, additional
factors such as maternal BMI, maternal weight gain, maternal smoking, gestational diabetes requiring insulin, and
postnatal characteristics such as breastfeeding and the timing of introduction to solid foods are also found to be
important (Dietz 1997; Deckelbaum and Williams 2001; Brisbois et al. 2012).



                                                           4
    Within this literature, studies have also focused on the identification of early life physical indicators of predispo-
sition to future obesity. Preliminary results suggest that birthweight, length, and gestation age at birth alone are not
strong predictors. Instead, there are complex interactions between these measures, along with other measures such
as head circumference, that matter. For example, a fetus born prematurely and, as a result, with low birthweight
and length is not likely to be at greater risk of future obesity as long as the fetus’ measurements are in proportion
and within ‘normal’ ranges given its gestation age. On the other hand, a fetus born with disproportionate physical
measurements suggests a greater risk (Barker 1997; Sayer et al. 1997; Godfrey and Barker 2001; Brisbois et al.
2012).



3     Empirics

3.1      Methodology

We assess the extent and origins of persistence using a dynamic regression framework. This approach allows for
the decomposition of persistence into various components reflecting state dependence, observed heterogeneity, and
unobserved heterogeneity.
    The simplest estimating equation is

                                      = −1 +        = 1   ;  = 1                               (1)

where  is a measure of weight status for child  at time ,  is a mean zero error term, and  must be at least two
(given observability of the initial observation, 0 ). Here,  reflects the overall level of persistence as it captures the
entire association between past and current anthropometric status. To decompose this overall persistence, we next
incorporate observed heterogeneity into the model

                               = −1 +   +   +        = 1   ;  = 1                       (2)

where  is a vector of observed, time-varying attributes of child  at time  and  is a vector of observed, time
invariant attributes of child . The change in the estimate of  from (1) to (2) reflects the portion of persistence
attributable to persistent, observed heterogeneity. Finally, we include observed time-varying heterogeneity and all
sources (observed and unobserved) of time-invariant heterogeneity into the model

                                = −1 +   +  +        = 1   ;  = 1                        (3)

where  is a child-specific fixed eﬀect. In (3)  reflects the degree of state dependence as it captures the causal eﬀect
of past weight status on current weight status. The child-specific fixed eﬀect, , reflects persistence in child anthro-
pometric measures due to persistent observed and unobserved, child-specific heterogeneity (such as time invariant
environmental and genetic factors). In such models,  represents the contemporaneous eﬀects of the observed, time
varying regressors, whereas (1 − ) represents the long-run eﬀects of a permanent unit change in these variables.
    Estimation of (3) is straightforward (assuming the model is correctly specified). Following Anderson and Hsiao
(1981), (3) is first-diﬀerenced to eliminate  . The first-diﬀerenced model is then estimated via instrumental variables

                                                              5
since the first-diﬀerenced lagged dependent variable is necessarily correlated with the first-diﬀerenced error term.
However, −2 represents a valid instrument if  is serially uncorrelated. The models are estimated by Generalized
Method of Moments (GMM).
   Once the models are estimated, in addition to simply examining the coeﬃcient estimates, we follow the logic in
Ulrick (2008) and simulate probabilities such as the following

                                                 Pr( ≥  ∗ |0 ≥ 0 )                                          (4)

given estimates of the regression model. Here, (4) represents the probability of a child having an anthropometric
measure above  ∗ in the terminal period conditional on an initial measure greater than or equal to some value
0 . For example, one might be interested in the probability of a child having a BMI above the 85 percentile in
period  conditional on being above the 85 percentile in the initial period,  = 0. These probabilities incorporate
not just the coeﬃcient directly related to persistence, , but also reflect persistence due to persistence in observed
and unobserved determinants of child weight. Moreover, by altering the attributes of individuals, we can simulate
counterfactual probabilities as well. Finally, we can simulate these probabilities and counterfactual probabilities for
diﬀerent socioeconomic groups. This allows one to determine if the degree of persistence, and the factors contributing
to such persistence, vary across socioeconomic groups.
   Before detailing the simulations undertaken, note that upon estimating (3), estimates of  are given by

                                        1 P h                      i
                                                                  b 
                                 b =
                                                    b−1 −  
                                           =1  −                        = 1                           (5)
                                        

The estimates can then be decomposed into observed and unobserved time invariant factors by estimating the
following model using OLS
                                                     b  =   +   
                                                                                                                  (6)

where  now includes an intercept and  is a mean zero error term. Finally, given estimates of , , and , we can
obtain estimates of the idiosyncratic errors,  and , using (3) and (6).
   To proceed, we simulate probabilities, such as those given by (4), under the following counterfactual scenarios:

  1. Own 0 , own  , set  = 0, and

                       b , or
      (a) replace  = 

      (b) draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  , or

       (c) draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample  and  ∈ , or

      (d) draw  ∼ 0 () where 0 (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample 0 and  ∈
                                                                                                      0 .

  2. Own 0 , own  , set  = 0, set  = 0, and

      (a) own  , or

      (b) draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  , or

       (c) draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample  and  ∈ , or

                                                             6
      (d)  ∼ 0 () where 0 (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample 0 and  ∈
                                                                                                 .

  3. Own 0 , own  , own  , set  = 0, and

      (a) draw   ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of   , or

      (b) draw   ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample  and  ∈ , or

      (c) draw   ∼ 0 () where 0 (·) is the empirical distribution of   in sub-sample 0 and  ∈
                                                                                                        .

  4. Own 0 , own  , set  = 0, and

      (a) replace  =  , or

      (b) draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1    , or

      (c) draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1    in sub-sample  and
            ∈ , or.

      (d) draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1    in sub-sample  and
            ∈ .

  5. Own 0 , own  , own  , and

      (a) draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical distribution of · , or

      (b) draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical distribution of · in sub-sample  and  ∈ , or

      (c) draw · ∼ 0 (1    ) where 0 (·) is the empirical distribution of · in sub-sample 0 and  ∈
                                                                                                                    .

  6. Own 0 , own  , and

      (a) draw ·  · ∼  (1     1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1     1    ,
           or

      (b) draw ·  · ∼  (1     1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1     1   
           in sub-sample  and  ∈ , or

      (c) draw ·  · ∼  (1     1    ) where 0 (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1     1   
           in sub-sample 0 and  ∈
                                   .

Probabilities are obtained using 500 simulations. See the Appendix A for further details.
   Case 1 eliminates time-varying, unobserved heterogeneity,  , and assesses the impact of altering the distribution
of time invariant heterogeneity,  . Case 1a eliminates all time invariant heterogeneity. Cases 1b-1d replace actual
time invariant heterogeneity with a random draw. Case 1b draws from the empirical distribution. Case 1c draws
from the empirical distribution of the same sub-group as observation . Case 1d draws from the empirical distribution
of the sub-group to which observation  does not belong. For example, if we divide the sample based on gender, Case
1c draws a value of  from the empirical distribution of boys for each boy. Case 1d entails drawing a value of  from
the empirical distribution of girls for each boy. Case 1b succeeds in entirely breaking any correlation between the

                                                                    7
initial condition, 0 , and  and time invariant heterogeneity,  . Case 1c partially breaks this correlation. In total,
these cases speak to the relative importance of time invariant heterogeneity in the persistence of weight status, as
well as diﬀerences in the distribution of  across diﬀerent sub-groups.
   Case 2 continues to eliminate time-varying, unobserved heterogeneity,  . However, time invariant, unobserved
heterogeneity,  , is now also eliminated; the observed component of time invariant heterogeneity is then altered. Case
2a utilizes each observation’s own time invariant heterogeneity,  . Case 2b draws  from the empirical distribution.
Case 2c draws  from the empirical distribution of the same sub-group as observation . Case 2d draws  from the
empirical distribution of the sub-group to which observation  does not belong. Case 3 is similar, but has individuals
retain their time invariant, observed heterogeneity,  , and alters the distribution of time invariant, unobserved
heterogeneity,   . Case 3a draws   from the population empirical distribution. Case 3b draws   from the empirical
distribution of the same sub-group as observation . Case 3c draws   from the empirical distribution of the sub-group
to which observation  does not belong. Altogether, Cases 2 and 3 permit assessment of the relative importance of the
observed and unobserved components of time invariant heterogeneity in the persistence of weight status. Moreover,
they will also illuminate any salient diﬀerences in these components across diﬀerent sub-groups.
   Case 4 continues to eliminate time-varying, unobserved heterogeneity,  , and assesses the impact of altering the
distribution of time-varying, observed heterogeneity,  . Case 4a eliminates all time-varying heterogeneity. Cases
4b-4d replace actual time-varying, observed heterogeneity with a random draw. Case 4b draws from the empirical
distribution. Case 4c draws from the empirical distribution of the same sub-group as observation . Case 4d draws
from the empirical distribution of the sub-group to which observation  does not belong. Case 4b succeeds in entirely
breaking any correlation between the initial condition, 0 , and  and time-varying, observed heterogeneity,  .
Case 4c partially breaks this correlation. These cases complement the simulations performed in Case 1 as they speak
to the relative importance of time-varying, observed heterogeneity in the persistence of weight status, as well as
diﬀerences in the distribution of  across diﬀerent sub-groups.
   Case 5 has individuals retain their time-varying, observed attributes,  , and time invariant attributes,  and
0 , but alters the distribution of time-varying, unobserved heterogeneity,  . Case 5a draws · from the empirical
distribution. Case 5b draws · from the empirical distribution of the same sub-group as observation . Case 5c
draws · from the empirical distribution of the sub-group to which observation  does not belong. Finally, Case 6
has individuals only retain their time invariant attributes,  and 0 . All time-varying heterogeneity is sampled.
Case 6a draws · and · from the population empirical distribution. Case 6b draws · and · from the empirical
distribution of the same sub-group as observation . Case 6c draws · and · from the empirical distribution of the
sub-group to which observation  does not belong. Thus, these final two cases address the relative importance of the
observed and unobserved components of time-varying heterogeneity in the persistence of weight status. The results
will also highlight any important diﬀerences in these components across diﬀerent sub-groups.


3.2    Data

We utilize data from the restricted version of the ECLS-K. Collected by the US Department of Education, the
ECLS-K surveys a nationally representative cohort of children throughout the US in fall and spring kindergarten,


                                                             8
fall and spring first grade, spring third grade, spring fifth grade, and spring eighth grade. The sample includes data
on over 20,000 students who entered kindergarten in one of roughly 1,000 schools during the 1998-99 school year. In
addition to family background information, height and weight measures are available from children in each round,
as well as information on birth weight.
    Our final sample consists of children for whom we have valid measures of age, gender, height, and weight.6 From
the information on height and weight of the children, we obtain -scores for weight, height, and BMI. Note that
-scores and percentiles are based on CDC 2000 growth charts; these are age- and gender-specific, are adjusted for
normal growth, and percentiles are based on the underlying reference population.7 The estimation utilizes data from
five waves: fall kindergarten, spring first grade, spring third grade, spring fifth grade, and spring eighth grade.8 The
sample is a balanced a panel of roughly 9,160 children.9
    Data on family background are used in two diﬀerent manners in the analysis. First, we define diﬀerent demo-
graphic groups in order to split the sample during the probability simulations. We consider five diﬀerent partitions
based on race (white vs. non-white), gender (male vs. female), urban status (urban vs. rural/suburban), mother’s
education (college vs. less than college), and socioeconomic status (low vs. high SES). Second, we incorporate
time-varying,  , and time invariant,  , attributes into the regression model.
    The following time invariant covariates are included: gender, race/ethnicity (white, black, Hispanic, Asian, and
other), birthweight, indicator for premature birth, indicator for being born in the U.S., indicator for being a native
English speaker, city type (urban, suburban, or rural), region (northeast, midwest, south, and west), mother’s
education (less than high school, high school/GED, some college, four-year college degree, and more than four years
of college), mother’s age at first birth, mother’s marital status at birth, indicator for attending nonparental pre-
kindergarten, indicator for mother’s labor force participation during infancy, indicator for mother’s participation in
WIC (Women’s, Infants, and Children) during pregnancy, indicator for mother’s participation in WIC during infancy,
indicator for mother’s participation in TANF (Temporary Assistance for Needy Families) during infancy, indicator
for participation in FSP (Food Stamp Program) during infancy, and indicator for attending full day kindergarten.10
The following time-varying covariates are included: an index of SES status, indicator for the household being in
poverty, number of children’s books in the household, household size, family type (two parents plus siblings, two
parents and no siblings, one parent and siblings, one parent and no siblings, and other), mother’s labor force status
(full-time, part-time, and not working), indicator for mother absent from the household, indicator of current TANF
participation, indicator of current FSP participation, indicator for health insurance, hours spent watching television
during the school week, hours spent watching television during the weekend, indicator for household rules regarding
  6 The   initial sample size of the ECLS-K is 21,260. After cleaning age, weight, and height as described in Millimet and Tchernis (2012,
Appendix C), and due to sample attrition, the sample size falls to 9,360 in the final wave of the data.      Restricting the sample to a
balanced panel reduces the sample size to approximately 9,160. This is the final sample size per wave in the analysis. Note, all sample
sizes are rounded to the nearest 10 per NCES restricted data regulations.
   7 -scores and their percentiles are obtained using the -zanthro- command in Stata.
   8 The survey design is troublesome in that the ECLS-K contains irregularly spaced waves. To minimize the issue, we omit the spring

kindergarten wave and thus each period conceptually represents roughly a two-year window.
    9 Sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10 per NCES restricted data regulations.
  1 0 FSP was renamed the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) in October 2008. Since the data pre-dates this change,

we refer to the program as FSP.



                                                                    9
television watching, days per week household eats breakfast together, days per week household eats dinner together,
indicator for household food security (household never worried about running out of food), neighborhood safety (very
safe, somewhat safe, and not safe), and percent of minority students in class at school. For all covariates (except
gender, age, height, and weight), we include dummy variables for missing observations.



4     Results
Tables 1, 5, and 9 display the results from estimation of (1), (2), and (3) for weight, height, and BMI -scores,
respectively. In addition to reporting estimates of the coeﬃcient on the lagged outcome, , we report the first-stage
Kleibergen-Paap (2006) Wald rk  -statistic, the Kleibergen-Paap (2006) rk test of underidentification, and a test of
endogeneity. The first two tests are designed to detect any issues associated with weak instruments. Finally, recall
that within each sample (i.e., the overall sample of demographic sub-group), the estimate of  from (1) reflects the
overall level of persistence, the change in the estimate moving from (1) from (2) captures the portion of persistence
explained by the observable covariates, and the change moving from (2) to (3) reflects the portion of persistence
explained by time invariant, observed factors.
    The remaining tables present the dynamic simulations based on (4) to provide further analysis of the sources
of persistence, the role of time-varying and time invariant observed attributes, and diﬀerences across demographic
groups. As noted earlier, the simulations are based on the estimates of the fixed eﬀects specification given in (3),
along with the subsequent estimates of the fixed eﬀects and their decomposition given in (5) and (6). For each
outcome, we simulate three sets of probabilities:

    1. Pr( ≥ 85th percentile | 0 ≥ 85th percentile),

    2. Pr( ≥ 95th percentile | 0 ≥ 95th percentile), and

    3. Pr( ≥ 85th percentile | 0 ≤ 50th percentile),

where period  denotes spring eighth grade and period 0 corresponds to fall kindergarten. Note, the percentile
outcomes are based on the underlying reference population used in the CDC 2000 growth charts, not the current
sample. Thus, the 85th and 95th percentiles correspond to usual cutoﬀs for overweight and obese when examining
BMI. Finally, each table presents the benchmark probability, which is the empirical probability observed in the data
(i.e., the sample probability as opposed to an estimate), for comparison.


4.1     Weight

Table 1 displays the regression results for weight -scores. For the full sample, the estimates of  across the three
specifications are 0.931, 0.932, and 0.775 (standard errors are 0.003, 0.003, and 0.067, respectively). Each is statisti-
cally significant at the   001 confidence level and all three specifications are strongly identified. The fact that the
estimate of  does not change moving from (1) to (2) implies that our lengthy vector of time-varying and time in-
variant observed factors explain none of the persistence in weight status for primary school-aged children. Moreover,


                                                            10
the estimates of  above 0.9 indicate a substantial degree of persistence. Thus, while persistence from one period
to the next is extreme, this persistence is not attributable to or explained by characteristics typically observed by
policymakers or health practitioners. Moving to the specification in (3), which replaces the time invariant observed
factors with child-level fixed eﬀects and thereby controls for all time invariant attributes of the child, the estimate
of  falls to 0.775, a decline of roughly 17% from 0.93. This implies that time invariant, unobserved factors explain
about 17% of the observed persistence in weight -scores. Examples of such factors include genetic endowments,
prior health shocks determined in utero or during infancy, time invariant environmental factors such as the presence
of grocery stores or outdoor amenities, etc.
    When we divide the sample into diﬀerent sub-groups, we find that the results are predominantly unchanged in
the specifications omitting the fixed eﬀects. The only minor diﬀerence we see is a slightly higher level of persistence
for males relative to females (approximately 0.95 to 0.91, statistically significant at the   001 confidence level).
However, once we include child-level fixed eﬀects, the results vary in several cases. For whites, we find that time
invariant, unobserved factors explain roughly 26% of overall persistence; only about 4% for non-whites. For males,
the fixed eﬀects explain over 70% of overall persistence as the estimate of  falls to 0.276 (standard error is 0.056). For
females, the point estimate for  increases well above unity and is relatively imprecise. When splitting the sample by
mother’s education, we find that time invariant, unobserved factors explain only 5% of total persistence for children
with a college educated mother, but roughly 20% for those without a mother without a four-year college degree.
Similarly, we find that the fixed eﬀects explain about 4% of total persistence for urban residents, but roughly 23%
for non-urban residents. Finally, we obtain little diﬀerence across groups when dividing the sample by SES status.
    To interpret these findings, it is important to remember that the decline in  when conditioning on the fixed
eﬀects represents the amount of persistence due to time invariant unobserved risk factors. Consequently, we find
that overall persistence is fairly extreme as a one standard deviation increase in weight is associated with roughly
a 0.9 standard deviation increase in the subsequent period. However, time-varying and time invariant observed
attributes explain none of this persistence. Moreover, time invariant unobserved factors also explain very little of
the persistence (typically less than one-third). Thus, much of the persistence in child weight is attributable to state
dependence, which implies that early interventions that are successful in reducing child weight will have long-run
eﬀects. Unfortunately, since our covariates explain little of the variation in weight, identifying such early interventions
may be diﬃcult.11
    Table 2 displays the simulation results for the Pr( ≥ 85th percentile | 0 ≥ 85th percentile). For the full
sample, the benchmark probability is 0.84. In other words, in our sample, 84% of children above the 85th percentile
in the initial period remain above the 85th percentile in the terminal period. This is consistent with a high degree of
persistence in weight. To explore the sources of this persistence, we turn to the simulations.
    Panel I contains the simulated probabilities when time-varying unobservables are ignored (i.e.,  = 0 for all  )
 1 1 The   full set of results are available upon request. While some estimated coeﬃcients are statistically significant at conventional levels,
the magnitudes are quite small; even the long-run eﬀects of permanent changes in the covariates, given by (1 − ), are quite small.
That said, while our covariate set does include a wide array of the usual family background variables, we do not have information on
many recent interventions designed to combat obesity, such as education eﬀorts, healthy food programs, and eﬀorts to promote physical
activity. We also do not have data on parents’ height or weight. We return to the issue of parental anthropometric status later.



                                                                       11
                                                                                                              b ) and
and time invariant heterogeneity is altered first by removing it entirely (by setting  at the sample mean of 
then by retaining the heterogeneity in , but breaking its correlation with  and 0 by giving each child a random
                                        b . In the first case, the conditional probability of staying above the 85th
draw from the empirical distribution of 
percentile falls to about 0.753; it falls to roughly 0.576 in the second case. The fact that the conditional staying
probability drops noticeably from the benchmark in the second case, but only marginally in the first case, indicates
that it is not the variation in  across children that determines persistence, but rather the correlation between 
and the time-varying covariates that explain a little over 30% of total persistence (i.e., 1 - (0.576/0.84). Moreover,
since the prior results in Table 1 indicate that the time-varying, observed covariates, , have little explanatory power,
this suggests it is really the correlation between  and the initial condition, 0 , that explains nearly one-third of
the total persistence. In other words, children with high initial conditions — measured by weight -scores upon
kindergarten entry — also have high values of , and this combination is responsible for one-third of the conditional
staying probability over the span of kindergarten through eighth grade.
   Panels II and III in Table 2 assess whether the importance of  is driven by time invariant observed factors, ,
or unobserved factors, . The first simulation in Panel II sets  equal to zero and leaves  at its actual value. The
result is very similar to the first case in Panel I, when  is set equal to its sample mean. In this case, the conditional
staying probability is 0.727, implying that it is the setting of  to its sample mean that is driving the first result in
Panel I. When instead children are given a random draw for  from its empirical distribution, the probability changes
only modestly to 0.703. Again, this is consistent with the results in Table 1 where we found little explanatory power
for the time invariant, observed covariates. In Panel III, however, when children retain their own observed factors,
 and , but receive a random draw for  from its empirical distribution, the conditional staying probability falls
to 0.593. As such, it is the correlation between time invariant, unobserved factors and the initial condition, 0 , that
is responsible for roughly one-third of the conditional staying probability. In other words, children with high initial
conditions also have high values of , and this combination is responsible for one-third of the persistence in weight
from kindergarten through eighth grade.
   Lastly, Panels IV, V, and VI report the simulated probabilities obtained when children retain their , but
receive draws of either time-varying, observed, , or unobserved, , attributes or both from their respective empirical
distributions. The results indicate no impact from altering either, again consistent with the the prior results in Table
1. In sum, the simulations for the full sample indicate that about one-third of the conditional staying probability for
weight is due to persistent, unobserved risk factors such as genetic endowments, early life health shocks, time invariant
environmental factors, etc. The remainder is due to state dependence. The fact that two-thirds of persistence is
due to state dependence is encouraging in that early interventions, to the extent that they are successful in reducing
weight prior to kindergarten, can have long-run eﬀects on weight during middle school.
   The remainder of Table 2 reports the simulated probabilities for the diﬀerent sub-groups. In addition to the
simulations just discussed for the full sample, additional simulations are conducted. Specifically, when drawing from
the empirical distributions, we draw not only from the full sample, but also from within one’s own group and outside
one’s own group. This enables us to see the eﬀects of diﬀerences in the distributions of the various components of
the model across groups.



                                                           12
   In the interest of brevity, we highlight a few salient findings. First, the benchmark probabilities diﬀer little by
gender or urban status. However, non-white children, children with a mother without a four-year college degree,
or children residing in a low SES household have a higher benchmark conditional staying probability (race: 0.861
versus 0.823; education: 0.870 versus 0.748; SES: 0.880 versus 0.820). Second, as in the full sample, altering values
for the time-varying, observed and/or unobserved factors,  and , has little impact on persistence in weight for all
demographic groups.
   Third, altering values for , or its components, matters across all demographic groups, but in diﬀerent ways. For
non-whites, children with a mother without a four-year college degree, and children residing in a low SES household,
replacing  with the (full) sample mean has little eﬀect on the conditional staying probability. This suggests that
these groups have such poor initial conditions, 0 , that even replacing  with the sample mean is not suﬃcient to
move children in these groups who are initially above the 85th percentile below the 85th percentile in the terminal
period. Instead, only when  is replaced by a random draw, particularly a random draw from outside one’s own
group, does the conditional staying probability drop to 0.50-0.60. Fourth, while the distributions of  do not diﬀer
by much across the diﬀerent groups, the distributions of the observed component, , does. In particular, females,
children in urban residences, children with a four-year college educated mother, and children in high SES families
possess time invariant, observed factors associated with persistence. However, the fact that the overall distribution
of  diﬀers little across groups indicates that much of the variation in  is due to the unobserved component, ,
which diﬀers little across groups. Thus, in the end, the amount of persistence due to the fixed eﬀects as opposed to
state dependence is roughly constant across the groups.
   Before turning to the next table, note that the preceding simulation results (and more) can be gleaned from plots
of the various distributions provided in Figures B1 and B2 in Appendix B. Figure B1 plots the overall distributions
                                                                             b in column two, the distributions
of weight -scores by demographic group in column one, the distributions of 
   b in column 3, and the distributions of b
of                                         in column four. When viewing the figures, it is important to pay
particular attention to not only diﬀerences in the distributions across groups, but also the scale of the horizontal
                                                                                                 b is quite diﬀerent
axis. For example, in the top row, while the distribution of time-varying, observed attributes, ,
across racial groups, the distributions are concentrated over a range of -0.1 to 0.1; the overall distributions of weight
-scores range from about -2 to 2. Thus, while time-varying, observed covariates diﬀer across racial groups, they
explain little of the overall variation in weight. In contrast, the distributions of time-varying, unobserved attributes,
b
, exhibit meaningful variation overall, but the distributions are virtually identical across demographic groups.
                                             b in column 1 along with its decomposition into observed attributes,
   Figure B2 reproduces the distributions of 
b
 , in column 2 and unobserved attributes, b
                                            , in column 3. As in Figure B1, we see that while the distributions of
observed characteristics diﬀer, for example, along racial lines in the top row, the scaling is such that the distributions
   b are determined predominantly by the distributions of b
of                                                        which diﬀer little between whites and non-whites. In
sum, then, the figures indicate little variation across demographic groups in terms of the overall distribution of weight
-scores or the components most responsible for variation in weight.
   Table 3 displays the analogous results for the Pr( ≥ 95th percentile | 0 ≥ 95th percentile). Compared to the
results in Table 2, three primary diﬀerences emerge. First, the benchmark probability is lower in the full sample



                                                           13
and for each demographic group (e.g., 0.762 for the full sample). Thus, there is less persistence in the extreme
upper tail of the weight distribution. Moreover, the diﬀerence in the benchmark probability across each demographic
group is now economically meaningful (race: 0.732 versus 0.795 favoring whites; gender: 0.710 versus 0.807 favoring
females; urban status: 0.749 versus 0.791 favoring non-urban; education: 0.646 versus 0.790 favoring four-year college
educated; SES: 0.740 versus 0.799 favoring high SES). Second, the vast majority of the persistence is due to time
invariant heterogeneity, ; even more so than in Table 2. State dependence, as well as time-varying factors,  and
, do not play much of a role in explaining persistence in the extreme upper tail. For example, replacing  with the
sample mean for all children reduces the conditional staying probability in the full sample to less than 15% and less
than 20% within each demographic group. Even replacing  with a random draw from its empirical distribution cuts
the conditional staying probability by nearly one-half in all cases. Third, unlike in Table 2, we find that setting 
to zero in Panel II results in lower conditional staying probabilities than in Panel III when  is replaced by random
draws from diﬀerent empirical distributions. This indicates that giving children initially above the 95th percentile an
average draw from the distribution of  (i.e., setting  to zero) is suﬃcient to bump most of these children below the
95th percentile by the terminal period, whereas this is not suﬃcient when using the 85th percentile as the threshold.
   Finally, Table 4 presents the results for the Pr( ≥ 85th percentile | 0 ≤ 50th percentile). This case illuminates
factors associated with relatively extreme weight gain during early childhood (i.e., sizeable upward mobility as opposed
to persistence). In terms of the benchmark case, the probability of moving from below the median at kindergarten
entry to above the 85th percentile by the end of eighth grade is roughly 12% in the full sample. While this probability
does not diﬀer much across the demographic groups, small diﬀerences arise favoring non-whites, urban residents, and
children with a mother with a four-year college degree and those residing in high SES households (race: 0.113 versus
0.121; gender: 0.104 versus 0.132; urban: 0.104 versus 0.124; education: 0.079 versus 0.131; SES: 0.106 versus 0.145).
   Turning to the simulations, we obtain a few noteworthy findings. First, time-varying factors,  and , continue
to not play any meaningful role. Second, replacing  with the sample mean reduces the probability of crossing
the 85th percentile conditional on starting below the median to zero in all cases. Replacing  with a random draw
from diﬀerent empirical distributions roughly doubles the probability of crossing the 85th percentile relative to the
benchmark in all cases. Together, these results imply that children initially below the median tend to have favorable
values of . Specifically,  is not randomly distributed in the population, but rather has a positive (partial) correlation
with the initial condition, 0 . Only the few children with extremely unfavorable draws of , despite being below
the median in the initial period, experience extreme upward mobility. Moreover, if  were randomly assigned, the
probability of moving from below the median to above the 85th percentile would roughly double. This is a testament
to the importance of time invariant factors, , in determining weight status.
   Third, the eﬀect of randomly assigning  is due to randomly assigning time invariant, unobserved factors, .
Randomly assigning the time invariant, observed factors, , has little impact on the probability of extreme upward
mobility. Moreover, removing time invariant, unobserved factors by setting  to zero reduces the probability of
extreme upward mobility to nearly zero in all cases. The implication is that children below the median tend to have
favorable draws of , which really means favorable draws of time invariant, unobserved factors, .




                                                            14
4.2    Height

Next we turn to the analysis of height. While height per se is not a policy concern in the U.S., it is interesting to
compare the dynamics of height with those of weight. In addition, it is useful to examine the individual components
of BMI prior to assessing BMI -scores in the next section.
   Table 5 displays the results for height -scores. For the full sample, the estimates of  across the first two
specifications are very similar to those using weight -scores; namely, 0.937 and 0.936 (standard errors are 0.004 and
0.004, respectively). However, the estimate of  falls to 0.603 (standard error is 0.048) in the fixed eﬀect specification
(compared to 0.775 in Table 1). As in Table 1, the estimate of  is statistically significant at the   001 confidence
level, all three specifications are strongly identified, the estimate of  barely changes when we include time-varying
and time invariant observed attributes, and the estimates of  above 0.9 in the first two specifications indicate a
substantial degree of persistence. Thus, as in Table 1, while anthropometric measures are quite persistent from one
period to the next, this is not attributable to or explained by observed characteristics.
   In contrast to weight -scores, the child-level fixed eﬀects explain about 36% of the overall persistence in child
height (versus only 17% for weight -scores). This is perhaps not surprising as unobserved biological factors —
most noticeably, parental height — are not included in our set of observed covariates. The fact that time invariant,
unobserved attributes account for a greater share of the persistence in height implies that state dependence, and
thus the long-run impact of successful, early interventions — that do not alter relevant, time invariant, unobserved
attributes — is diminished. For example, a one-time intervention that reduces a child’s weight by one standard
deviation prior to kindergarten entry, ceteris paribus, is expected to reduce the child’s weight by over one-third of
a standard deviation in spring eighth grade. Thus, one-third of the eﬀects of the early intervention persist through
eighth grade. An intervention that raises a child’s height by one standard deviation prior to kindergarten entry,
ceteris paribus, is expected to increase the child’s height only by slightly over 0.10 standard deviations in spring
eighth grade. As such, only about one-tenth of the eﬀects of the early intervention persist through eighth grade; the
remainder of the intervention dies out.
   When we divide the sample into diﬀerent sub-groups, we find that the results are predominantly unchanged in
the specifications omitting the fixed eﬀects. The only minor diﬀerence we see is a slightly higher level of persistence
for males relative to females and non-urban residents relative to urban residents (approximately 0.95 to 0.92 and
statistically significant at the   001 confidence level in each case). However, as with weight -scores, once we
include child-level fixed eﬀects, the results vary in several cases. When we split the sample by race, we find that time
invariant, unobserved factors explain roughly 41% of overall persistence for whites versus about 28% for non-whites.
For males, the fixed eﬀects explain over 50% of overall persistence as the estimate of  falls to 0.460 (standard error
is 0.055). For females, the point estimate falls to 0.739 (standard error is 0.079); thus, accounting for only about 20%
of overall persistence. When we divide the sample by mother’s education, we find that time invariant, unobserved
factors also explain over 50% of total persistence for children with a college educated mother; roughly 30% for those
with a mother without a four-year college degree. Similarly, we find that the fixed eﬀects explain about 40% of total
persistence for children in high SES households, but roughly 25% for children in low SES households. Finally, we
obtain little diﬀerence across groups when dividing the sample by urban status.


                                                           15
   Tables 6-8 present the analogous set of simulation results for height -scores; Figures B3 and B4 display the
plots. We discuss the results briefly. In terms of the benchmark probabilities, a few diﬀerences emerge relative
to the previous results for weight. First, the benchmark probabilities are lower for height than the corresponding
probabilities for weight in all cases across Tables 6-7. For example, Pr( ≥ 85th percentile | 0 ≥ 85th percentile)
and Pr( ≥ 95th percentile | 0 ≥ 95th percentile) are 0.606 and 0.467, respectively, in the full sample for height;
0.840 and 0.762, respectively, for weight. Thus, persistence in the upper half of the distribution is lower, albeit still
high, for height. Second, while there may exist more mobility in terms of height, extreme upward mobility for height
is less common than for weight. In the full sample, Pr( ≥ 85th percentile | 0 ≤ 50th percentile) is 0.030 for
height and 0.118 for weight.
   Turning to the simulations, a few patterns emerge. First, while the time-varying factors,  and , have a bit more
impact on height than weight, their combined eﬀect is still modest. In Tables 6-8, replacing  and/or  with diﬀerent
values increases the conditional staying probabilities in all cases for the full sample. This indicates that, on average,
children initially above the median tend to have less favorable (in terms of raising height) time-varying attributes,
partially oﬀsetting the child’s height in the initial period.
   Second, as with weight, most of persistence in height is attributable to time invariant factors captured by .
However, the patterns are diﬀerent. In Tables 6 and 7, we find that replacing  with the sample mean drops the
conditional staying probabilities above the 85th and 95th probabilities to zero for the full sample and all demographic
groups. Further analysis reveals that this stems from the unobserved component captured by ; varying the time
invariant, observed component, , has little eﬀect. This implies that children in the upper tail of the height distrib-
ution upon entry to kindergarten possess time invariant, unobserved attributes that tend to keep them in the upper
tail. Replacing these attributes with the sample mean, or a random draw, essentially guarantees these children will
fall out of the upper tail by the end of eighth grade. Replacing the unobserved component of the fixed eﬀects, ,
with a random draw similarly reduces the conditional staying probabilities, but not as much; the probabilities fall to
around 0.25 and 0.10 in Tables 6 and 7, respectively. This is perhaps not surprising as genetics and early biological
factors presumably play a large role in determining child height.
   Third, Table 8 suggests that extreme upward mobility in height is rare since children initially below the median
have unfavorable draws of time invariant, unobserved heterogeneity, . Replacing  with its sample average would
eliminate extreme upward mobility entirely as the few cases of observed extreme upward mobility is due to a handful
of children having very favorable values of  despite being below the median upon entry to kindergarten. On the
other hand, replacing  with a random draw would increase extreme upward mobility by four- to five-fold.
   Finally, Figures B3 and B4 provide a graphical representation of these findings. The implications are very similar
to those discussed above with respect to the figures for weight. The only subtle diﬀerence, consistent with the
                                                                  b , explain a bit more of the overall variation in height
simulation results, is that the distribution of the fixed eﬀects, 
(with this variation reflecting the unobserved component, b
                                                          ).




                                                            16
4.3    BMI

Next we turn to the analysis of BMI. Table 9 presents the regression results. For the full sample, the estimates of
 across the first two specifications are very similar to those in Tables 1 and 5; namely, 0.912 and 0.911 (standard
errors are 0.004 and 0.005, respectively). However, the estimate of  now falls to 0.217 (standard error is 0.015)
in the fixed eﬀect specification (compared to 0.775 and 0.603 in Tables 1 and 5, respectively). As in Tables 1 and
5, the estimate of  is statistically significant at the   001 confidence level, all three specifications are strongly
identified, the estimate of  barely changes when we include time-varying and time invariant observed attributes,
and the estimates of  above 0.9 in the first two specifications indicate a substantial degree of persistence. Thus,
as with weight and height -scores, while persistence from one period to the next in BMI -scores is high, it is not
attributable to or explained by observed characteristics.
   While the first two specifications diﬀer little across Tables 1, 5, and 9, the results from the fixed eﬀect specification
do. As noted above, time invariant, unobserved factors account for roughly 17% of the total persistence in weight
-scores and 36% for height -scores. For BMI, the fixed eﬀects now account for nearly 80% of total persistence.
The economically and statistically meaningful drop in the estimate of  implies a substantially smaller role for state
dependence in the persistence of child BMI. Consequently, the long-run impact of early interventions — that do not
alter relevant, time invariant, unobserved attributes — on BMI is quite small. For example, a one-time intervention
that reduces a child’s BMI prior to kindergarten entry by one standard deviation, ceteris paribus, is expected to have
essentially no impact on BMI in spring eighth grade. A permanent intervention that reduces a child’s BMI by 0.10
standard deviations every period, will only result in a long-run decrease in the child’s BMI of roughly 0.13 standard
deviations. This has profound implications for the types of policies one should pursue if the objective is to reverse
the obesity epidemic.
   When we divide the sample into diﬀerent sub-groups, we find that the results are qualitatively similar across all
demographic groups for each of the three specifications, in contrast to the prior results for weight and height. In
terms of the first two specifications, there are essentially no diﬀerences across the various groups. For the fixed eﬀect
specification, the only minor diﬀerence of note is for gender. In this case, the fixed eﬀects account for approximately
80% of total persistence for males and roughly 70% for females. For all the remaining divisions of the sample, time
invariant factors account for roughly 73 - 78% of total persistence. Again, this is a striking finding as it indicates
that while there may be level diﬀerences in BMI across demographic groups, the extent and origins of persistence
are not fundamentally diﬀerent across groups.
   Tables 10-12 display the simulation results for BMI -scores; Figures B5 and B6 contain the plots. In Tables 10
and 11, the benchmark probabilities lie in between the conditional staying probabilities for weight and height reported
in the corresponding Tables 2-3 and 6-7. This is also true for most of the demographic sub-groups. Furthermore, the
benchmark probabilities are consistent with the high degree of persistence in BMI documented earlier. For example,
the conditional probability of staying above the 85th percentile is 0.746 in the full sample (see Table 10); 0.715 for
staying above the 95th percentile (see Table 11). Lastly, the benchmark probabilities are notable in that the gaps
between racial, education, and SES groups in Tables 10 and 11 are larger than the corresponding gaps for either
weight or height separately. For instance, the conditional probability of staying above the 95th percentile for BMI


                                                            17
is 0.664 for whites and 0.769 for non-whites. The corresponding gap for weight (height) is 0.732 versus 0.795 (0.481
versus 0.446). Thus, demographic diﬀerences in persistence of remaining in the upper tail of the BMI distribution
are sizeable.
   When we turn to the simulated probabilities, a few findings stand out. First, altering the values of the time
invariant components in Panels I, II, and III of Tables 10-11 yields results that are qualitatively similar to those
reported in Tables 6-7 for height. In particular, in Panel I we find that replacing  with the sample mean reduces the
conditional probability of staying above the 85th and 95th percentiles to zero in nearly every case. Moreover, this is
predominantly due to the salient role of time invariant, unobserved factors, . Variation in time invariant, observed
factors, , explain a modest amount of variation in the conditional probability of staying above the 85 percentile
(see Table 10), but not when using the 95th percentile as the threshold (see Table 11). Thus, the results are consistent
with children in the upper part of the BMI distribution possessing less favorable time invariant factors, particularly
those unobserved. The results are also consistent with Figures B5 and B6 which indicate that the majority of the
                                             b , and the unobserved component, b
variation in BMI is due to the fixed eﬀects,                                   , in particular.
   Second, in Panel II of Table 10, where variation in time invariant, observed factors, , plays a modest role, we
find that whites, females, non-urban residents, children with a mother with a four-year college degree, and children
in high SES households continue to possess more favorable attributes. The largest discrepancy occurs along racial
lines. If we set  to zero and give white children a random draw of  from the empirical distribution for whites
(non-whites), we obtain a conditional staying probability of 0.015 (0.121). Setting  to zero and giving non-white
children a random draw of  from the empirical distribution for whites (non-whites), we obtain a conditional staying
probability of 0.015 (0.118). Thus, the variation in the distribution of time invariant, observed factors is responsible
for roughly a ten percentage point diﬀerence along racial lines in the conditional probability of remaining above the
85th percentile, ceteris paribus. Finally, as in all the analysis of weight and height, we find very little role for variation
in time-varying factors, either observed or unobserved.
   Table 12 presents the results for the Pr( ≥ 85th percentile | 0 ≤ 50th percentile). In terms of the benchmark
probabilities for extreme upward mobility, we obtain higher probabilities for BMI than either weight or height. For
example, the probability of having a BMI above the 85th percentile in the terminal period conditional on entering
kindergarten below the median is 0.142 for the full sample (see Table 12). The corresponding figures are 0.118 and
0.003 for weight and height, respectively. The probability of extreme upward mobility for BMI is particularly high
for whites, children with non-college educated mothers, and children residing in low SES households (0.167, 0.162,
and 0.192, respectively).
   Turning to the simulations, we obtain a few findings. First, time-varying factors,  and , continue to not play
any meaningful role. Second, replacing  with the sample mean reduces the probability of crossing the 85th percentile
conditional on starting below the median to zero in all cases, just as in Tables 4 and 8. Replacing  with a random
draw from diﬀerent empirical distributions roughly increases the probability of crossing the 85th percentile by two-
to three-fold relative to the benchmark in all cases. Together, these results continue to imply that children initially
below the median tend to have favorable values of . Only a few children with extremely unfavorable draws of
, despite being initially below the median, experience extreme upward mobility. Moreover, if  were randomly



                                                             18
assigned, the probability of moving from below the median to above the 85th percentile would increase substantially.
   Third, the eﬀect of altering  is due to altering the time invariant, unobserved factors, . However, as in Table
10, the time invariant, observed factors, , explain a modest amount of the variation in the probability of extreme
upward mobility overall, as well as across racial, education, and SES groups. Specifically, whereas removing time
invariant, unobserved factors by setting  to zero reduces the probability of extreme upward mobility to nearly zero
for weight and height, this is not the case for BMI as the probability varies from roughly 1 - 8%.


4.4       Discussion

While there are many subtle results emerging from the analysis, perhaps the most important is that persistence in
weight, height, and BMI is quite high over the period spanning kindergarten through eighth grade and that this
persistence is predominantly driven by persistent, unobserved heterogeneity. Time-varying observed and unobserved
factors play little role. Time invariant, observed heterogeneity plays a modest role in some instances. In particular,
children who are male or black, rural or northeast residents, non-native English speakers, had a high birthweight, and
have a mother with low education, a low age at first birth, or who participated in the labor force during the child’s
infancy tend to have higher BMI (as evidenced by inspection of the estimation results of (6)). State dependence
plays a prominent role for weight only. That said, it is worth re-iterating that the majority of persistence in weight,
height, and BMI is due to time invariant, unobserved factors.
   This finding implies that, while earlier intervention is preferred to later interventions, only interventions that
alter the crucial, time invariant, unobserved risk factors captured by  are likely to be eﬀective in the long-run.
Interventions that leave the attributes captured by  unaltered are likely to have, at best, minimal short-run eﬀects
and little to no long-run eﬀects. This is entirely consistent with the findings reported in Davis and Gebremariam
(2010). There, the authors document that community-based interventions designed to combat childhood obesity that
were deemed as successful according to the analysis of data collected via randomized control trials did not produce
lasting eﬀects. Eventually, children returned to their “natural state” (p. 22). The results are also consistent with
Figlio et al. (2013) who document constant eﬀects of birthweight (conditional on gestation length) on cognitive
outcomes throughout primary school.
   This naturally begs the question concerning the attributes reflected by . From the analysis presented here,
all we can conclude is that they are not contained in our set of covariates taken from the ECLS-K and they do
not vary during the primary school years. The prior literature, discussed earlier, posits some possibilities: prenatal
attributes such as maternal BMI, maternal weight gain, maternal smoking, and gestational diabetes requiring insulin
and post-natal attributes such as breastfeeding, transitions to solid foods, and age at adiposity rebound. While we
do control for birthweight, birthweight alone is not a suﬃcient proxy for these early influences on fetal development
as noted earlier. Finally, while time invariant, environmental factors, such as neighborhood characteristics, are also
captured by , prior evidence suggests that these are not likely to play a significant role. For example, prior studies
using twins that are reared apart conclude that familial environment does not play a salient role (Eriksson et al.
2001). In an attempt to delve further into this issue, we undertake one final analysis using the ECLS-B. We turn to
it now.


                                                          19
5      ECLS-B

5.1         Data

To explore the early life origins of anthropometric persistence, we utilize data from the restricted version of the ECLS-
B. Collected by the US Department of Education, the ECLS-B collects information on a nationally representative
cohort of children born in 2001 at 9 months of age, two years, four years, and five years. As with the ECLS-K, our
final sample consists of a balanced sample of children for whom we have valid measures of age, gender, height, and
weight.12 Given the age of the sample, we convert weight into -scores; height is measured in centimeters.
    The following time invariant covariates are included: gender, race/ethnicity (white, black, Hispanic, Asian, and
other), mother’s age at first birth, birthweight indicators (normal or low), indicator for intrauterine growth retardation
(less than 10%, 10-24%, 25-49%, 50-75%, 76-89%, and 90% and above)13 , indicator for premature birth, indicator for
birth status (singleton, twin, or higher order birth), mother’s height, mother’s weight prior to pregnancy, mother’s
weight gain during pregnancy, indicator for prenatal care (inadequate, intermediate, adequate, or adequate plus),
indicator for maternal prenatal vitamin consumption within the three months preceding conception, indicator for
maternal prenatal vitamin consumption during the first trimester, indicator for maternal smoking within the three
months preceding conception, indicator for maternal smoking within the third trimester, indicator if mother has
smoked more than 100 cigarettes in her lifetime, indicator for maternal alcohol consumption within the three months
preceding conception, number of current smokers in the household, region (northeast, midwest, south, and west),
city type (urban, suburban, or rural), indicator for mother’s participation in WIC during pregnancy, indicator for
mother’s participation in WIC during infancy, and scores on infant mental and motor assessments administered at 9
months.
    The following time-varying covariates are included: age, mother’s education (less than high school, high school/GED,
some college, four-year college degree, and more than four years of college), an index of SES status, indicator for the
household being in poverty, number of children’s books in the household, household size, family type (two parents
plus siblings, two parents and no siblings, one parent and siblings, one parent and no siblings, and other), indicator
for biological mother present, indicator for biological father present, indicator for no father present, indicator for no
mother present, indicator for parental respondent’s marital status, indicator of current TANF participation, indicator
of current FSP participation, indicator for health insurance, indicator for current medicaid participation, indicator
for current WIC participation, indicator for household food security (household never worried about running out of
food), hours per day spent watching television during the school week, indicator for household rules regarding tele-
vision watching, neighborhood safety (very safe, somewhat safe, and not safe), mother’s labor force status (full-time,
part-time, and not working), indicators for primary child care arrangement (parents, other relatives, non-relatives,
center-based care, or Head Start), indicator for school enrollment, indicator if English is the primary home language,
and mother’s weight. For all covariates (except gender, age, height, and weight), we include dummy variables for
  1 2 The   possible sample size is roughly 6,950; the initial sample size in the first wave is about 10,700. Restricting the sample to those
with valid data on age, gender, height, and weight reduces the sample size to approximately 5,450. This is the final sample size per wave
in the regression analysis. Note, all sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 50 per NCES restricted data regulations for the ECLS-B.
  1 3 Intrauterine growth retardation measures the ratio of birthweight to predicted weight based on gestation age.




                                                                      20
missing observations.


5.2    Results

The results are presented in Tables 13-20. Tables 13 and 17 display the regression estimates; the remaining tables
present the simulation results. Figures B7-B10 in Appendix B contain the corresponding plots.
   In terms of the coeﬃcient estimates, the results in Table 13 using weight -scores are fairly similar to those
obtained using the ECLS-K when omitting child-specific fixed eﬀects. Specifically, the estimates of  in the full
sample and each of the demographic sub-groups is statistically significant and ranges from 0.84 to 0.89. As with the
ECLS-K, the fact that the estimate of  does not change moving from (1) to (2) implies that our lengthy vector
of time-varying and time invariant observed factors explain none of the persistence in weight status for infants and
young children. Given the additional time invariant controls available in the ECLS-B, this is striking. Moreover, the
estimates of  near 0.9 indicate a substantial degree of persistence even prior to kindergarten. However, unlike in
the ECLS-K, inclusion of child-level fixed eﬀects explains the majority of this persistence. Here, the estimate of 
falls to 0.124 (standard error of 0.013) in the full sample; the estimates vary from 0.105 to 0.144 across the various
sub-groups. This implies that time invariant, unobserved factors explain about 85% of the observed persistence
in weight -scores during early childhood. In contrast, only 17% of observed persistence in weight -scores during
primary school is due to time invariant, unobserved heterogeneity. Again, given that we observe many more time
invariant attributes of children in the ECLS-B, this is a startling result.
   Table 17 displays the corresponding regression results for height. Four interesting patterns emerge. First, per-
sistence in height in the models not controlling for any other covariates — based on the specification in (1) — is of a
much smaller magnitude than found in the ECLS-K when assessing height for older children or in the ECLS-B when
assessing weight. Second, when controlling for observed heterogeneity — based on the specification in (2) — persis-
tence actually increases by about 15%. This is consistent with a negative correlation between the initial condition for
height, 0 , which is really ‘length’ at nine months of age, and observed heterogeneity associated with greater height.
Third, as with weight in the ECLS-B, there is very little diﬀerence across the demographic sub-groups. Finally,
when child-level fixed eﬀects are included, the estimates of  become negative and statistically significant (although
always below 0.06 in absolute value). Thus, all of the persistence in child height up to age five is attributable to
time invariant, unobserved heterogeneity.
   Tables 14-16 and 18-20 report the results of the same simulations performed as when using the ECLS-K. In
the interest of brevity, we only briefly summarize the results. First, time-varying attributes, both observed and
unobserved have no eﬀect on persistence. Given the lengthy vector of attributes, as well as the plethora of time-
varying, unobserved attributes captured by , this continues to be a noteworthy finding. Second, the benchmark
probabilities for both weight and height, along with the distributions of observed and unobserved, time-varying
attributes, do not qualitatively diﬀer across the demographic sub-groups (see also Figures B7 and B9). As such, not
only do the benchmark probabilities not vary across groups, but replacing a child’s own  and/or  with draws from
the opposite group has no discernible eﬀect on persistence.
   Third, as in the ECLS-K, time invariant heterogeneity continues to play a prominent role in understanding


                                                           21
persistence in child weight and height. For weight, replacing  with its sample mean explains virtually all persistence
through age five. Moreover, replacing the fixed eﬀect of a child initially below the median with the sample mean
roughly doubles the probability that the child’s weight will exceed the 85th percentile at age five. For height, replacing
 with its sample mean explains most, but not all, persistence. However, replacing the fixed eﬀect of a child initially
below the median with the sample mean does not alter the probability that the child’s height will exceed the 85th
percentile at age five.
   Fourth, time invariant, observed attributes play a more prominent role, particularly for height, in explaining
persistence up to age five than in the ECLS-K analysis of primary school children. This could be attributable
to two sources. On the one hand, the time invariant, observed attributes may play a more important role in the
determination of child weight and height prior to age five. On the other hand, the vector of controls is not identical
across the two data sources. Examining the results of (6), the most important covariates relate to birthweight, birth
status (i.e., singleton, twin, or higher order birth), intrauterine growth retardation, breastfeeding duration, mother’s
height, and mother’s weight gain during pregnancy. That said, as measured by the 2 , only 19% (22%) of the
             b is explained by the covariates included in (6) when examining weight (height).
variation in 
   Finally, time invariant attributes, both observed and unobserved, diﬀer across the various demographic sub-
groups, particularly along racial lines. For example, in Table 14, the probability of a white (non-white) child’s weight
persisting above the 85th percentile when the child’s own fixed eﬀect, , is replaced by a random draw from the
sample distribution is 0.284 (0.242). Replacing the child’s own fixed eﬀect, , with a random draw from the sample
distribution for the child’s own racial group, the probability of persisting above the 85th percentile is 0.216 (0.284).
Replacing the child’s own fixed eﬀect, , with a random draw from the sample distribution from the opposite racial
group, the probability of persisting above the 85th percentile is 0.333 (0.179). Similar patterns hold in the other
panels for weight and height.
   In sum, the results from the sample of children aged five and younger in the ECLS-B are consistent with the
sample of primary school children in the ECLS-K. Namely, persistence in weight and height is quite high, and this
persistence is mainly driven by time invariant heterogeneity. However, in contrast to the primary school sample,
time invariant, observed attributes play a bit more of an important role. In particular, while the associations between
birthweight, gestation age, maternal height and weight, and single versus multiple birth and fetal development are
not strong, perhaps due to the complexities involved these relationships that are only currently beginning to be
understood in the medical literature, these controls do play a small role in explaining persistence. Nonetheless,
the primary determinants of fetal and infant development that may be critical in placing children on an “obesity
trajectory” remain unobserved, even in the ECLS-B. Such unobserved attributes are likely to include gestational
diabetes treated with insulin or periods of undernutrition during pregnancy. Similarly, recent research has uncovered
genetic abnormalities associated with obesity (e.g., Asai et al. 2013; Ramachandrappa et al. 2013).




                                                           22
6     Conclusion
Concern over childhood and adult obesity has risen dramatically over the past decade. As this concern has risen, our
understanding that interventions earlier in life are likely to have greater impact has risen as well. This understanding
follows from well chronicled evidence that obesity is highly persistent; as such, adults may become trapped on an
“obesity trajectory” early in life. However, little is known about the origins of these correlations in anthropometric
measures over the life cycle. Specifically, whether this correlation reflects state dependence, observed heterogeneity,
or unobserved heterogeneity is unknown. Moreover, when this persistence in weight status begins — adolescence,
early childhood, postnatally, or prenatally — is also unknown. Prior work has identified three ‘critical’ development
periods as it relates to obesity: in utero, adiposity rebound (around age four to six), and adolescence. However, as
Dietz (1997, p. 1886S) notes, “The relative contribution of each of these critical periods to the prevalence, morbidity
and mortality of adult obesity remains uncertain.”
    Better understanding of the dynamics of weight status is crucial for sound policymaking. If weight is highly
persistent and the source of this persistence is state dependence, then small (permanent) changes will have large, long-
run eﬀects even if the contemporaneous eﬀects are small. However, if persistence is due to biological or environmental
factors that are time invariant, then the only changes that will have long-run eﬀects are those that alter these
underlying factors. Absent such eﬀects, interventions will not alter the long-run anthropometric status of individuals
even if they have contemporaneous eﬀects.
    The evidence presented here indicates, first, that there is significant persistence in weight and height starting dur-
ing infancy and, second, that this persistence is predominantly due to time invariant heterogeneity across individuals
determined at birth or shortly thereafter, not state dependence. Moreover, little variation in this time invariant het-
erogeneity is explained by attributes observed in the data analyzed here. The few time invariant, observed attributes
that do seem to play a role in the persistence of weight status over the early part of the life cycle relate to fetal and
infant nutrition. This suggests that of the three ‘critical’ periods noted in Dietz (1997), in utero (and post-natal)
plays the largest role. It also suggests that strategies to reverse the current childhood obesity epidemic may need
to start even earlier than previously thought, namely in utero. This confirms recent policy prescriptions advocated
elsewhere. For example, Brisbois et al. (2012, p. 347) concludes: “Given that obesity may be programmed in utero
and during early infancy, preventive measures should be initiated preconception, during pregnancy and continue
throughout early childhood.” Examples of such measures may include altering institutional rules concerning federal
nutrition programs, such as SNAP or WIC, or education provided under these programs, as they relate to pregnant
women (e.g., Baum 2012).




                                                           23
References
 [1] Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011), “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 25,153-172.

 [2] Asai, M., S. Ramachandrappa, M. Joachim, Y. Shen, R. Zhang, N. Nuthalapati, V. Ramanathan, D. E. Strochlic,
    P. Ferket, K. Linhart, C. Ho, T. V. Novoselova, S. Garg, M. Ridderstrale, C. Marcus, J. N. Hirschhorn, J. M.
    Keogh, S. O’Rahilly, L. F. Chan, A. J. Clark, I. S. Farooqi, J. A. Majzoub (2013), “Loss of Function of the
    Melanocortin 2 Receptor Accessory Protein 2 Is Associated with Mammalian Obesity,” Science, 341, 275-278.

 [3] Barker, D.J.P. (1997), “Maternal Nutrition, Fetal Nutrition, and Disease in Later Life,” Nutrition, 13, 807-813.

 [4] Baum, C.L. (2012), “The Eﬀects of Food Stamps on Weight Gained by Expectant Mothers,” Journal of Popu-
    lation Economics, 25, 1307-1340.

 [5] Bhattacharya, D. and B. Mazumder (2011), “A Nonparametric Analysis of Black-White Diﬀerences in Intergen-
    erational Mobility in the United States,” Quantitative Economics, 2, 335-379.

 [6] Brisbois, T.D., A.P. Farmer. and L.J. McCargar (2012), “Early Markers of Adult Obesity: A Review,” Obesity
    Reviews, 13, 347-367.

 [7] Cawley, J. and C. Meyerhoefer (2012), “The Medical Care Costs of Obesity: An Instrumental Variables Ap-
    proach,” Journal of Health Economics, 31, 219-230.

 [8] Davis, K. and K.K. Christoﬀel (1994), “Obesity in Preschool and School-Age Children: Treatment Early and
    Often May Be Best,” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 148, 1257-1261.

 [9] Davis, M.M. and A. Gebremariam (2010), “Economic Long-Term Impacts of Interventions Aimed at Preventing
    or Reducing Obesity Among Children,” CCR 62, USDA Economic Research Service.

[10] Dietz, W.H. (1997), “Periods of Risk in Childhood for the Development of Adult Obesity–What Do We Need
    to Learn?” Journal of Nutrition, 127, 1884S-1886S

[11] Dietz, W.H. and T.N. Robinson (2005), “Overweight Children and Adolescents,” New England Journal of
    Medicine, 352, 2100—2109.

[12] Dor, A., C. Ferguson, E. Tan, C. Langwith (2010), “A Heavy Burden: The Individual Costs of Being Overweight
    and Obese in the United States,” Department of Health Policy, George Washington University.

[13] Eriksson, J., T. Forsén, J. Tuomilehto, C. Osmond, and D. Barker (2001), “Size at Birth, Childhood Growth
    and Obesity in Adult Life,” International Journal of Obesity, 25, 735-740.

[14] Figlio, D.N., J. Guryan, K. Karbownik, and J. Roth (2013), “The Eﬀects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s
    Cognitive Development,” unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University.




                                                         24
[15] Finkelstein, E. A. , I.C. Fiebelkorn, and G. Wang (2004), “State-Level Estimates of Annual Medical Expenditures
    Attributable to Obesity,” Obesity Research, 12.

[16] Finkelstein, E.A. and L. Zuckerman (2007), The Fattening of America: How The Economy Makes Us Fat, If It
    Matters, and What To Do About It, John Wylie and Sons, Inc.

[17] Freedman, D.S., L.K. Khan, W.H. Dietz, S.R. Srinivasan, and G.S. Berenson (2001), “Relationship of Childhood
    Obesity to Coronary Heart Disease Risk Factors in Adulthood: The Bogalusa Heart Study,” Pediatrics, 108,
    712—718.

[18] Freedman, D.S., L.K. Khan, M.K. Serdula, W.H. Dietz, S.R. Srinivasan, and G.S. Berenson (2005), “Racial
    Diﬀerences in the Tracking of Childhood BMI to Adulthood,” Obesity Research, 13, 928—935.

[19] Frisvold, D.E. and A. Giri (2013), “The Potential of Early Childhood Education as a Successful Obesity In-
    tervention,” in V. Brennan, S. Kumanyika, and R. Zambrana (eds.), Obesity Interventions in Underserved US
    Populations: Evidence and Directions, Johns Hopkins University Press.

[20] Gable, S., J. Britt-Rankin, and J. Krull (2008), “Ecological Predictors and Developmental Outcomes of Persistent
    Childhood Overweight,” Contractor and Cooperator Report No. 42, USDA, ERS.

[21] Godfrey, K.M. and D.J.P. Barker (2001), “Fetal Programming and Adult Health,” Public Health Nutrition, 4,
    611-624.

[22] Ham, J.C., D. Iorio, and M. Sovinsky (2013), “Caught in the Bulimic Trap? Persistence and State Dependence
    of Bulimia Among Young Women,” Journal of Human Resources, 48, 736-767.

[23] Halliday, T. (2008), “Heterogeneity, State Dependence and Health,” Econometrics Journal, 11, 499—516.

[24] Hsiao, C (1986), Analysis of Panel Data, Cambridge University Press.

[25] Iughetti, L., M. de Simone, A. Verrotti, M.L. Iezzi, B. Predieri, P. Bruzzi, S. Bernasconi, F. Balli, and G.
    Bedogni (2008), “Thirty-year Persistence of Obesity after Presentation to a Pediatric Obesity Clinic,” Annals
    of Human Biology, 35, 439-448

[26] Kleibergen, F. and R. Paap (2006), “Generalized Reduced Rank Tests Using the Singular Value Decomposition,”
    Journal of Econometrics, 133, 97-126.

[27] Krebs, N.F., and M.S. Jacobson (2003), “Prevention of Pediatric Overweight and Obesity,” Pediatrics, 112,
    424—430.

[28] Millimet, D.L. and R. Tchernis (2012), “Estimation of Treatment Eﬀects Without an Exclusion Restriction: with
    an Application to the Analysis of the School Breakfast Program,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.

[29] Millimet, D.L. and R. Tchernis (2013), “Anthropometric Mobility During Childhood Obesity,” unpublished
    manuscript, Southern Methodist University.


                                                         25
[30] Mocan, N. and E. Tekin (2011), “Obesity, Self-Esteem, and Wages,” in M. Grossman and N. Mocan (eds.)
    Economic Aspects of Obesity, University of Chicago Press.

[31] Nader P.R., M. O’Brien, R. Houts, R. Bradley, J. Belsky, R. Crosnoe, S. Friedman, Z. Mei, and E.J. Susman
    (2007), “Identifying the Risk for Obesity in Early Childhood,” Pediatrics, 118(3), e594—e601.

[32] Ogden, C.L., K.M. Flegal, M.D. Carroll, and C.L. Johnson (2002), “Prevalence and Trends in Overweight among
    US Children and Adolescents, 1999-2000,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 288(14), 1728—1732.

[33] Ogden, C.L., M.D. Carroll, and K.M. Flegal, (2008), “High Body Mass Index for Age Among US Children and
    Adolescents,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 299, 2401—2405.

[34] Ramachandrappa, S., A. Raimondo, A.M.G. Cali, J.M. Keogh, E. Henning, S. Saeed, A. Thompson, S. Garg,
    E.G. Bochukova, S. Brage, V. Trowse, E. Wheeler, A.E. Sullivan, M. Dattani, P.E. Clayton, V.Datta, J.B.
    Bruning, N.J. Wareham, S. O’Rahilly, D.J. Peet, I. Barroso, M.L. Whitelaw, I.S. Farooqi (2013), “Rare Variants
    in Single-Minded 1 (SIM1) are Associated with Severe Obesity,” Journal of Clinical Investigation, 123, 3042-
    3050.

[35] Ulrick, S.W. (2008), “Using Semi-parametric Methods in an Analysis of Earnings Mobility,” Econometrics
    Journal, 11, 478—498.

[36] Van Cleave, J., S.L. Gortmaker and J.M. Perrin (2010), “Dynamics of Obesity and Chronic Health Conditions
    Among Children and Youth,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 303 (7), 623—630.

[37] Walpole, S.C., D. Prieto-Merino, P. Edwards, J. Cleland, G. Stevens, and I. Roberts (2012), “The Weight of
    Nations: An Estimation of Adult Human Biomass,” BMC Public Health, 12, 439.

[38] Whitaker, R.C., J.A. Wright, M.S. Pepe, K.D. Seidel, and W.H. Dietz (1997), “Predicting Obesity in Young
    Adulthood from Childhood and Parental Obesity,” New England Journal of Medicine, 337, 869-873.




                                                       26
Appendix A. Simulation Details.
                                             b , set  = 0. This eliminates heterogeneity due to time invariant and
 1. Case I. Own 0 , own  , replace  = 
    time-varying unobserved factors.

    (a) Compute
                                                    b =              b+
                                                           bb−1 +   b           = 1  

         where b0 = 0 .

    (b) Compute                                                        P
                                                        ∗                        ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                             I(b
                                        Pr(   |0 ≥ 0 ) =               P                        
                                                                                   I(0 ≥ 0 )

     (c) Compute                                                         P
                                                    ∗                        ∈ I(b
                                                                                          ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                    Pr(   |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                 P                           
                                                                                       ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

         where  denotes a specific sub-sample of the data (e.g., males).

 2. Case II. Own 0 , own  , draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  , set  = 0. This
    allows for time invariant unobserved heterogeneity, but breaks the correlation between  and .

             e  () ∼  (b
    (a) Draw             ),  = 1  , where  is the number of simulations.

    (b) Compute
                                            b () =                  b+
                                                       bb−1 () +   e  ()          = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                       ∙P                                       ¸
                                                ∗                1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                 I(b
                                  Pr(   |0       ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                                       I(0 ≥ 0 )

    (d) Compute                                                          ∙P                                           ¸
                                        ∗                       1 P              ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                       I(b
                              Pr(   |0   ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                         P                               
                                                                                         ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

 3. Case III. Own 0 , own  , draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample 
   and  ∈ , set  = 0. This only partially breaks the correlation between  and  as it retains any correlation
   between  and  common to group .

             e  () ∼  (b
    (a) Draw              ), where  ∈ ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.

    (b) Compute
                                             b () =                  b+
                                                        bb−1 () +   e             = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                       ∙P                                       ¸
                                                ∗                1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                 I(b
                                  Pr(   |0       ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                                       I(0 ≥ 0 )




                                                                 27
   (d) Compute                                                           ∙P                                           ¸
                                                                  1 P            ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                       I(b
                             Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                          P                               
                                                                                         ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

4. Case IV. Own 0 , own  , draw  ∼ 0 () where 0 (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample
   0 and  ∈
             0 , set  = 0. This replaces the true  for those in group  (e.g., males) with a draw from the
   empirical distribution in group 0 (e.g., females).

            e  ∼ 0 (b
   (a) Draw                        0 ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.
                       ), where  ∈

   (b) Compute
                                                   b =              b+
                                                          bb−1 +   e           = 1  

        where b0 = 0 .

    (c) Compute                                                        ∙P                                       ¸
                                               ∗                1 P                ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                 I(b
                                 Pr(   |0       ≥ 0 ) =                      P                            
                                                                                       I(0 ≥ 0 )

   (d) Compute                                                           ∙P                                           ¸
                                        ∗                      1 P               ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                       I(b
                             Pr(   |0   ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                          P                               
                                                                                         ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

5. Case V. Own 0 , own  , own  , set  = 0, set  = 0. This eliminates heterogeneity due to time invariant
   and time-varying unobserved factors.

   (a) Compute
                                            b () =              b + b
                                                       bb−1 +                    = 1  

        where b0 = 0 .

   (b) Compute                                                        P
                                                                                  ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                             I(b
                                        Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0 ) =            P                        
                                                                                   I(0 ≥ 0 )

    (c) Compute                                                         P
                                                   ∗                         ∈ I(b
                                                                                          ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                   Pr(   |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                  P                           
                                                                                       ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

6. Case VI. Own 0 , own  , draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  , set   = 0, set
    = 0. This eliminates heterogeneity due to time invariant and time-varying unobserved factors and breaks
   the correlation between  and .

            e () ∼  (),  = 1  , where  is the number of simulations.
   (a) Draw 

   (b) Compute
                                         b () = 
                                                    bb−1 () +   e ()b
                                                                      b+                   = 1  

        where b0 () = 0 ∀.

    (c) Compute                                                        ∙P                                       ¸
                                               ∗                1 P                ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                 I(b
                                 Pr(   |0       ≥ 0 ) =                      P                            
                                                                                       I(0 ≥ 0 )



                                                                28
   (d) Compute                                                     ∙P                                         ¸
                                                             1 P         ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                               I(b
                         Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                      P                               
                                                                                 ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

7. Case VII. Own 0 , own  , draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample
    and  ∈ , set  = 0, set  = 0. This eliminates heterogeneity due to time invariant and time-varying
   unobserved factors and only partially breaks the correlation between  and  as it retains any correlation
   between  and  common to group .

             e () ∼  (), where  ∈ ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.
    (a) Draw 

   (b) Compute
                                      b () = 
                                                 bb−1 () +   e ()b
                                                                   b+              = 1  

        where b0 () = 0 ∀.

    (c) Compute                                                 ∙P                                      ¸
                                           ∗             1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                         I(b
                              Pr(   |0   ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                               I(0 ≥ 0 )

   (d) Compute                                                     ∙P                                         ¸
                                     ∗                     1 P           ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                               I(b
                         Pr(   |0   ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                      P                               
                                                                                 ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

8. Case VIII. Own 0 , own  , draw  ∼ 0 () where 0 (·) is the empirical distribution of  in sub-sample
   0 and  ∈
             , set   = 0, set  = 0. This replaces the true  for those in group  (e.g., males) with a draw
   from the empirical distribution in group 0 (e.g., females).and eliminates heterogeneity due to time invariant
   and time-varying unobserved factors.

             e () ∼ 0 (), where  ∈
    (a) Draw                           ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.

   (b) Compute
                                      b () = 
                                                 bb−1 () +   e ()b
                                                                   b+              = 1  

        where b0 () = 0 ∀.

    (c) Compute                                                 ∙P                                      ¸
                                           ∗             1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                         I(b
                              Pr(   |0   ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                               I(0  0 )

   (d) Compute                                                     ∙P                                         ¸
                                     ∗                     1 P           ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                               I(b
                         Pr(   |0   ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                      P                               
                                                                                 ∈ I(0  0 )

9. Case IX. Own 0 , own  , own  , draw   ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of  , set  = 0.
   This breaks the correlation between ,  and  and eliminates heterogeneity due to time-varying unobserved
   factors.

    (a) Draw e
               () ∼  (b
                           ),  = 1  , where  is the number of simulations.




                                                          29
    (b) Compute
                                    b () =                  b + b
                                               bb−1 () +       +e
                                                                           ()         = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                  ∙P                                     ¸
                                                            1 P              ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                          I(b
                               Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0 ) =                    P                            
                                                                                I(0 ≥ 0 )

    (d) Compute                                                     ∙P                                         ¸
                                                              1 P         ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                I(b
                          Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                      P                               
                                                                                  ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

10. Case X. Own 0 , own  , own  , draw  ∼  () where  (·) is the empirical distribution of   in sub-
    sample  and  ∈ , set  = 0. This only partially breaks the correlation between ,  and  as it retains
    any correlation between ,  and  common to group  and eliminates heterogeneity due to time invariant
    and time-varying unobserved factors.

     (a) Draw e
               () ∼  (b
                            ), where  ∈ ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.

    (b) Compute
                                    b () =                  b + b
                                               bb−1 () +       +e
                                                                           ()         = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                  ∙P                                     ¸
                                            ∗             1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                          I(b
                               Pr(   |0   ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                                I(0 ≥ 0 )

    (d) Compute                                                     ∙P                                         ¸
                                     ∗                      1 P           ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                I(b
                          Pr(   |0   ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                      P                               
                                                                                  ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

11. Case XI. Own 0 , own  , own  , draw   ∼ 0 () where 0 (·) is the empirical distribution of  in
    sub-sample 0 and  ∈
                         , set  = 0. This replaces the true  for those in group  (e.g., males) with a draw
    from the empirical distribution in group 0 (e.g., females) and eliminates heterogeneity due to time invariant
    and time-varying unobserved factors.

     (a) Draw e
                () ∼ 0 (b
                              ), where  ∈
                                           ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.

    (b) Compute
                                    b () =                  b + b
                                               bb−1 () +       +e
                                                                           ()         = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                  ∙P                                     ¸
                                            ∗             1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                          I(b
                               Pr(   |0   ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                                I(0  0 )

    (d) Compute                                                     ∙P                                         ¸
                                     ∗                      1 P           ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                I(b
                          Pr(   |0   ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                      P                               
                                                                                  ∈ I(0  0 )




                                                            30
12. Case XII. Own 0 , replace  =  , own  , set  = 0. The eliminates heterogeneity due to time-varying
    factors.

     (a) Compute
                                                  b =             b+
                                                         bb−1 +   b             = 1  

         where b0 = 0 .

     (b) Compute                                                      P
                                                      ∗                          ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                             I(b
                                         Pr(   |0 ≥ 0 ) =              P                        
                                                                                   I(0 ≥ 0 )

     (c) Compute                                                         P
                                                  ∗                          ∈ I(b
                                                                                          ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                    Pr(   |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                 P                           
                                                                                       ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )
         where  denotes a specific sub-sample of the data (e.g., males).

13. Case XIII. Own 0 , draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1    , own
     , set  = 0. This breaks the correlation between  and  and eliminates heterogeneity due to time-varying
    unobserved factors.

              e· () ∼  (1    ),  = 1  , where  is the number of simulations.
     (a) Draw 

     (b) Compute
                                           b () = 
                                                      bb−1 () +       b +  
                                                                    e ()                 = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                      ∙P                                        ¸
                                                               1 P                  ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                 I(b
                                  Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0 ) =                        P                            
                                                                                       I(0 ≥ 0 )

     (d) Compute                                                         ∙P                                           ¸
                                                                  1 P            ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                       I(b
                              Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                         P                               
                                                                                         ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

14. Case XIV. Own 0 , draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1    in
    sub-sample  and  ∈ , own  , set  = 0. This only partially breaks the correlation between  and  as it
    retains any correlation between  and  common to group  and eliminates heterogeneity due to time-varying
    unobserved factors.

              e· () ∼  (1    ), where  ∈ ,  = 1  , where  is the number of simulations.
     (a) Draw 

     (b) Compute
                                           b () = 
                                                      bb−1 () +       b +  
                                                                    e ()                 = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                      ∙P                                        ¸
                                              ∗                1 P                 ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                 I(b
                                  Pr(   |0     ≥ 0 ) =                       P                            
                                                                                       I(0  0 )



                                                                31
     (d) Compute                                                        ∙P                                         ¸
                                                                1 P           ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                    I(b
                           Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                         P                               
                                                                                      ∈ I(0  0 )

15. Case XV. Own 0 , draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution of 1    in
    sub-sample  and  ∈ , own  , set  = 0. This replaces the true · for those in group  (e.g., males)
    with a draw from the empirical distribution in group 0 (e.g., females) and eliminates heterogeneity due to
    time-varying unobserved factors.

                                                      0 ,  = 1  , where  is the number of simulations.
              e· () ∼ 0 (1    ), where  ∈
     (a) Draw 

     (b) Compute
                                          b () = 
                                                     bb−1 () +       b +  
                                                                   e ()               = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                     ∙P                                      ¸
                                             ∗              1 P                 ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                              I(b
                                Pr(   |0    ≥ 0 ) =                       P                            
                                                                                    I(0  0 )

     (d) Compute                                                        ∙P                                         ¸
                                      ∗                       1 P             ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                    I(b
                           Pr(   |0    ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                        P                               
                                                                                      ∈ I(0  0 )

16. Case XVI. Own 0 , own  , own  , draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical distribution of · .
    This breaks the correlation between  and .

     (a) Draw e            1   b
              · () ∼  (b          ),  = 1  , where  is the number of simulations.

     (b) Compute
                                     b () =                  b+
                                                bb−1 () +   b + e
                                                                          ()            = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                     ∙P                                      ¸
                                             ∗              1 P                 ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                              I(b
                                Pr(   |0    ≥ 0 ) =                       P                            
                                                                                    I(0 ≥ 0 )

     (d) Compute                                                        ∙P                                         ¸
                                      ∗                       1 P             ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                    I(b
                           Pr(   |0    ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                        P                               
                                                                                      ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

17. Case XVII. Own 0 , own  , own  , draw · ∼  (1    ) where  (·) is the empirical distribution of
    · in sub-sample  and  ∈ . This only partially breaks the correlation between  and  as it retains any
    correlation between  and  common to group .

     (a) Draw e             1   b
              · () ∼  (b          ), where  ∈ ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.

     (b) Compute
                                     b () =                  b+
                                                bb−1 () +   b + e
                                                                          ()            = 1  

         where b0 () = 0 ∀.


                                                               32
     (c) Compute                                                     ∙P                                     ¸
                                                               1 P              ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                             I(b
                                  Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0 ) =                    P                            
                                                                                   I(0  0 )

     (d) Compute                                                       ∙P                                         ¸
                                         ∗                     1 P           ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                   I(b
                            Pr(   |0    ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                      P                               
                                                                                     ∈ I(0  0 )

18. Case XVIII. Own 0 , own  , own  , draw · ∼ 0 (1    ) where 0 (·) is the empirical distribution of
    · in sub-sample 0 and  ∈
                                . This replaces the true · for those in group  (e.g., males) with a draw from
    the empirical distribution in group 0 (e.g., females).

     (a) Draw e              1   b
              · () ∼ 0 (b          ), where  ∈
                                                      ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.

     (b) Compute
                                       b () =                  b+
                                                  bb−1 () +   b + e
                                                                            ()         = 1  

          where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                     ∙P                                     ¸
                                                               1 P              ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                             I(b
                                  Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0 ) =                    P                            
                                                                                   I(0 ≥ 0 )

     (d) Compute                                                       ∙P                                         ¸
                                         ∗                     1 P           ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                   I(b
                            Pr(   |0    ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                      P                               
                                                                                     ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

19. Case XIX. Own 0 , own  , draw ·  · ∼  (1     1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution
    of 1     1    . This breaks the correlation between  and , .

              e· () e
     (a) Draw         · () ∼  (1     b
                                                   1   b
                                                              ),  = 1  , where  is the number of simulations.

     (b) Compute
                                      b () = 
                                                 bb−1 () +       b+
                                                               e () b + e
                                                                              ()         = 1  

          where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                     ∙P                                     ¸
                                              ∗              1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                             I(b
                                  Pr(   |0   ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                                   I(0 ≥ 0 )

     (d) Compute                                                       ∙P                                         ¸
                                                                1 P          ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                   I(b
                            Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                       P                               
                                                                                     ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )

20. Case XX. Own 0 ,own  , draw ·  · ∼  (1     1    ) where  (·) is the empirical joint distribution
    of 1     1    in sub-sample  and  ∈ . This only partially breaks the correlation between  and ,
     as it retains any correlation between  and ,  common to group .

              e· () e
     (a) Draw         · () ∼  (1     b
                                                    1   b
                                                               ), where  ∈ ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.

     (b) Compute
                                      b () = 
                                                 bb−1 () +       b+
                                                               e () b + e
                                                                              ()         = 1  

          where b0 () = 0 ∀.

                                                               33
     (c) Compute                                                      ∙P                                     ¸
                                                               1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                              I(b
                                  Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                                    I(0  0 )

     (d) Compute                                                        ∙P                                         ¸
                                                                 1 P          ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                    I(b
                             Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                       P                               
                                                                                      ∈ I(0  0 )

21. Case XXI. Own 0 , own  , draw ·  · ∼  (1     1    ) where 0 (·) is the empirical joint distribution
    of 1     1    in sub-sample 0 and  ∈
                                                           . This replaces the true · and · for those in group  (e.g.,
    males) with a draw from the empirical distribution in group 0 (e.g., females).

              e· () e
     (a) Draw         · () ∼ 0 (1     b
                                                     1   b
                                                                ), where  ∈
                                                                              ,  = 1  and  is the number of simulations.

     (b) Compute
                                      b () = 
                                                 bb−1 () +       b+
                                                               e () b + e
                                                                              ()          = 1  

          where b0 () = 0 ∀.

     (c) Compute                                                      ∙P                                     ¸
                                                               1 P               ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                              I(b
                                  Pr(   ∗ |0 ≥ 0 ) =                     P                            
                                                                                    I(0 ≥ 0 )

     (d) Compute                                                        ∙P                                         ¸
                                         ∗                     1 P            ∈      ()   ∗ ) I(0  0 )
                                                                                    I(b
                             Pr(   |0   ≥ 0   ∈ ) =                       P                               
                                                                                      ∈ I(0 ≥ 0 )




                                                               34
Appendix B. Figures.




                       35
                                                                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                   15
  .4
  .3




                                                   10




                                                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                         1
  .2




                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                   5
  .1
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                         0
       -4   -2          0        2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2          -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1         0           1              2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                           Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                   Idiosyncratic Errors

             White                   Non-White                  White                Non-White                  White                      Non-White                 White                        Non-White




                                                                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                         1.5
  .4




                                                   10
                                                   8
  .3




                                                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                   6
  .2




                                                   4




                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                         .5
  .1




                                                   2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                         0
       -4   -2          0        2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2          -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1         0           1              2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                           Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                   Idiosyncratic Errors

                 Male                  Female                       Male               Female                       Male                     Female                      Male                       Female
                                                                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                         1.5
  .4




                                                   10
  .3




                                                   8




                                                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                   6
  .2




                                                   4




                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                         .5
  .1




                                                   2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                         0
       -4   -2          0        2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2          -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                           Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                      Idiosyncratic Errors

             Urban                   Non-Urban                  Urban                Non-Urban                  Urban                      Non-Urban                 Urban                        Non-Urban
                                                                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                   15
  .4
  .3




                                                   10




                                                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                         1
  .2




                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                   5
  .1
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                         0




       -4   -2          0        2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2          -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                           Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                      Idiosyncratic Errors

            College                  Non-College               College               Non-College               College                     Non-College              College                       Non-College
                                                                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                   15
  .4
  .3




                                                   10




                                                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                         1
  .2




                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                   5
  .1
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                         0




       -4   -2          0        2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2          -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                           Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                      Idiosyncratic Errors

             Low SES                  High SES                 Low SES                High SES                 Low SES                      High SES                 Low SES                       High SES



Figure B1. Weight: Decomposition.
Notes: Data from ECLS-K. Empirical distributions of the outcome, yit, and the various estimated components of the dynamic model
yit = γyit-1 + Xitβ + αi + εit. Data from ECLS-K. See text for further details.
   1.5




                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                          8
                                                          6
   1




                                                                                                                 1
                                                          4
   .5




                                                                                                                 .5
                                                          2
   0




                                                          0




                                                                                                                 0
         -1   -.5           0         .5              1       0   .1             .2      .3   .4            .5         -1   -.5          0         .5              1
                      Fixed Effects                                               Observed                                           Unobserved
                White                      Non-White                    White                 Non-White                       White                     Non-White
   1.5




                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                          8
                                                          6
   1




                                                                                                                 1
                                                          4
   .5




                                                                                                                 .5
                                                          2
   0




                                                          0




                                                                                                                 0
         -1   -.5           0         .5              1       0   .1             .2      .3   .4            .5         -1   -.5           0        .5              1
                      Fixed Effects                                               Observed                                            Unobserved
                    Male                     Female                      Male                      Female                         Male                    Female
   1.5




                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                          8
                                                          6
   1




                                                                                                                 1
                                                          4
   .5




                                                                                                                 .5
                                                          2
   0




                                                          0




                                                                                                                 0




         -1   -.5           0         .5              1       0   .1             .2      .3   .4            .5         -1   -.5          0         .5              1
                      Fixed Effects                                               Observed                                           Unobserved
                Urban                      Non-Urban                   Urban                  Non-Urban                       Urban                     Non-Urban
   1.5




                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                          8
                                                          6
   1




                                                                                                                 1
                                                          4
   .5




                                                                                                                 .5
                                                          2
   0




                                                          0




                                                                                                                 0




         -1   -.5           0         .5              1       0   .1            .2      .3    .4            .5         -1   -.5          0         .5              1
                      Fixed Effects                                              Observed                                            Unobserved
               College                     Non-College                 College                Non-College                    College                    Non-College
   1.5




                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                          8
                                                          6
   1




                                                                                                                 1
                                                          4
   .5




                                                                                                                 .5
                                                          2
   0




                                                          0




                                                                                                                 0




         -1   -.5           0         .5              1       0   .1            .2      .3    .4            .5         -1   -.5          0         .5              1
                      Fixed Effects                                              Observed                                            Unobserved
               Low SES                       High SES                  Low SES                     High SES                  Low SES                      High SES


Figure B2. Weight: Decomposition of Fixed Effects.
Notes: Data from ECLS-K. Empirical distributions of the estimated fixed effects, αit, and its components obtained from the dynamic
model yit = γyit-1 + Xitβ + αi + εit, where αi = wiδ + ηi. See text for further details.
                                                                                                                                                       1.5
  .4




                                                                                                  1
                                                   8




                                                                                                  .8
  .3




                                                   6




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                  .6
  .2




                                                   4




                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                       .5
  .1




                                                   2




                                                                                                  .2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                       0
       -4   -2          0        2           4         -.4   -.2          0    .2           .4         -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1         0           1              2
                 Height Z-Scores                                          Xb                                        Fixed Effects                                   Idiosyncratic Errors

             White                   Non-White                 White                Non-White                 White                      Non-White                 White                        Non-White




                                                                                                                                                       1.5
  .4




                                                   8




                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                  .8
  .3




                                                   6




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                  .6
  .2




                                                   4




                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                       .5
  .1




                                                   2




                                                                                                  .2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                       0
       -4   -2          0        2           4         -.4   -.2          0    .2           .4         -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1         0           1              2
                 Height Z-Scores                                          Xb                                        Fixed Effects                                   Idiosyncratic Errors

                 Male                  Female                      Male               Female                      Male                     Female                      Male                       Female




                                                                                                                                                       1.5
  .4




                                                   8




                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                  .8
  .3




                                                   6




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                  .6
  .2




                                                   4




                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                       .5
  .1




                                                   2




                                                                                                  .2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                       0
       -4   -2          0        2           4         -.4   -.2          0    .2           .4         -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Height Z-Scores                                          Xb                                        Fixed Effects                                      Idiosyncratic Errors

             Urban                   Non-Urban                 Urban                Non-Urban                 Urban                      Non-Urban                 Urban                        Non-Urban
                                                                                                                                                       1.5
  .4




                                                                                                  1
                                                   8




                                                                                                  .8
  .3




                                                   6




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                  .6
  .2




                                                   4




                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                       .5
  .1




                                                   2




                                                                                                  .2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                       0




       -4   -2          0        2           4         -.4   -.2          0    .2           .4         -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Height Z-Scores                                          Xb                                        Fixed Effects                                      Idiosyncratic Errors

            College                  Non-College              College               Non-College              College                     Non-College              College                       Non-College
                                                                                                                                                       1.5
  .4




                                                   8




                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                  .8
  .3




                                                   6




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                  .6
  .2




                                                   4




                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                       .5
  .1




                                                   2




                                                                                                  .2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                       0




       -4   -2          0        2           4         -.4   -.2          0    .2           .4         -1   -.5           0         .5           1           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Height Z-Scores                                          Xb                                        Fixed Effects                                      Idiosyncratic Errors

             Low SES                  High SES                Low SES                High SES                Low SES                      High SES                 Low SES                       High SES



Figure B3. Height: Decomposition.
Notes: See Figure B1 and text for details.
   1




                                                         6




                                                                                                        1
   .8




                                                                                                        .8
                                                         4
   .6




                                                                                                        .6
   .4




                                                                                                        .4
                                                         2
   .2




                                                                                                        .2
   0




                                                         0




                                                                                                        0
        -1   -.5           0         .5              1       -.5                0                  .5        -1   -.5          0         .5              1
                     Fixed Effects                                           Observed                                      Unobserved
               White                      Non-White                 White               Non-White                   White                     Non-White




                                                                                                        1
                                                         5
   1




                                                                                                        .8
   .8




                                                         4




                                                                                                        .6
   .6




                                                         3




                                                                                                        .4
   .4




                                                         2




                                                                                                        .2
   .2




                                                         1
   0




                                                         0




                                                                                                        0
        -1   -.5           0         .5              1       -.5                0                  .5        -1   -.5           0        .5              1
                     Fixed Effects                                           Observed                                       Unobserved
                   Male                     Female                   Male                 Female                        Male                    Female
   1




                                                         5




                                                                                                        1
   .8




                                                         4




                                                                                                        .8
   .6




                                                                                                        .6
                                                         3
   .4




                                                                                                        .4
                                                         2
   .2




                                                                                                        .2
                                                         1
   0




                                                         0




                                                                                                        0



        -1   -.5           0         .5              1       -.5                0                  .5        -1   -.5          0         .5              1
                     Fixed Effects                                           Observed                                      Unobserved
               Urban                      Non-Urban                Urban                Non-Urban                   Urban                     Non-Urban
   1




                                                         5




                                                                                                        1
   .8




                                                         4




                                                                                                        .8
   .6




                                                         3




                                                                                                        .6
   .4




                                                         2




                                                                                                        .4
   .2




                                                                                                        .2
                                                         1
   0




                                                         0




                                                                                                        0




        -1   -.5           0         .5              1       -.5                0                  .5        -1   -.5          0         .5              1
                     Fixed Effects                                           Observed                                      Unobserved
              College                     Non-College              College              Non-College                College                    Non-College
   1




                                                                                                        1
                                                         5
   .8




                                                                                                        .8
                                                         4
   .6




                                                                                                        .6
                                                         3
   .4




                                                                                                        .4
                                                         2
   .2




                                                                                                        .2
                                                         1
   0




                                                         0




                                                                                                        0




        -1   -.5           0         .5              1       -.5                0                  .5        -1   -.5          0         .5              1
                     Fixed Effects                                           Observed                                      Unobserved
              Low SES                       High SES               Low SES                High SES                 Low SES                      High SES



Figure B4. Height: Decomposition of Fixed Effects.
Notes: See Figure B2 and text for details.
                                                                                                                                                 1.5
  .4




                                                                                                    .5
                                                    10




                                                                                                    .4
                                                    8
  .3




                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                    .3
                                                    6
  .2




                                                                                                    .2
                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                 .5
  .1




                                                                                                    .1
                                                    2
  0




                                                    0




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                 0
       -4   -2          0         2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2         -2             0              2               -2   -1         0           1              2
                   BMI Z-Scores                                             Xb                                    Fixed Effects                               Idiosyncratic Errors

             White                    Non-White                  White                Non-White               White                Non-White                 White                        Non-White




                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                    10
  .4




                                                                                                    .5
                                                                                                    .4
                                                    8
  .3




                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                    .3
                                                    6
  .2




                                                                                                    .2
                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                 .5
  .1




                                                                                                    .1
                                                    2
  0




                                                    0




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                 0
       -4   -2          0         2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2         -2              0             2               -2   -1         0           1              2
                   BMI Z-Scores                                             Xb                                     Fixed Effects                              Idiosyncratic Errors

                 Male                   Female                       Male               Female                  Male                 Female                      Male                       Female




                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                    10
  .4




                                                                                                    .5
                                                                                                    .4
                                                    8
  .3




                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                    .3
                                                    6
  .2




                                                                                                    .2
                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                 .5
  .1




                                                                                                    .1
                                                    2
  0




                                                    0




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                 0
       -4   -2          0         2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2         -2             0              2               -2   -1            0           1           2
                   BMI Z-Scores                                             Xb                                    Fixed Effects                                  Idiosyncratic Errors

             Urban                    Non-Urban                  Urban                Non-Urban               Urban                Non-Urban                 Urban                        Non-Urban
                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                    .6
  .4




                                                    10
  .3




                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                 1
  .2




                                                    5




                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                 .5
  .1
  0




                                                    0




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                 0




       -4   -2         0          2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2         -2             0              2               -2   -1            0           1           2
                  BMI Z-Scores                                              Xb                                    Fixed Effects                                  Idiosyncratic Errors

            College                   Non-College               College               Non-College             College              Non-College              College                       Non-College
                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                    10
  .4




                                                                                                    .5
                                                                                                    .4
                                                    8
  .3




                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                    .3
                                                    6
  .2




                                                                                                    .2
                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                 .5
  .1




                                                                                                    .1
                                                    2
  0




                                                    0




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                 0




       -4   -2         0          2           4          -.2   -.1          0    .1           .2         -2             0              2               -2   -1            0           1           2
                  BMI Z-Scores                                              Xb                                    Fixed Effects                                  Idiosyncratic Errors

             Low SES                   High SES                 Low SES                High SES               Low SES               High SES                 Low SES                       High SES



Figure B5. BMI: Decomposition.
Notes: See Figure B1 and text for details.
                                                 2.5




                                                                                                     .6
   .5




                                                 2
   .4




                                                                                                     .4
                                                 1.5
   .3
   .2




                                                 1




                                                                                                     .2
                                                 .5
   .1
   0




                                                 0




                                                                                                     0
        -2               0              2              0      .5                1              1.5        -2             0                2
                   Fixed Effects                                     Observed                                        Unobserved
               White               Non-White                White                   Non-White                   White                Non-White
   .5




                                                 2




                                                                                                     .5
   .4




                                                 1.5




                                                                                                     .4
   .3




                                                                                                     .3
                                                 1
   .2




                                                                                                     .2
                                                 .5
   .1




                                                                                                     .1
   0




                                                 0




                                                                                                     0
         -2              0              2              0      .5                1              1.5        -2                0             2
                   Fixed Effects                                     Observed                                           Unobserved
                Male                 Female                  Male                     Female                     Male                  Female
   .5




                                                 2




                                                                                                     .5
   .4




                                                                                                     .4
                                                 1.5
   .3




                                                                                                     .3
                                                 1
   .2




                                                                                                     .2
                                                 .5
   .1




                                                                                                     .1
   0




                                                 0




                                                                                                     0




        -2               0              2              0      .5                1              1.5        -2             0                2
                   Fixed Effects                                     Observed                                        Unobserved
              Urban                Non-Urban               Urban                    Non-Urban                  Urban                 Non-Urban
   .6




                                                                                                     .6
                                                 3
   .4




                                                                                                     .4
                                                 2
   .2




                                                                                                     .2
                                                 1
   0




                                                 0




                                                                                                     0




        -2               0              2              0      .5                1              1.5        -2             0                2
                   Fixed Effects                                     Observed                                        Unobserved
              College              Non-College             College                  Non-College                College               Non-College
                                                 2.5
   .5




                                                                                                     .5
   .4




                                                 2




                                                                                                     .4
                                                 1.5
   .3




                                                                                                     .3
   .2




                                                 1




                                                                                                     .2
   .1




                                                 .5




                                                                                                     .1
   0




                                                 0




                                                                                                     0




        -2               0              2              0      .5                1              1.5        -2             0                2
                   Fixed Effects                                     Observed                                        Unobserved
              Low SES                High SES              Low SES                    High SES                 Low SES                 High SES


Figure B6. BMI: Decomposition of Fixed Effects.
Notes: See Figure B2 and text for details.
  .4




                                                                                                           .5
                                                   2




                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                           .4
                                                   1.5
  .3




                                                                                                           .3
  .2




                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                                                                           .2
  .1




                                                   .5




                                                                                                           .1
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                              0
       -4   -2          0        2           4           -.5   0           .5         1   1.5         2         -4   -2           0         2           4           -2   -1         0           1              2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                                 Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                  Idiosyncratic Errors

             White                   Non-White                     White                    Non-White                 White                     Non-White                 White                        Non-White
                                                   1.5
  .4




                                                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                           .4
  .3




                                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                   1




                                                                                                           .3




                                                                                                                                                              .6
  .2




                                                                                                           .2




                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                   .5
  .1




                                                                                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                              .2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                              0
       -4   -2          0        2           4           -.5   0            .5        1   1.5         2         -4   -2           0         2           4           -2   -1         0           1              2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                                 Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                  Idiosyncratic Errors

                 Male                  Female                        Male                       Female                    Male                    Female                      Male                       Female
                                                   1.5
  .4




                                                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                           .4
  .3




                                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                   1




                                                                                                           .3




                                                                                                                                                              .6
  .2




                                                                                                           .2




                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                   .5
  .1




                                                                                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                              .2
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                              0
       -4   -2          0        2           4           -.5   0           .5         1   1.5         2         -4   -2           0         2           4           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                                 Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                     Idiosyncratic Errors

             Urban                   Non-Urban                     Urban                   Non-Urban                  Urban                     Non-Urban                 Urban                        Non-Urban
                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                              1.5
  .4




                                                                                                           .5
                                                                                                           .4
  .3




                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                           .3
  .2




                                                                                                           .2
                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                              .5
  .1




                                                                                                           .1
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                              0




       -4   -2          0        2           4           -.5   0         .5           1   1.5         2         -4   -2           0         2           4           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                                 Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                     Idiosyncratic Errors

            College                  Non-College                   College                 Non-College               College                    Non-College              College                       Non-College
                                                   1.5
  .4




                                                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                           .4
  .3




                                                   1




                                                                                                           .3
  .2




                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                                                                           .2
                                                   .5
  .1




                                                                                                           .1
  0




                                                   0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                              0




       -4   -2          0        2           4           -.5   0         .5           1   1.5         2         -4   -2           0         2           4           -2   -1            0           1           2
                 Weight Z-Scores                                                 Xb                                         Fixed Effects                                     Idiosyncratic Errors

             Low SES                  High SES                     Low SES                      High SES              Low SES                    High SES                 Low SES                       High SES



Figure B7. Weight: Decomposition.
Notes: Data from ECLS-B. Empirical distributions of the outcome, yit, and the various estimated components of the dynamic model
yit = γyit-1 + Xitβ + αi + εit. See text for further details.
   .5




                                                                                                                   .5
                                                        1
   .4




                                                                                                                   .4
                                                        .8
   .3




                                                                                                                   .3
                                                        .6
   .2




                                                                                                                   .2
                                                        .4
   .1




                                                                                                                   .1
                                                        .2
   0




                                                        0




                                                                                                                   0
        -4    -2           0         2              4        -2   -1.5            -1      -.5    0            .5        -4   -2          0        2              4
                     Fixed Effects                                                 Observed                                          Unobserved
                White                    Non-White                        White                  Non-White                    White                   Non-White
   .5




                                                                                                                   .5
                                                        1
   .4




                                                                                                                   .4
                                                        .8
   .3




                                                                                                                   .3
                                                        .6
   .2




                                                                                                                   .2
                                                        .4
   .1




                                                                                                                   .1
                                                        .2
   0




                                                        0




                                                                                                                   0
        -4    -2           0         2              4        -2   -1.5             -1      -.5   0            .5        -4   -2          0        2              4
                     Fixed Effects                                                  Observed                                         Unobserved
                   Male                    Female                          Male                      Female                       Male                  Female
   .5




                                                                                                                   .5
                                                        1
   .4




                                                                                                                   .4
                                                        .8
   .3




                                                                                                                   .3
                                                        .6
   .2




                                                                                                                   .2
                                                        .4
   .1




                                                                                                                   .1
                                                        .2
   0




                                                        0




                                                                                                                   0




        -4    -2           0         2              4        -2   -1.5            -1      -.5    0            .5        -4   -2          0        2              4
                     Fixed Effects                                                 Observed                                          Unobserved
               Urban                     Non-Urban                       Urban                   Non-Urban                    Urban                   Non-Urban
   .5




                                                                                                                   .5
                                                        1
   .4




                                                                                                                   .4
                                                        .8
   .3




                                                                                                                   .3
                                                        .6
   .2




                                                                                                                   .2
                                                        .4
   .1




                                                                                                                   .1
                                                        .2
   0




                                                        0




                                                                                                                   0




        -4    -2           0         2              4        -2   -1.5            -1      -.5    0            .5        -4   -2         0         2              4
                     Fixed Effects                                                 Observed                                         Unobserved
               College                   Non-College                     College                 Non-College                 College                  Non-College
   .5




                                                                                                                   .5
                                                        1
   .4




                                                                                                                   .4
                                                        .8
   .3




                                                                                                                   .3
                                                        .6
   .2




                                                                                                                   .2
                                                        .4
   .1




                                                                                                                   .1
                                                        .2
   0




                                                        0




                                                                                                                   0




        -4    -2           0         2              4        -2   -1.5            -1      -.5    0            .5        -4   -2          0        2              4
                     Fixed Effects                                                 Observed                                          Unobserved
               Low SES                     High SES                      Low SES                     High SES                 Low SES                   High SES


Figure B8. Weight: Decomposition of Fixed Effects.
Notes: Data from ECLS-B. Empirical distributions of the estimated fixed effects, αit, and its components obtained from the dynamic
model yit = γyit-1 + Xitβ + αi + εit, where αi = wiδ + ηi. See text for further details.
  .03




                                                                                                          .1
                                                      .04




                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                                                                          .08




                                                                                                                                                        .25
                                                      .03
  .02




                                                                                                          .06




                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                      .02




                                                                                                          .04
  .01




                                                                                                                                                        .15
                                                      .01




                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                        .1
  0




                                                      0




                                                                                                          0
        40   60        80       100   120       140         0   10        20         30   40        50          60     70           80           90           -2   -1         0           1              2
                       Height (cms)                                             Xb                                      Fixed Effects                                Idiosyncratic Errors

                  White                 Non-White                    White                 Non-White                 White                Non-White                 White                        Non-White
  .03




                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                      .04




                                                                                                          .08




                                                                                                                                                        .25
                                                      .03
  .02




                                                                                                          .06




                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                      .02




                                                                                                          .04
  .01




                                                                                                                                                        .15
                                                      .01




                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                        .1
  0




                                                      0




                                                                                                          0
        40   60         80      100   120       140         0   10         20        30   40        50          60      70           80          90           -2   -1         0           1              2
                       Height (cms)                                             Xb                                       Fixed Effects                               Idiosyncratic Errors

                    Male                    Female                     Male                    Female                  Male                 Female                      Male                       Female
  .03




                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                      .04




                                                                                                          .08




                                                                                                                                                        .25
                                                      .03
  .02




                                                                                                          .06




                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                      .02




                                                                                                          .04
  .01




                                                                                                                                                        .15
                                                      .01




                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                        .1
  0




                                                      0




                                                                                                          0




        40   60        80       100   120       140         0   10        20         30   40        50          60     70           80           90           -2   -1            0           1           2
                       Height (cms)                                             Xb                                      Fixed Effects                                   Idiosyncratic Errors

                  Urban                Non-Urban                     Urban                 Non-Urban                 Urban                Non-Urban                 Urban                        Non-Urban
  .03




                                                                                                          .1
                                                      .04




                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                                                                          .08




                                                                                                                                                        .25
                                                      .03
  .02




                                                                                                          .06




                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                      .02




                                                                                                          .04
  .01




                                                                                                                                                        .15
                                                      .01




                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                        .1
  0




                                                      0




                                                                                                          0




        40   60       80       100    120       140         0   10        20         30   40        50          60     70           80           90           -2   -1            0           1           2
                      Height (cms)                                              Xb                                      Fixed Effects                                   Idiosyncratic Errors

                  College              Non-College                   College              Non-College                College              Non-College              College                       Non-College
  .03




                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                      .04




                                                                                                          .08




                                                                                                                                                        .25
                                                      .03
  .02




                                                                                                          .06




                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                      .02




                                                                                                          .04
  .01




                                                                                                                                                        .15
                                                      .01




                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                        .1
  0




                                                      0




                                                                                                          0




        40   60       80       100    120       140         0   10        20         30   40        50          60     70           80           90           -2   -1            0           1           2
                      Height (cms)                                              Xb                                      Fixed Effects                                   Idiosyncratic Errors

                  Low SES               High SES                     Low SES                   High SES              Low SES               High SES                 Low SES                       High SES



Figure B9. Height: Decomposition.
Notes: See Figure B7 and text for details.
   .1




                                                     .2




                                                                                                               .1
   .08




                                                     .15
   .06




                                                     .1




                                                                                                               .05
   .04




                                                     .05
   .02
   0




                                                     0




                                                                                                               0
         60      70             80              90         70   72            74      76   78            80                     -10   -5          0        5              10
                   Fixed Effects                                               Observed                                                       Unobserved
               White                 Non-White                        White                Non-White                                   White                   Non-White
   .1




                                                     .2




                                                                                                                .1
   .08




                                                                                                                .04 .06 .08
                                                     .15
   .06




                                                     .1
   .04




                                                     .05
   .02




                                                                                                                .02
   0




                                                     0




                                                                                                                0
         60      70             80              90         70   72            74      76   78            80                     -10   -5          0        5              10
                   Fixed Effects                                               Observed                                                       Unobserved
                Male                   Female                          Male                     Female                                     Male                  Female
   .1




                                                     .2




                                                                                                               .1
   .08




                                                     .15




                                                                                                               .08
   .06




                                                                                                               .06
                                                     .1
   .04




                                                                                                               .04
                                                     .05
   .02




                                                                                                               .02
   0




                                                     0




                                                                                                               0



         60      70             80              90         70   72            74      76   78            80                     -10   -5          0        5              10
                   Fixed Effects                                               Observed                                                       Unobserved
              Urban                  Non-Urban                       Urban                 Non-Urban                                   Urban                   Non-Urban
   .1




                                                     .2




                                                                                                              .1
   .08




                                                     .15
   .06




                                                     .1




                                                                                                              .05
   .04




                                                     .05
   .02
   0




                                                     0




                                                                                                              0




         60     70             80               90         70   72         74      76      78            80                     -10   -5         0         5              10
                  Fixed Effects                                             Observed                                                         Unobserved
              College                Non-College                     College               Non-College                                College                  Non-College
   .1




                                                     .2




                                                                                                              .1
   .08




                                                                                                              .02 .04 .06 .08
                                                     .15
   .06




                                                     .1
   .04




                                                     .05
   .02
   0




                                                     0




                                                                                                              0




         60     70             80               90         70   72           74      76    78            80                     -10   -5          0        5              10
                  Fixed Effects                                               Observed                                                        Unobserved
              Low SES                  High SES                      Low SES                 High SES                                  Low SES                   High SES



Figure B10. Height: Decomposition of Fixed Effects.
Notes: See Figure B8 and text for details.
Table 1. Dynamic Panel Data Estimates: Weight Z-Scores.


                                  Full Sample                                          Race                                                        Gender
                                                                      White                         Non-White                        Male                           Female
Lag Weight              0.931*      0.932*      0.775*    0.932*      0.932*    0.686*    0.929*     0.931*     0.895*    0.948*    0.951*    0.276*     0.914*     0.910*     1.732*
                        (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.067)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.080)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.116)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.056)    (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.219)


Time-Varying              No         Yes         Yes        No         Yes       Yes          No       Yes        Yes       No       Yes        Yes        No         Yes       Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant            No         Yes          No        No         Yes        No          No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No         No         Yes        No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects             No          No         Yes        No         No        Yes          No       No         Yes       No        No        Yes        No         No        Yes
Observations             27470       27470      27470      16900      16900     16900      10570      10570      10570     13880    13880      13880      13580      13580     13580
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity            p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.186 p = 0.050 p = 0.000 p = 0.113 p = 0.007 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat     88146.9 84006.9          269.0     49635.2 48281.7       172.4     37871.6 35837.8        101.4    37300.4 36297.2      195.2    55116.6 51193.2         80.0


                                                 Urban Status                                                  Mother's Education                                                SES Status
                                    Urban                           Non-Urban                  Less Than College                    College                        Low SES                         High SES
Lag Weight              0.929*      0.930*      0.896*    0.933*      0.932*    0.708*    0.931*     0.932*     0.743*    0.930*    0.930*    0.887*     0.929*     0.934*     0.807*     0.931*    0.931*     0.778*
                        (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.116)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.082)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.077)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.146)    (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.135)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.077)


Time-Varying              No         Yes         Yes        No         Yes       Yes          No       Yes        Yes       No       Yes        Yes        No         Yes       Yes         No        Yes        Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant            No         Yes          No        No         Yes        No          No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No         No         Yes        No         No        Yes        No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects             No          No         Yes        No         No        Yes          No       No         Yes       No        No        Yes        No         No        Yes         No        No         Yes
Observations             10010       10010      10010      17460      17460     17460      20250      20250      20250     7210      7210       7210      8340       8340       8340      19120      19120      19120
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity            p = 0.060 p = 0.006 p = 0.000 p = 0.003 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.002 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.005 p = 0.001 p = 0.000 p = 0.102 p = 0.036 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat     33299.8 31697.0          103.1     54867.6 52628.1       167.7     65410.2 62000.1        186.1    23916.2 22706.4       78.0    28392.3 26903.2         65.3     59580.3 57058.5        212.0

Notes: ‡ p<0.10, † p<0.05, * p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Estimation by GMM. Excluded instrument is the dependent variable twice-lagged. Sample sizes rounded to the nearest 10 per NCES restricted
data regulations. Sample includes data from fall kindergarten, spring first, spring third, spring fifth grades, and spring eighth grade. See text for the list of covariates and further details.
Table 2. Dynamic Simulations: Weight Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≥85th percentile).
                    Full                  Race                         Gender                  Urban Status                   Education                        SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White         Male         Female         Urban       Non-Urban Non-College          College       Low SES       High SES
Benchmark           0.840         0.823          0.861         0.846          0.833          0.840         0.840          0.870         0.748          0.880         0.820


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.753         0.681          0.846         0.765          0.739          0.776         0.740          0.800         0.609          0.868         0.695
 α~f(α)             0.576         0.555          0.604         0.581          0.570          0.586         0.570          0.588         0.540          0.609         0.559
 α~fi(α)                          0.552          0.608         0.597          0.555          0.565         0.584          0.607         0.484          0.637         0.547
 α~f-i(α)                         0.562          0.602         0.567          0.586          0.599         0.551          0.537         0.561          0.597         0.593


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.727         0.642          0.837         0.800          0.645          0.714         0.734          0.829         0.418          0.894         0.643
 W~f(W)             0.703         0.649          0.775         0.710          0.696          0.729         0.689          0.736         0.604          0.786         0.662
 W~fi(W)                          0.632          0.789         0.778          0.622          0.672         0.724          0.802         0.394          0.870         0.614
 W~f-i(W)                         0.676          0.765         0.640          0.767          0.759         0.631          0.550         0.678          0.748         0.769


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.591         0.563          0.628         0.616          0.563          0.582         0.596          0.622         0.497          0.652         0.561
 η~fi(η)                          0.566          0.620         0.608          0.569          0.580         0.596          0.617         0.500          0.642         0.562
 η~f-i(η)                         0.558          0.632         0.625          0.557          0.582         0.593          0.635         0.496          0.653         0.557


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.844         0.834          0.858         0.850          0.838          0.837         0.848          0.867         0.777          0.867         0.833
 X~f(X)             0.849         0.841          0.860         0.855          0.843          0.841         0.854          0.871         0.783          0.870         0.839
 X~fi(X)                          0.834          0.868         0.854          0.844          0.844         0.852          0.873         0.771          0.877         0.834
 X~f-i(X)                         0.852          0.856         0.856          0.843          0.839         0.857          0.864         0.788          0.866         0.852


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.846         0.830          0.868         0.854          0.838          0.842         0.849          0.873         0.766          0.880         0.830
 ε~fi(ε)                          0.831          0.866         0.852          0.841          0.844         0.848          0.873         0.766          0.881         0.829
 ε~f-i(ε)                         0.829          0.868         0.857          0.834          0.840         0.852          0.873         0.765          0.880         0.832


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.843         0.835          0.854         0.851          0.835          0.833         0.849          0.866         0.775          0.863         0.833
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                      0.829          0.862         0.848          0.840          0.839         0.846          0.869         0.761          0.873         0.827
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                     0.845          0.849         0.854          0.831          0.830         0.855          0.859         0.779          0.860         0.848


Notes: Benchmark case denotes the observed probability in the sample. Simulations - based on 500 draws - are obtained after estimating the dynamic model yit = αi + γyit-1 +
Xitβ + εit, where αi = wiδ + ηi. f(∙) denotes the empirical distribution of the argument. Sample includes data from fall kindergarten, spring first, spring third, spring fifth
grades, and spring eighth grade. See text for the list of covariates and further details.
Table 3. Dynamic Simulations: Weight Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥95th percentile | yi1≥95th percentile).
                     Full                  Race                   Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample          White       Non-White   Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.762          0.732           0.795   0.807       0.710    0.791      0.746     0.790       0.646     0.799         0.740


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.134          0.093           0.180   0.171       0.091    0.150      0.125     0.151       0.067     0.183         0.105
 α~f(α)             0.396          0.376           0.418   0.404       0.387    0.408      0.390     0.370       0.403     0.420         0.382
 α~fi(α)                           0.368           0.431   0.434       0.356    0.386      0.403     0.300       0.428     0.461         0.364
 α~f-i(α)                          0.390           0.411   0.377       0.418    0.420      0.371     0.398       0.337     0.405         0.425


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.246          0.194           0.302   0.305       0.175    0.196      0.273     0.079       0.286     0.348         0.185
 W~f(W)             0.196          0.152           0.245   0.221       0.167    0.218      0.185     0.135       0.212     0.253         0.163
 W~fi(W)                           0.140           0.268   0.265       0.121    0.168      0.209     0.057       0.248     0.330         0.138
 W~f-i(W)                          0.172           0.231   0.177       0.211    0.244      0.142     0.161       0.109     0.222         0.220


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.418          0.397           0.441   0.443       0.388    0.406      0.425     0.332       0.439     0.464         0.391
 η~fi(η)                           0.395           0.443   0.444       0.384    0.408      0.426     0.318       0.441     0.467         0.388
 η~f-i(η)                          0.405           0.439   0.442       0.397    0.404      0.427     0.341       0.435     0.465         0.398


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.780          0.774           0.786   0.809       0.746    0.791      0.773     0.691       0.801     0.796         0.770
 X~f(X)             0.784          0.777           0.792   0.811       0.753    0.792      0.780     0.695       0.806     0.800         0.775
 X~fi(X)                           0.768           0.806   0.811       0.753    0.797      0.778     0.682       0.810     0.816         0.769
 X~f-i(X)                          0.792           0.784   0.813       0.751    0.788      0.786     0.700       0.795     0.793         0.791


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.786          0.763           0.811   0.813       0.754    0.806      0.775     0.678       0.812     0.820         0.766
 ε~fi(ε)                           0.765           0.809   0.811       0.759    0.811      0.773     0.679       0.812     0.822         0.766
 ε~f-i(ε)                          0.762           0.812   0.817       0.749    0.806      0.778     0.679       0.812     0.820         0.769


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.779          0.769           0.791   0.806       0.747    0.785      0.776     0.685       0.802     0.797         0.768
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                       0.762           0.804   0.803       0.755    0.794      0.772     0.669       0.808     0.816         0.760
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                      0.784           0.785   0.811       0.742    0.780      0.786     0.691       0.792     0.791         0.789


Notes: See Table 2 and text for further details.
Table 4. Dynamic Simulations: Weight Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≤50th percentile).
                     Full                  Race                   Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample          White       Non-White   Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.118          0.121           0.113   0.132       0.104    0.108      0.124     0.131       0.079     0.145         0.106


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 α~f(α)             0.213          0.209           0.220   0.213       0.214    0.218      0.210     0.209       0.215     0.224         0.208
 α~fi(α)                           0.198           0.238   0.244       0.182    0.205      0.218     0.146       0.238     0.264         0.192
 α~f-i(α)                          0.226           0.210   0.181       0.245    0.226      0.198     0.232       0.151     0.206         0.247


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.006          0.005           0.009   0.007       0.005    0.002      0.009     0.001       0.008     0.010         0.005
 W~f(W)             0.006          0.006           0.008   0.006       0.006    0.007      0.006     0.005       0.007     0.008         0.006
 W~fi(W)                           0.005           0.008   0.008       0.005    0.002      0.009     0.002       0.008     0.012         0.005
 W~f-i(W)                          0.006           0.007   0.005       0.008    0.010      0.002     0.007       0.002     0.007         0.008


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.209          0.204           0.216   0.225       0.193    0.198      0.215     0.166       0.223     0.240         0.195
 η~fi(η)                           0.197           0.228   0.240       0.176    0.201      0.214     0.145       0.231     0.256         0.188
 η~f-i(η)                          0.216           0.209   0.211       0.210    0.197      0.218     0.173       0.203     0.235         0.211


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.116          0.123           0.105   0.137       0.096    0.100      0.126     0.085       0.127     0.134         0.109
 X~f(X)             0.120          0.127           0.109   0.140       0.101    0.104      0.130     0.087       0.132     0.140         0.112
 X~fi(X)                           0.123           0.115   0.140       0.101    0.106      0.128     0.083       0.134     0.148         0.109
 X~f-i(X)                          0.135           0.106   0.141       0.101    0.103      0.133     0.088       0.125     0.136         0.119


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.121          0.125           0.116   0.140       0.103    0.109      0.129     0.080       0.135     0.149         0.109
 ε~fi(ε)                           0.126           0.115   0.139       0.105    0.110      0.128     0.079       0.136     0.151         0.109
 ε~f-i(ε)                          0.124           0.116   0.143       0.101    0.108      0.131     0.080       0.135     0.149         0.111


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.124          0.131           0.112   0.143       0.105    0.108      0.133     0.088       0.136     0.143         0.115
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                       0.127           0.117   0.140       0.107    0.111      0.130     0.082       0.138     0.153         0.111
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                      0.138           0.109   0.145       0.103    0.106      0.138     0.090       0.129     0.139         0.125


Notes: See Table 2 and text for further details.
Table 5. Dynamic Panel Data Estimates: Height Z-Scores.


                                Full Sample                                          Race                                                       Gender
                                                                    White                         Non-White                        Male                         Female
Lag Height            0.937*      0.936*      0.603*    0.938*      0.941*    0.553*    0.932*     0.932*     0.676*    0.951*    0.954*    0.460*    0.922*     0.918*   0.739*
                      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.048)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.057)   (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.082)   (0.004)   (0.005)   (0.055)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.079)


Time-Varying            No         Yes         Yes        No         Yes       Yes          No       Yes        Yes       No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes      Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant          No         Yes          No        No         Yes        No          No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes       No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects           No          No         Yes        No         No        Yes          No       No         Yes       No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes
Observations           27470       27470      27470      16900      16900     16900      10570      10570      10570     13880    13880     13880      13580     13580    13580
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity          p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat    68631.4 64548.2         673.1     42314.9 40485.2       388.5     26601.1 24081.3        284.7    34323.0 31415.4     326.6     34269.4 32561.6     339.9


                                               Urban Status                                                  Mother's Education                                             SES Status
                                  Urban                           Non-Urban                  Less Than College                    College                       Low SES                       High SES
Lag Height            0.923*      0.922*      0.646*    0.945*      0.945*    0.580*    0.936*     0.936*     0.659*    0.939*    0.939*    0.453*    0.932*     0.933*   0.705*    0.938*     0.939*    0.560*
                      (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.073)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.064)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.059)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.081)   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.096)   (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.054)


Time-Varying            No         Yes         Yes        No         Yes       Yes          No       Yes        Yes       No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes      Yes        No        Yes       Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant          No         Yes          No        No         Yes        No          No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes       No        No        Yes        No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects           No          No         Yes        No         No        Yes          No       No         Yes       No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No         No       Yes
Observations           10010       10010      10010      17460      17460     17460      20250      20250      20250     7210      7210      7210      8340      8340      8340      19120     19120     19120
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity          p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat    20304.1 19094.2         270.5     50866.0 47176.7       405.4     54613.3 51233.9        498.4    14521.0 13396.4     166.2     21762.4 20541.3     211.9     46682.7 44002.2      464.8


Notes: ‡ p<0.10, † p<0.05, * p<0.01. See Table 1 and text for further details.
Table 6. Dynamic Simulations: Height Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≥85th percentile).
                     Full                  Race                        Gender                   Urban Status                    Education                        SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White         Male          Female         Urban       Non-Urban Non-College           College       Low SES       High SES
Benchmark           0.606          0.635          0.559         0.665          0.545          0.592          0.614          0.587         0.653          0.515          0.642


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000
 α~f(α)             0.235          0.243          0.221         0.236          0.234          0.229          0.238          0.228         0.252          0.222          0.240
 α~fi(α)                           0.248          0.216         0.260          0.209          0.221          0.243          0.228         0.251          0.217          0.243
 α~f-i(α)                          0.237          0.223         0.210          0.259          0.236          0.228          0.228         0.250          0.222          0.234


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.006          0.006          0.008         0.010          0.002          0.008          0.005          0.004         0.012          0.002          0.008
 W~f(W)             0.003          0.004          0.002         0.004          0.003          0.004          0.003          0.002         0.005          0.002          0.004
 W~fi(W)                           0.003          0.004         0.006          0.002          0.003          0.003          0.002         0.007          0.002          0.004
 W~f-i(W)                          0.007          0.001         0.002          0.004          0.005          0.002          0.003         0.006          0.002          0.004


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.256          0.265          0.241         0.281          0.230          0.246          0.261          0.247         0.279          0.231          0.266
 η~fi(η)                           0.263          0.241         0.286          0.224          0.245          0.261          0.250         0.270          0.237          0.263
 η~f-i(η)                          0.267          0.240         0.276          0.234          0.245          0.260          0.234         0.283          0.225          0.271


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.669          0.662          0.680         0.702          0.635          0.673          0.667          0.667         0.673          0.627          0.686
 X~f(X)             0.663          0.655          0.675         0.695          0.629          0.664          0.662          0.664         0.660          0.626          0.677
 X~fi(X)                           0.669          0.655         0.694          0.630          0.657          0.665          0.655         0.686          0.611          0.686
 X~f-i(X)                          0.633          0.688         0.697          0.627          0.668          0.656          0.688         0.650          0.634          0.657


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.635          0.645          0.621         0.665          0.604          0.627          0.640          0.627         0.656          0.581          0.657
 ε~fi(ε)                           0.667          0.587         0.680          0.590          0.616          0.645          0.622         0.670          0.562          0.667
 ε~f-i(ε)                          0.610          0.641         0.650          0.620          0.631          0.632          0.644         0.648          0.590          0.635


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.635          0.629          0.646         0.666          0.603          0.636          0.635          0.638         0.630          0.603          0.648
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                       0.663          0.595         0.680          0.589          0.621          0.644          0.624         0.668          0.569          0.666
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                      0.572          0.679         0.653          0.616          0.643          0.620          0.675         0.616          0.618          0.608


Notes: Benchmark case denotes the observed probability in the sample. Simulations - based on 500 draws - obtained after estimating the dynamic model yit = αi + γyit-1 +
Xitβ + εit, where αi = wiδ + ηi. f(∙) denotes the empirical distribution of the argument. Sample includes data from fall kindergarten, spring first, spring third, spring fifth
grades, and spring eighth grade. See text for the list of covariates and further details.
Table 7. Dynamic Simulations: Height Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥95th percentile | yi1≥95th percentile).
                     Full                  Race                   Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample          White       Non-White   Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.467          0.481           0.446   0.550       0.377    0.448      0.476     0.453       0.502     0.414         0.489


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 α~f(α)             0.092          0.097           0.085   0.094       0.090    0.092      0.092     0.103       0.088     0.083         0.096
 α~fi(α)                           0.097           0.086   0.107       0.076    0.087      0.095     0.103       0.087     0.082         0.097
 α~f-i(α)                          0.096           0.081   0.079       0.102    0.095      0.087     0.104       0.087     0.084         0.091


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.000          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~f(W)             0.000          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~fi(W)                           0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~f-i(W)                          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.108          0.111           0.103   0.122       0.092    0.107      0.108     0.121       0.102     0.094         0.113
 η~fi(η)                           0.110           0.105   0.127       0.090    0.108      0.108     0.112       0.105     0.098         0.111
 η~f-i(η)                          0.116           0.099   0.120       0.093    0.107      0.107     0.122       0.095     0.093         0.118


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.523          0.498           0.562   0.572       0.469    0.493      0.536     0.498       0.533     0.517         0.525
 X~f(X)             0.523          0.495           0.568   0.569       0.473    0.499      0.534     0.500       0.532     0.520         0.524
 X~fi(X)                           0.509           0.540   0.566       0.475    0.492      0.539     0.530       0.522     0.497         0.533
 X~f-i(X)                          0.470           0.585   0.570       0.472    0.503      0.526     0.488       0.562     0.531         0.502


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.506          0.496           0.522   0.545       0.463    0.480      0.518     0.505       0.506     0.485         0.514
 ε~fi(ε)                           0.517           0.487   0.559       0.449    0.470      0.523     0.523       0.499     0.466         0.524
 ε~f-i(ε)                          0.461           0.543   0.530       0.477    0.484      0.508     0.498       0.521     0.496         0.493


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.509          0.481           0.552   0.546       0.468    0.489      0.518     0.481       0.519     0.509         0.509
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                       0.517           0.494   0.558       0.457    0.476      0.528     0.523       0.506     0.470         0.528
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                      0.425           0.587   0.533       0.479    0.497      0.502     0.467       0.561     0.525         0.468


Notes: See Table 6 and text for further details.
Table 8. Dynamic Simulations: Height Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≤50th percentile).
                     Full                  Race                   Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample          White       Non-White   Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.030          0.036           0.019   0.032       0.027    0.025      0.032     0.030       0.029     0.026         0.032


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 α~f(α)             0.144          0.151           0.134   0.144       0.145    0.141      0.146     0.158       0.140     0.136         0.149
 α~fi(α)                           0.153           0.135   0.163       0.126    0.134      0.151     0.157       0.141     0.134         0.150
 α~f-i(α)                          0.151           0.135   0.125       0.164    0.145      0.140     0.160       0.138     0.135         0.147


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.000          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~f(W)             0.000          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~fi(W)                           0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~f-i(W)                          0.000           0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.133          0.145           0.115   0.149       0.117    0.125      0.138     0.155       0.126     0.114         0.142
 η~fi(η)                           0.143           0.119   0.153       0.115    0.126      0.138     0.144       0.130     0.119         0.139
 η~f-i(η)                          0.149           0.114   0.145       0.120    0.125      0.139     0.159       0.118     0.112         0.149


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.019          0.020           0.017   0.019       0.019    0.021      0.018     0.014       0.020     0.020         0.018
 X~f(X)             0.018          0.019           0.016   0.017       0.018    0.019      0.017     0.014       0.019     0.019         0.017
 X~fi(X)                           0.020           0.014   0.017       0.018    0.018      0.017     0.015       0.018     0.018         0.018
 X~f-i(X)                          0.017           0.017   0.017       0.018    0.019      0.017     0.013       0.021     0.020         0.015


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.021          0.024           0.016   0.022       0.020    0.021      0.021     0.021       0.021     0.021         0.021
 ε~fi(ε)                           0.026           0.014   0.022       0.020    0.020      0.021     0.023       0.020     0.019         0.022
 ε~f-i(ε)                          0.021           0.018   0.021       0.020    0.021      0.020     0.021       0.023     0.021         0.019


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.022          0.024           0.019   0.023       0.021    0.023      0.022     0.019       0.023     0.023         0.022
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                       0.027           0.015   0.023       0.021    0.022      0.022     0.024       0.021     0.020         0.023
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                      0.019           0.022   0.023       0.021    0.023      0.021     0.018       0.028     0.024         0.018


Notes: See Table 6 and text for further details.
Table 9. Dynamic Panel Data Estimates: Body Mass Index Z-Scores.


                                Full Sample                                          Race                                                       Gender
                                                                    White                         Non-White                        Male                         Female
Lag BMI               0.912*      0.911*      0.217*    0.915*      0.912*    0.194*    0.904*     0.910*     0.255*    0.915*    0.919*    0.179*    0.909*     0.903*   0.275*
                      (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.015)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.018)   (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.027)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.018)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.026)


Time-Varying            No         Yes         Yes        No         Yes       Yes          No       Yes        Yes       No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes      Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant          No         Yes          No        No         Yes        No          No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes       No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects           No          No         Yes        No         No        Yes          No       No         Yes       No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes
Observations           27470       27470      27470     16900       16900     16900     10570       10570      10570    13880     13880     13880     13580      13580    13580
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity          p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat    8637.8      8518.0      820.8     4744.4      4885.9    535.8     3823.7     3657.3      293.8    3555.1    3516.1    451.8     6391.0     6229.0   420.2


                                               Urban Status                                                  Mother's Education                                             SES Status
                                  Urban                           Non-Urban                  Less Than College                    College                       Low SES                       High SES
Lag BMI               0.912*      0.909*      0.254*    0.912*      0.911*    0.200*    0.906*     0.908*     0.216*    0.921*    0.920*    0.227*    0.905*     0.912*   0.222*    0.912*     0.910*    0.222*
                      (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.027)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.018)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.017)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.030)   (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.028)   (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.018)


Time-Varying            No         Yes         Yes        No         Yes       Yes          No       Yes        Yes       No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes      Yes        No        Yes       Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant          No         Yes          No        No         Yes        No          No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes       No        No        Yes        No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects           No          No         Yes        No         No        Yes          No       No         Yes       No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No         No       Yes
Observations           10010       10010      10010     17460       17460     17460     20250       20250      20250     7210      7210      7210      8340       8340     8340     19120      19120     19120
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity          p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat    3452.7      3187.6      278.1     5265.0      5388.1    545.0     6257.6     6090.8      575.5    2448.2    2562.1    254.0     3340.8     3264.5   251.2     5367.1     5346.3    579.1


Notes: ‡ p<0.10, † p<0.05, * p<0.01. See Table 1 and text for further details.
Table 10. Dynamic Simulations: BMI Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≥85th percentile).
                     Full                  Race                         Gender                   Urban Status                    Education                        SES
                   Sample          White       Non-White         Male          Female         Urban       Non-Urban Non-College           College       Low SES        High SES
Benchmark           0.746          0.703          0.800          0.736          0.757          0.758         0.739          0.779          0.637          0.813          0.710


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000          0.001          0.000          0.000          0.001          0.000         0.001          0.000          0.002          0.000          0.001
 α~f(α)             0.347          0.348          0.345          0.346          0.347          0.347         0.347          0.357          0.344          0.341          0.350
 α~fi(α)                           0.309          0.407          0.357          0.337          0.344         0.348          0.265          0.376          0.420          0.316
 α~f-i(α)                          0.410          0.307          0.334          0.360          0.348         0.345          0.392          0.250          0.306          0.430


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.070          0.011          0.145          0.076          0.065          0.079         0.066          0.004          0.090          0.147          0.030
 W~f(W)             0.055          0.056          0.055          0.054          0.057          0.054         0.056          0.071          0.051          0.049          0.059
 W~fi(W)                           0.015          0.118          0.065          0.044          0.059         0.052          0.006          0.067          0.108          0.028
 W~f-i(W)                          0.121          0.015          0.041          0.069          0.050         0.062          0.093          0.004          0.023          0.130


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.368          0.333          0.412          0.376          0.359          0.370         0.366          0.299          0.389          0.413          0.344
 η~fi(η)                           0.324          0.421          0.379          0.356          0.373         0.365          0.277          0.394          0.433          0.333
 η~f-i(η)                          0.347          0.406          0.374          0.363          0.370         0.369          0.306          0.378          0.406          0.364


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.797          0.761          0.842          0.793          0.802          0.798         0.797          0.708          0.824          0.845          0.772
 X~f(X)             0.795          0.759          0.840          0.791          0.800          0.798         0.793          0.707          0.822          0.844          0.769
 X~fi(X)                           0.761          0.837          0.789          0.802          0.798         0.793          0.723          0.818          0.837          0.773
 X~f-i(X)                          0.756          0.841          0.792          0.798          0.798         0.793          0.701          0.831          0.847          0.760


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.766          0.733          0.807          0.764          0.768          0.768         0.764          0.688          0.789          0.807          0.744
 ε~fi(ε)                           0.733          0.806          0.752          0.780          0.770         0.762          0.670          0.793          0.816          0.739
 ε~f-i(ε)                          0.732          0.807          0.775          0.754          0.767         0.767          0.696          0.775          0.802          0.755


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.765          0.730          0.808          0.763          0.766          0.768         0.762          0.672          0.792          0.813          0.739
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                       0.732          0.806          0.750          0.781          0.771         0.761          0.670          0.793          0.817          0.737
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                      0.726          0.811          0.777          0.752          0.768         0.764          0.674          0.789          0.812          0.741


Notes: Benchmark case denotes the observed probability in the sample. Simulations - based on 500 draws - obtained after estimating the dynamic model yit = αi + γyit-1 +
Xitβ + εit, where αi = wiδ + ηi. f(∙) denotes the empirical distribution of the argument. Sample includes data from fall kindergarten, spring first, spring third, spring fifth
grades, and spring eighth grade. See text for the list of covariates and further details.
Table 11. Dynamic Simulations: BMI Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥95th percentile | yi1≥95th percentile).
                     Full                  Race                    Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White     Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.715          0.664            0.769   0.724       0.703    0.738      0.702     0.757       0.538     0.783         0.672


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000          0.000            0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 α~f(α)             0.179          0.180            0.178   0.178       0.180    0.177      0.179     0.187       0.177     0.175         0.181
 α~fi(α)                           0.147            0.228   0.194       0.161    0.181      0.176     0.117       0.199     0.233         0.153
 α~f-i(α)                          0.231            0.144   0.158       0.196    0.176      0.179     0.211       0.109     0.149         0.242


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.000          0.000            0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~f(W)             0.000          0.000            0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~fi(W)                           0.000            0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 W~f-i(W)                          0.000            0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.195          0.171            0.221   0.199       0.190    0.195      0.196     0.137       0.209     0.226         0.176
 η~fi(η)                           0.162            0.238   0.207       0.182    0.198      0.193     0.124       0.216     0.244         0.168
 η~f-i(η)                          0.184            0.212   0.192       0.197    0.194      0.198     0.142       0.190     0.217         0.193


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.792          0.757            0.830   0.804       0.778    0.810      0.782     0.629       0.832     0.845         0.759
 X~f(X)             0.792          0.758            0.827   0.802       0.778    0.808      0.782     0.628       0.831     0.841         0.761
 X~fi(X)                           0.760            0.824   0.801       0.781    0.808      0.783     0.648       0.826     0.830         0.766
 X~f-i(X)                          0.754            0.830   0.805       0.776    0.809      0.782     0.622       0.845     0.846         0.749


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.734          0.699            0.771   0.739       0.728    0.748      0.726     0.597       0.767     0.776         0.708
 ε~fi(ε)                           0.698            0.770   0.723       0.746    0.752      0.724     0.575       0.774     0.788         0.700
 ε~f-i(ε)                          0.698            0.771   0.755       0.710    0.747      0.729     0.606       0.747     0.770         0.721


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.735          0.699            0.773   0.742       0.726    0.749      0.727     0.583       0.771     0.784         0.704
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                       0.700            0.770   0.724       0.743    0.750      0.727     0.579       0.772     0.787         0.702
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                      0.694            0.775   0.761       0.706    0.749      0.729     0.583       0.767     0.783         0.706


Notes: See Table 10 and text for further details.
Table 12. Dynamic Simulations: BMI Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≤50th percentile).
                     Full                  Race                    Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                    White         White       Non-White     Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.142          0.127            0.167   0.152       0.132    0.138      0.144     0.162       0.087     0.192         0.121


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000          0.000            0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000         0.000
 α~f(α)             0.346          0.347            0.343   0.345       0.347    0.346      0.346     0.356       0.342     0.339         0.348
 α~fi(α)                           0.308            0.403   0.354       0.335    0.344      0.347     0.263       0.375     0.418         0.315
 α~f-i(α)                          0.410            0.304   0.333       0.359    0.348      0.342     0.390       0.249     0.304         0.428


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.044          0.020            0.086   0.051       0.036    0.032      0.050     0.005       0.058     0.094         0.023
 W~f(W)             0.054          0.054            0.053   0.052       0.055    0.054      0.053     0.066       0.049     0.047         0.056
 W~fi(W)                           0.014            0.114   0.063       0.042    0.061      0.049     0.005       0.065     0.105         0.026
 W~f-i(W)                          0.118            0.014   0.040       0.067    0.051      0.058     0.087       0.003     0.021         0.126


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.335          0.311            0.378   0.345       0.326    0.328      0.339     0.270       0.360     0.392         0.312
 η~fi(η)                           0.300            0.387   0.347       0.320    0.329      0.337     0.248       0.363     0.410         0.303
 η~f-i(η)                          0.324            0.370   0.341       0.328    0.325      0.341     0.276       0.345     0.383         0.332


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.105          0.096            0.120   0.120       0.091    0.092      0.113     0.062       0.121     0.139         0.091
 X~f(X)             0.107          0.098            0.121   0.121       0.092    0.095      0.113     0.062       0.123     0.142         0.092
 X~fi(X)                           0.099            0.121   0.121       0.093    0.095      0.113     0.067       0.121     0.138         0.094
 X~f-i(X)                          0.097            0.122   0.122       0.092    0.095      0.113     0.060       0.129     0.144         0.089


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.125          0.116            0.139   0.138       0.111    0.115      0.130     0.086       0.139     0.158         0.111
 ε~fi(ε)                           0.116            0.139   0.131       0.117    0.116      0.129     0.079       0.142     0.163         0.109
 ε~f-i(ε)                          0.116            0.138   0.145       0.105    0.114      0.131     0.088       0.131     0.155         0.115


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.125          0.116            0.140   0.140       0.111    0.115      0.131     0.083       0.141     0.161         0.111
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                       0.116            0.140   0.132       0.117    0.116      0.130     0.081       0.141     0.162         0.110
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                      0.116            0.141   0.147       0.105    0.114      0.132     0.083       0.139     0.161         0.111


Notes: See Table 10 and text for further details.
Table 13. Dynamic Panel Data Estimates: Weight Z-Scores.


                                  Full Sample                                           Race                                                        Gender
                                                                      White                           Non-White                        Male                         Female
Lag Weight              0.873*      0.870*      0.124*    0.868*      0.903*    0.105*     0.873*      0.857*     0.144*    0.888*    0.896*    0.108*    0.857*     0.850*    0.143*
                        (0.010)     (0.012)     (0.013)   (0.016)    (0.021)    (0.018)    (0.013)     (0.016)    (0.018)   (0.014)   (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.014)   (0.017)   (0.018)


Time-Varying              No         Yes         Yes        No         Yes       Yes           No        Yes        Yes       No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes       Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant            No         Yes          No        No         Yes        No           No        Yes        No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes        No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects             No          No         Yes        No         No        Yes           No        No         Yes       No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes
Observations             10900       10900      10900      4500        4500      4500          6400     6400       6400      5450      5450      5450      5400      5400       5400
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity            p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat       112.0      1398.4      1929.3    626.3       429.3     803.7      1683.9      1112.7     1253.0    321.8     778.8     972.4     889.5      640.4     965.5


                                                 Urban Status                                                    Mother's Education                                               SES Status
                                    Urban                           Non-Urban                    Less Than College                    College                       Low SES                        High SES
Lag Weight              0.874*      0.869*      0.130*    0.870*      0.894*    0.121*     0.864*      0.886*     0.123*    0.875*    0.872*    0.126*    0.868*     0.887*    0.127*     0.874*    0.860*     0.128*
                        (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.016)   (0.018)    (0.024)    (0.023)    (0.018)     (0.024)    (0.023)   (0.012)   (0.015)   (0.016)   (0.018)   (0.021)   (0.022)    (0.012)    (0.015)    (0.016)


Time-Varying              No         Yes         Yes        No         Yes       Yes           No        Yes        Yes       No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes       Yes         No        Yes        Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant            No         Yes          No        No         Yes        No           No        Yes        No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes        No         No        Yes        No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects             No          No         Yes        No         No        Yes           No        No         Yes       No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes         No        No         Yes
Observations             7800        7800        7800      3100        3100      3100          7750     7750       7750      3150      3150      3150      4050      4050       4050       6850      6850       6850
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity            p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat      1785.2      1184.3      1566.7    469.1       342.0     497.2      697.1        447.3      715.3    1455.9    978.3     1261.1    686.6      481.3     687.5     1497.8      988.9     1339.1

Notes: ‡ p<0.10, † p<0.05, * p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Estimation by GMM. Excluded instrument is the dependent variable twice-lagged. Sample sizes rounded to the nearest 50 per NCES restricted
data regulations. Sample includes data from waves 1-4 in the ECLS-B. See text for the list of covariates and further details.
Table 14. Dynamic Simulations: Weight Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≥85th percentile).
                     Full                 Race                         Gender                   Urban Status                   Education                        SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White         Male          Female         Urban       Non-Urban Non-College          College       Low SES        High SES
Benchmark           0.541         0.508          0.558          0.605         0.496          0.511          0.621         0.434          0.583          0.593          0.507


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.007         0.000          0.010          0.005         0.008          0.006          0.008         0.000          0.009          0.014          0.002
 α~f(α)             0.255         0.284          0.240          0.249         0.259          0.240          0.295         0.237          0.262          0.257          0.254
 α~fi(α)                          0.216          0.284          0.263         0.243          0.248          0.267         0.213          0.271          0.285          0.237
 α~f-i(α)                         0.333          0.180          0.234         0.275          0.217          0.308         0.246          0.242          0.240          0.284


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.169         0.135          0.187          0.181         0.161          0.157          0.202         0.112          0.191          0.174          0.166
 W~f(W)             0.101         0.120          0.092          0.090         0.109          0.085          0.142         0.080          0.109          0.106          0.098
 W~fi(W)                          0.050          0.127          0.103         0.094          0.094          0.107         0.068          0.115          0.122          0.087
 W~f-i(W)                         0.166          0.042          0.078         0.121          0.064          0.154         0.086          0.093          0.096          0.114


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.332         0.311          0.343          0.340         0.326          0.322          0.358         0.304          0.343          0.338          0.328
 η~fi(η)                          0.307          0.347          0.344         0.326          0.324          0.354         0.294          0.348          0.357          0.318
 η~f-i(η)                         0.320          0.337          0.340         0.327          0.320          0.361         0.309          0.336          0.328          0.346


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.605         0.532          0.642          0.678         0.554          0.593          0.637         0.558          0.624          0.646          0.578
 X~f(X)             0.596         0.521          0.634          0.659         0.552          0.591          0.611         0.557          0.612          0.630          0.574
 X~fi(X)                          0.560          0.609          0.656         0.557          0.576          0.652         0.525          0.623          0.639          0.568
 X~f-i(X)                         0.494          0.670          0.662         0.550          0.630          0.593         0.570          0.585          0.628          0.582


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.581         0.556          0.594          0.635         0.543          0.556          0.649         0.516          0.607          0.611          0.562
 ε~fi(ε)                          0.553          0.595          0.630         0.547          0.553          0.653         0.511          0.607          0.616          0.557
 ε~f-i(ε)                         0.558          0.592          0.640         0.538          0.560          0.647         0.520          0.603          0.608          0.567


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.582         0.509          0.618          0.633         0.546          0.578          0.593         0.546          0.596          0.615          0.561
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                      0.541          0.596          0.626         0.554          0.564          0.634         0.510          0.609          0.625          0.553
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                     0.486          0.652          0.641         0.539          0.618          0.577         0.559          0.566          0.609          0.574


Notes: Benchmark case denotes the observed probability in the sample. Simulations - based on 500 draws - obtained after estimating the dynamic model yit = αi + γyit-1 +
Xitβ + εit, where αi = wiδ + ηi. f(∙) denotes the empirical distribution of the argument. Sample includes data from waves 1-4 of the ECLS-B. See text for the list of covariates
and further details.
Table 15. Dynamic Simulations: Weight Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥95th percentile | yi1≥95th percentile).
                     Full                 Race                     Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White     Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.366         0.360             0.369   0.409       0.340    0.354      0.392     0.198      0.420      0.446         0.302


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000         0.000             0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000         0.000
 α~f(α)             0.118         0.134             0.112   0.113       0.122    0.109      0.140     0.105      0.123      0.122         0.116
 α~fi(α)                          0.088             0.139   0.121       0.112    0.114      0.132     0.084      0.132      0.150         0.101
 α~f-i(α)                         0.166             0.070   0.105       0.131    0.098      0.147     0.112      0.102      0.104         0.145


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.031         0.016             0.038   0.044       0.023    0.028      0.038     0.030      0.032      0.043         0.022
 W~f(W)             0.007         0.007             0.007   0.006       0.007    0.006      0.009     0.006      0.007      0.008         0.005
 W~fi(W)                          0.001             0.011   0.007       0.005    0.006      0.007     0.003      0.008      0.012         0.004
 W~f-i(W)                         0.011             0.002   0.004       0.010    0.004      0.010     0.005      0.005      0.006         0.008


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.166         0.148             0.174   0.174       0.162    0.162      0.177     0.150      0.172      0.171         0.163
 η~fi(η)                          0.133             0.183   0.174       0.161    0.160      0.178     0.131      0.179      0.190         0.151
 η~f-i(η)                         0.157             0.164   0.171       0.164    0.162      0.178     0.158      0.156      0.158         0.185


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.419         0.392             0.430   0.465       0.390    0.427      0.400     0.337      0.445      0.462         0.384
 X~f(X)             0.416         0.381             0.431   0.448       0.396    0.427      0.390     0.335      0.442      0.455         0.385
 X~fi(X)                          0.412             0.410   0.445       0.401    0.415      0.437     0.309      0.452      0.462         0.381
 X~f-i(X)                         0.354             0.464   0.451       0.392    0.461      0.374     0.347      0.417      0.450         0.393


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.405         0.415             0.401   0.443       0.382    0.390      0.441     0.284      0.444      0.462         0.360
 ε~fi(ε)                          0.414             0.403   0.438       0.387    0.386      0.450     0.275      0.447      0.467         0.356
 ε~f-i(ε)                         0.417             0.398   0.448       0.379    0.393      0.441     0.288      0.440      0.456         0.369


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.413         0.372             0.430   0.443       0.394    0.425      0.385     0.337      0.437      0.450         0.382
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                      0.398             0.413   0.437       0.402    0.412      0.427     0.303      0.450      0.464         0.374
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                     0.356             0.456   0.453       0.385    0.458      0.368     0.352      0.407      0.441         0.397

Notes: See Table 14 and text for further details.
Table 16. Dynamic Simulations: Weight Z-Scores, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≤50th percentile).
                     Full                 Race                     Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White     Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.431         0.426             0.435   0.443       0.418    0.426      0.443     0.395      0.446      0.468         0.410


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.837         0.982             0.724   0.830       0.846    0.793      0.949     0.798      0.854      0.820         0.847
 α~f(α)             0.617         0.646             0.593   0.614       0.619    0.605      0.645     0.594      0.626      0.627         0.610
 α~fi(α)                          0.594             0.632   0.624       0.610    0.614      0.622     0.592      0.627      0.635         0.606
 α~f-i(α)                         0.683             0.537   0.603       0.629    0.579      0.653     0.594      0.626      0.622         0.619


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.613         0.553             0.661   0.633       0.591    0.613      0.615     0.559      0.636      0.648         0.594
 W~f(W)             0.719         0.777             0.674   0.715       0.725    0.698      0.771     0.685      0.734      0.732         0.712
 W~fi(W)                          0.680             0.749   0.734       0.706    0.715      0.737     0.676      0.737      0.740         0.708
 W~f-i(W)                         0.847             0.566   0.696       0.743    0.659      0.784     0.688      0.727      0.726         0.721


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.556         0.525             0.581   0.568       0.542    0.556      0.555     0.526      0.568      0.574         0.546
 η~fi(η)                          0.527             0.577   0.569       0.543    0.559      0.551     0.532      0.567      0.578         0.543
 η~f-i(η)                         0.523             0.585   0.570       0.541    0.552      0.557     0.525      0.575      0.572         0.551


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.435         0.398             0.465   0.462       0.405    0.447      0.407     0.444      0.432      0.432         0.437
 X~f(X)             0.440         0.401             0.470   0.464       0.412    0.451      0.413     0.442      0.439      0.442         0.439
 X~fi(X)                          0.436             0.448   0.460       0.416    0.436      0.452     0.413      0.450      0.451         0.434
 X~f-i(X)                         0.377             0.503   0.467       0.410    0.488      0.397     0.455      0.411      0.436         0.447


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.431         0.428             0.434   0.453       0.407    0.429      0.436     0.402      0.444      0.450         0.421
 ε~fi(ε)                          0.425             0.437   0.449       0.411    0.428      0.440     0.396      0.446      0.458         0.417
 ε~f-i(ε)                         0.431             0.430   0.457       0.403    0.435      0.434     0.405      0.438      0.447         0.429


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.441         0.405             0.469   0.464       0.415    0.451      0.417     0.442      0.441      0.445         0.439
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                      0.431             0.451   0.457       0.423    0.436      0.455     0.408      0.454      0.460         0.429
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                     0.387             0.496   0.472       0.407    0.488      0.401     0.456      0.410      0.437         0.454

Notes: See Table 14 and text for further details.
Table 17. Dynamic Panel Data Estimates: Height.


                                Full Sample                                          Race                                                        Gender
                                                                   White                           Non-White                        Male                         Female
Lag Height            0.480*      0.506*      -0.002   0.488*      0.522*    0.002      0.474*      0.493*     -0.005    0.485*    0.511*    -0.056*   0.474*     0.498*   -0.043*
                      (0.004)     (0.010)   (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.016)    (0.012)    (0.005)     (0.013)    (0.009)   (0.006)   (0.014)   (0.008)   (0.006)   (0.015)   (0.008)


Time-Varying            No         Yes         Yes       No         Yes       Yes           No        Yes        Yes       No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes      Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant          No         Yes         No        No         Yes        No           No        Yes        No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes       No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects           No          No         Yes       No         No        Yes           No        No         Yes       No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes
Observations           10900       10900      10900     4500        4500      4500          6400     6400       6400      5450      5450      5450      5400       5400     5400
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity          p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat     770.2      6940.2 10250.2 17737.1 2263.8              3947.3 27111.7 4758.6             6311.6    568.9     3435.1    8396.2 21349.5 3328.9         8158.5


                                               Urban Status                                                   Mother's Education                                             SES Status
                                  Urban                          Non-Urban                    Less Than College                    College                       Low SES                       High SES
Lag Height            0.475*      0.491*    -0.049*    0.493*      0.549*    -0.057*    0.481*      0.492*     -0.051*   0.480*    0.515*    -0.049*   0.466*     0.486*   -0.055*   0.488*     0.524*    -0.045*
                      (0.005)     (0.012)   (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.021)    (0.011)    (0.007)     (0.018)    (0.010)   (0.005)   (0.012)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.017)   (0.009)   (0.005)    (0.013)   (0.007)


Time-Varying            No         Yes         Yes       No         Yes       Yes           No        Yes        Yes       No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes      Yes        No        Yes       Yes
  Covariates
Time Invariant          No         Yes         No        No         Yes        No           No        Yes        No        No       Yes        No        No        Yes       No        No        Yes        No
 Covariates
Fixed Effects           No          No         Yes       No         No        Yes           No        No         Yes       No        No       Yes        No        No       Yes        No         No       Yes
Observations           7800        7800       7800      3100        3100      3100          7750     7750       7750      3150      3150      3150      4050       4050     4050      6850       6850      6850
Underidentification p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
Endogeneity          p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.006 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000 p = 0.000
First-Stage F-stat   33778.2 5408.6 12465.7            310.8       1489.6    3939.6 13369.8 1660.6             4565.1 31408.3 5230.3 11710.0           246.8      2752.0   6982.2 28553.6 4057.3          9316.1


Notes: ‡ p<0.10, † p<0.05, * p<0.01. Dependent variable is length/height in centimeters. See Table 13 and text for further details.
Table 18. Dynamic Simulations: Height, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≥85th percentile).
                     Full                 Race                         Gender                   Urban Status                   Education                        SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White         Male          Female         Urban       Non-Urban Non-College          College       Low SES        High SES
Benchmark           0.600         0.576          0.615          0.626         0.580          0.611          0.574         0.585          0.606          0.605          0.598


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.190         0.225          0.169          0.062         0.292          0.175          0.228         0.135          0.213          0.198          0.186
 α~f(α)             0.380         0.400          0.368          0.332         0.418          0.373          0.397         0.355          0.390          0.387          0.376
 α~fi(α)                          0.351          0.403          0.368         0.381          0.385          0.368         0.377          0.381          0.383          0.379
 α~f-i(α)                         0.435          0.318          0.295         0.456          0.342          0.410         0.345          0.416          0.392          0.369


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.396         0.367          0.413          0.386         0.403          0.401          0.383         0.386          0.400          0.373          0.409
 W~f(W)             0.292         0.323          0.274          0.210         0.357          0.281          0.320         0.252          0.308          0.306          0.284
 W~fi(W)                          0.256          0.316          0.258         0.300          0.301          0.266         0.275          0.297          0.284          0.296
 W~f-i(W)                         0.370          0.215          0.163         0.414          0.232          0.340         0.242          0.335          0.319          0.264


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.444         0.430          0.452          0.438         0.448          0.447          0.435         0.437          0.446          0.438          0.447
 η~fi(η)                          0.430          0.451          0.439         0.447          0.447          0.436         0.449          0.441          0.447          0.442
 η~f-i(η)                         0.431          0.450          0.437         0.449          0.445          0.436         0.433          0.457          0.433          0.456


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.607         0.565          0.632          0.622         0.594          0.623          0.568         0.630          0.597          0.591          0.616
 X~f(X)             0.597         0.564          0.616          0.607         0.588          0.612          0.559         0.622          0.586          0.589          0.601
 X~fi(X)                          0.581          0.605          0.605         0.591          0.606          0.575         0.595          0.598          0.597          0.596
 X~f-i(X)                         0.554          0.633          0.608         0.587          0.630          0.551         0.634          0.556          0.584          0.610


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.597         0.572          0.612          0.619         0.580          0.605          0.577         0.586          0.601          0.598          0.596
 ε~fi(ε)                          0.572          0.612          0.611         0.588          0.606          0.576         0.589          0.600          0.599          0.597
 ε~f-i(ε)                         0.574          0.611          0.628         0.571          0.603          0.580         0.585          0.605          0.597          0.597


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.589         0.559          0.607          0.599         0.581          0.603          0.553         0.614          0.578          0.581          0.593
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                      0.573          0.596          0.591         0.590          0.597          0.569         0.590          0.590          0.589          0.588
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                     0.548          0.622          0.606         0.573          0.620          0.546         0.625          0.554          0.575          0.602

Notes: Benchmark case denotes the observed probability in the sample. Simulations - based on 500 draws - obtained after estimating the dynamic model yit = αi + γyit-1 +
Xitβ + εit, where αi = wiδ + ηi. f(∙) denotes the empirical distribution of the argument. Sample includes data from waves 1-4 of the ECLS-B. See text for the list of covariates
and further details.
Table 19. Dynamic Simulations: Height, Pr(yiT≥95th percentile | yi1≥95th percentile).
                     Full                 Race                     Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White     Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.365         0.344             0.377   0.372       0.360    0.355      0.387     0.353      0.370      0.319         0.393


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.000         0.000             0.000   0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000         0.000
 α~f(α)             0.092         0.102             0.087   0.061       0.112    0.088      0.100     0.080      0.096      0.095         0.090
 α~fi(α)                          0.080             0.100   0.074       0.094    0.094      0.082     0.085      0.093      0.090         0.091
 α~f-i(α)                         0.116             0.069   0.050       0.128    0.072      0.105     0.077      0.101      0.095         0.086


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.020         0.008             0.027   0.020       0.020    0.021      0.017     0.015      0.022      0.022         0.019
 W~f(W)             0.007         0.007             0.007   0.002       0.010    0.006      0.008     0.004      0.008      0.007         0.007
 W~fi(W)                          0.004             0.008   0.003       0.005    0.007      0.006     0.005      0.007      0.007         0.006
 W~f-i(W)                         0.009             0.004   0.001       0.015    0.005      0.008     0.004      0.009      0.008         0.006


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.136         0.131             0.139   0.125       0.144    0.134      0.141     0.129      0.139      0.133         0.138
 η~fi(η)                          0.125             0.141   0.127       0.138    0.132      0.139     0.125      0.137      0.137         0.133
 η~f-i(η)                         0.134             0.131   0.120       0.146    0.129      0.142     0.129      0.137      0.128         0.142


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.350         0.320             0.366   0.346       0.354    0.369      0.309     0.426      0.322      0.297         0.382
 X~f(X)             0.353         0.332             0.365   0.360       0.349    0.368      0.322     0.416      0.330      0.298         0.386
 X~fi(X)                          0.346             0.356   0.358       0.353    0.362      0.337     0.388      0.341      0.305         0.383
 X~f-i(X)                         0.322             0.380   0.362       0.348    0.384      0.315     0.429      0.304      0.297         0.395


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.304         0.306             0.303   0.311       0.300    0.301      0.311     0.308      0.303      0.264         0.328
 ε~fi(ε)                          0.303             0.304   0.302       0.307    0.302      0.310     0.308      0.302      0.267         0.326
 ε~f-i(ε)                         0.307             0.301   0.319       0.292    0.298      0.310     0.306      0.304      0.263         0.330


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.357         0.336             0.368   0.364       0.353    0.372      0.325     0.415      0.335      0.306         0.388
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                      0.349             0.361   0.358       0.360    0.365      0.339     0.392      0.345      0.315         0.382
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                     0.328             0.381   0.373       0.346    0.385      0.320     0.425      0.313      0.301         0.398

Notes: See Table 18 and text for further details.
Table 20. Dynamic Simulations: Height, Pr(yiT≥85th percentile | yi1≤50th percentile).
                     Full                 Race                     Gender          Urban Status          Education                  SES
                   Sample         White       Non-White     Male        Female   Urban   Non-Urban Non-College   College   Low SES    High SES
Benchmark           0.179         0.176             0.181   0.168       0.193    0.185      0.165     0.200      0.170      0.196         0.169


Panel I. Own Xs, ε=0, and
 α=E[α]             0.183         0.206             0.163   0.071       0.319    0.160      0.239     0.117      0.210      0.218         0.162
 α~f(α)             0.383         0.401             0.368   0.345       0.428    0.373      0.407     0.357      0.393      0.393         0.377
 α~fi(α)                          0.350             0.401   0.381       0.389    0.385      0.378     0.380      0.383      0.387         0.380
 α~f-i(α)                         0.436             0.319   0.310       0.466    0.342      0.419     0.348      0.418      0.396         0.370


Panel II. Own Xs, η=0, ε=0, and
 W=Wi               0.148         0.111             0.178   0.139       0.157    0.156      0.127     0.125      0.157      0.145         0.149
 W~f(W)             0.296         0.321             0.274   0.231       0.375    0.280      0.334     0.255      0.313      0.314         0.285
 W~fi(W)                          0.254             0.315   0.280       0.316    0.300      0.278     0.278      0.302      0.291         0.296
 W~f-i(W)                         0.369             0.215   0.180       0.431    0.231      0.357     0.245      0.340      0.326         0.264


Panel III. Own Xs, own Ws, ε=0, and
 η~f(η)             0.297         0.276             0.314   0.292       0.303    0.301      0.288     0.283      0.303      0.293         0.299
 η~fi(η)                          0.273             0.318   0.295       0.302    0.303      0.287     0.288      0.301      0.302         0.295
 η~f-i(η)                         0.281             0.310   0.288       0.307    0.300      0.288     0.282      0.308      0.288         0.309


Panel IV. Own α, ε=0, and
 X=E[X]             0.176         0.158             0.191   0.179       0.172    0.189      0.144     0.200      0.166      0.168         0.181
 X~f(X)             0.204         0.186             0.219   0.207       0.201    0.208      0.193     0.230      0.193      0.202         0.205
 X~fi(X)                          0.194             0.212   0.205       0.203    0.204      0.205     0.208      0.201      0.207         0.201
 X~f-i(X)                         0.179             0.229   0.207       0.200    0.219      0.187     0.239      0.174      0.199         0.210


Panel V. Own Xs, own α, and
 ε~f(ε)             0.158         0.148             0.166   0.159       0.156    0.160      0.154     0.162      0.156      0.170         0.150
 ε~fi(ε)                          0.146             0.167   0.154       0.161    0.160      0.150     0.163      0.156      0.173         0.149
 ε~f-i(ε)                         0.150             0.163   0.164       0.151    0.158      0.154     0.163      0.155      0.168         0.153


Panel VI. Own α and
 X,ε~f(X,ε)         0.214         0.197             0.229   0.217       0.212    0.218      0.204     0.241      0.203      0.213         0.215
 X,ε~fi(X,ε)                      0.204             0.224   0.210       0.219    0.215      0.214     0.220      0.211      0.220         0.211
 X,ε~f-i(X,ε)                     0.193             0.237   0.223       0.205    0.228      0.201     0.249      0.186      0.210         0.223

Notes: See Table 18 and text for further details.
