                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE EFFECT OF SAFETY NET PROGRAMS ON FOOD INSECURITY

                                           Lucie Schmidt
                                        Lara Shore-Sheppard
                                            Tara Watson

                                        Working Paper 19558
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19558


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




This project was supported with a grant from the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research
through funding by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, contract number
AG-3198-B-10-0028. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors
and should not be construed as representing the opinions or policies of the UKCPR or any agency
of the Federal government. We are grateful to Stacy Dickert-Conlin, Katie Fitzpatrick, Craig Gundersen,
Hilary Hoynes, Jim Ziliak, and participants at the UKCPR Research Program on Childhood Hunger
Organizing Workshop and Progress Report Conference, the National Tax Association meetings, the
Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management meetings, the NBER Universities Research
Conference on Poverty, Inequality, and Social Policy, and the Southern Economic Association meetings
for helpful comments. We also thank Rebecca Blank, Henry Farber, Katie Fitzpatrick, Jordan Matsudaira,
and Rob Valletta for sharing data. Wendy Magoronga and Tianyue Zhou provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Safety Net Programs on Food Insecurity
Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 19558
October 2013
JEL No. H31,I38

                                            ABSTRACT

Does the safety net reduce food insecurity in families? In this paper we investigate how the structure
of benefits for five major safety net programs – TANF, SSI, EITC, food assistance, and Medicaid–
affects low food security in families. We build a calculator for the years 2001-2009 to impute
eligibility and benefits for these programs in each state, taking into account cross-program eligibility
rules. To identify a causal effect of the safety net, we use simulated eligibility and benefits for a
nationally representative sample as instruments for imputed eligibility and potential benefits. We
also perform a two-sample instrumental variables estimation in which we use simulated benefits as
instruments for actual reported benefits. Focusing on non-immigrant, single-parent families with
incomes below 300 percent of the poverty line, the results suggest that each $1000 in cash or food
benefits actually received reduces the incidence of low food security by 4 percentage points. These
estimates imply that moving from the policies of the 10th percentile state of Kentucky to the 90th
percentile state of Vermont would reduce low food security by 1.7 percentage points on a base
incidence of 33 percent. We are unable to reject equivalent impacts of cash and food assistance.
The results also highlight the importance of jointly considering a full range of safety net programs.


Lucie Schmidt                                      Tara Watson
Dept. of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Schapiro Hall                                      Williams College
Williams College                                   24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 02167                             Williamstown, MA 01267
lschmidt@williams.edu                              and NBER
                                                   tara.watson@williams.edu
Lara Shore-Sheppard
Department of Economics
Williams College
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
lshore@williams.edu
I. Introduction

          Food security—having the resources to access enough food for a healthy and active

lifestyle—is a key input into individual well-being. As of 2012, more than 1 in 7 households

were defined as food insecure by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, suggesting that tens of

millions of Americans face challenges in meeting their basic food needs. 1 Food insecurity is

associated with a wide range of negative health and economic outcomes, making its reduction a

key policy priority. Food insecurity also serves as an indicator of material hardship more

broadly, so it can serve as a proxy for economic well-being in cases where other measures such

as consumption are not readily available. Assessing the relationship between the safety net and

food insecurity thus offers an indirect way to examine the effect of safety net programs on

material hardship.

          Reductions in food insecurity are a primary goal of public nutrition programs, and

substantial research has investigated the effect of these programs on food insecurity among

families and children. However, less is known about how non-food safety net programs affect

food insecurity.     Safety net programs may allow at-risk families to avoid or reduce food

insecurity, but program effects may depend on their mix of cash- and non-cash benefits and the

degree to which they “crowd out” food-specific transfers. For example, Federal food assistance

tends to dampen total differences in benefits levels by considering cash assistance in the

determination of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits.

          In addition, the safety net includes a number of different programs that interact with each

other in important ways. Given that many families simultaneously receive benefits from many


1
    http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/key-statistics-

graphics.aspx#.UkWSxT_qWfY


                                                   2
of these programs, it may be important to look at the effectiveness of the safety net in aggregate

rather than separately examining the effects of each individual program. In this paper we

investigate how the level of benefits received from the safety net as a whole and their distribution

between cash, food, and health insurance affect low food security in families and very low food

security among children.

         We quantify state differences in total benefits and categories of benefits by examining

eligibility and benefit levels for five means-tested sets of programs: Temporary Assistance for

Needy Families (TANF), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), federal and state Earned Income

Tax Credits (EITC), food assistance through the three largest national nutrition programs, 2 and

public health insurance through Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP).

Our benefits calculator reveals substantial variation across states and over time in the level and

composition of benefits. Thus, two states might have similar levels of total benefits for a given

family income, disability status, and family structure, but low-income residents of one state

might be provided more cash while residents of another might enjoy more generous in-kind

benefits. There is also substantial variation across states and within states over time in the

aggregate generosity of the safety net. We exploit within-state changes over time in eligibility

and benefit determination rules to identify the casual impact of program generosity.

         We use 2001-2009 Current Population Survey data to investigate whether the generosity

of the aggregate safety net at the state level affects food insecurity among families with children,

and to understand the mechanisms underlying these relationships. We also examine whether

2
    The three nutrition programs we consider are the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program,

or SNAP, formerly known as the Food Stamp Program, the Special Supplemental Nutrition

Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC), and the National School Lunch Program.


                                                 3
these effects vary by program. We focus on families most likely to experience food insecurity:

single parent families under 300 percent of the poverty line.

         The results suggest that the safety net does impact food insecurity. Each $1000 in

potential benefits (benefits for which a family is eligible) reduces low food security by 2

percentage points on a base rate of 33 percent, and each $1000 in benefits actually received

reduces low food security by 4 percentage points.        The safety net also reduces other food

hardships but has no detectible impact on the measure of usual weekly food expenditures

available in the data or on chronic food hardship. The results suggest that the safety net may

help families manage occasional shocks that would otherwise lead to short-term reduced food

consumption. Eligibility for food assistance programs reduces food insecurity to a degree that is

economically and in some specifications statistically meaningful, but we find no evidence of

differential effects for cash and food benefits.



II. Background and Motivation

         In 2001-2009, 17 percent of non-immigrant families with children experienced low food

security (LFS). 3 For single parent families under 300% of the poverty line, the corresponding

percentage is 33 percent. Food insecurity emerges when households lack the resources to access

enough food for an active, healthy lifestyle for all household members (Nord, Andrews, and




3
    Authors’ calculation based on Current Population Survey December 2001-2009 Food Security

Supplement. We exclude immigrant families to simplify eligibility imputation, as explained

below.


                                                   4
                   4
Carlson 2009).         Food insecurity is associated with nutritional outcomes for adults

(Bhattacharya, Currie, and Haider 2004) and a wide range of health outcomes for adults and

children (see Gundersen and Kreider 2009, and Gundersen, Kreider, and Pepper 2011, for

reviews). 5

         Figure 1 shows recent trends in food insecurity for non-immigrant families with children.

For both low-income single parent families and all families, the rate of food insecurity was fairly

stable from 2001 until the recession starting in late 2007.     Food insecurity is almost twice as

prevalent in every year among the single parent, low-income families that comprise our primary

sample.

         A large literature examines the impact of nutrition programs on food insecurity.

Presumably due to selection into the program, SNAP recipients have rates of food insecurity that

are twice as large as those of eligible non-recipients (Gundersen, Kreider, and Pepper 2011).

However, a number of papers that have tried to account for self-selection of the most food

insecure into food assistance find beneficial effects. These include Gundersen and Oliveira

(2001), Nord and Golla (2009), Ratcliffe, McKernan, and Zhang (2011), Mykerezi and Mills

(2010), and Nord and Prell (2011), all described in Appendix A.

         Comparatively little research, however, has addressed the effect of non-food safety net

programs on food security. Such programs are similar to nutrition programs in that they expand

4
    See National Research Council (2006) for further discussion of the measurement of food

insecurity.
5
    Additional evidence on correlates of food insecurity can be found in Kirkpatrick, McIntyre, and

Potestio (2010), Eicher-Miller et al. (2009), Skalicky et al. (2006), Howard (2011), Huang,

Oshima, and Kim (2010), and Cook et al. (2006).


                                                  5
the total resources available to the household and provide a buffer against income shocks. To the

extent that these additional resources are used for food, they may reduce food insecurity. Borjas

(2004) reports that welfare generosity decreases food insecurity among immigrants, for instance.

Even non-cash programs such as public health insurance may increase the funds available for

food. Understanding how household food consumption is affected by the type of safety net

support (i.e. cash, food, or health insurance) is critical for the effective design of poverty policy.

          Furthermore, the effect of non-food programs may depend on how they interact with

nutrition programs. For example, enrollment in TANF or SSI may facilitate access to nutrition

assistance programs (see Brauner and Zedlewski 1999). On the other hand, by increasing family

income, state cash generosity may reduce eligibility and potential benefit levels for SNAP and

other food assistance programs. 7 This dynamic can be seen in Figure 2, which shows average

imputed potential cash benefits and food benefits for a fixed nationally representative low-

income sample according to the policy rules for each state for a given year. It is clear that as

states become more generous with their cash benefits, their residents lose potential food

benefits. 8    Generous cash welfare programs could “crowd out” food assistance and in theory

shift household consumption toward other items, thereby increasing food insecurity.                  For

example, Duggan and Kearney (2007) report that households receive fewer food stamps and

WIC benefits following enrollment in the Supplemental Security Income program.

          Furthermore, because food assistance generosity is conditioned on income from other

safety net programs, analyses of food assistance that fail to account for the generosity of other

7
    See Ziliak, Gundersen, and Figlio (2003) for a discussion.
8
    The trade-off for a typical state is that 15-20 cents of SNAP eligibility is lost for each additional

dollar of cash eligibility. Alaska and Hawaii have distinct Food Stamp/SNAP benefit rules.


                                                     6
safety net programs may yield biased estimates of the marginal impact of food benefits. The fact

that recipients tend to participate in multiple programs is readily evident in Table 1, which shows

participation rates for sample single-parent families under 300 percent of poverty. Families that

report receiving cash welfare, SSI, or food assistance almost always also report Medicaid

coverage. Similarly, a majority of food assistance recipient households also appear to be EITC

eligible. In addition, there are important cross-program participation effects conditional on

eligibility, as discussed below.

       Theoretically, the net result of the “income effect” associated with non-food program

participation (resulting from expanded resources) and the “substitution effect” (stemming from

fewer requirements to allocate household resources to food) is ambiguous and requires empirical

investigationFurthermore, even if cash and non-cash programs have similar effects, it is useful to

evaluate the impact of the overall safety net package. As noted above, our research focuses on

four major safety net programs in addition to food assistance: Temporary Assistance to Needy

Families (TANF), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), the federal and state Earned Income Tax

Credits (EITC), and Medicaid/CHIP. These are described in Appendix A.

       In sum, the analysis presented below addresses the following questions: (1) What is the

impact of a more generous safety net on food insecurity? (2) Does it matter whether benefits are

in the form of food, cash or medical assistance? and (3) How do estimates of program effects

differ from naïve specifications that only consider one program at a time? In the next section we

describe the empirical approach we use to address these questions.



III. Methodology and Data




                                                7
         Because the goal of this analysis is to examine how the generosity of the state safety net

affects food insecurity, the general empirical approach is to regress food security on measures of

family potential benefit levels and participation. We account for selection bias with one-sample

and two-sample instrumental variables models described below. Our data come from the 2001-

2009 Current Population Survey Food Security Supplement (CPS FSS), which is conducted in

December of each year. The FSS is the source for the official food security statistics in the

United States. Respondents are asked about food spending and whether they were able to meet

their food needs. Based on their answers to a subset of FSS questions, households are classified

as food secure or having low food security.

         The unit of observation for the analysis is the family. Families are included in the sample

if they include at least one child under 18 and the reference person and spouse (if relevant) are

between ages 18 and 64. Families are excluded if earnings information is incomplete, if they did

not complete the food security supplement, or if any member of the family is an immigrant. We

exclude immigrant families throughout the analysis because program eligibility rules are

different for this group and are hard to characterize without information on legal status. We

primarily focus our attention on single-parent families because food insecurity rates are higher

for this group, but also present results for two-parent families. We focus on families under 300

percent of the poverty level because this range captures most variation in safety net eligibility.

Above 300 percent of poverty, very few families are eligible for the transfer programs we

consider, but there are a number of families in the 200-300 percent of poverty range with

eligibility for Medicaid and EITC. 9


9
    Among single-parent families in the 200-300% of poverty range, approximately 44 percent are

imputed to be EITC eligible and the average fraction of kids eligible for Medicaid/CHIP is 17


                                                  8
          Table 2 describes the summary statistics for the primary sample of interest: single parent

families under 300 percent of the poverty line. This sample is more economically disadvantaged

and more food insecure than the general population. Among this population, 33 percent report

low food security. Nine percent of sample families have a disabled member, 10 about half have

two or more children, and less than half have any college education. About 85 percent of the

families are headed by a single mother rather than a single father.

          We would like to impute program eligibility for each family, but the December CPS does

not include detailed data on income.         It contains a variable that gives total income in 16

categories, but this variable does not make a distinction between earned and unearned income,

which is critical for determining eligibility and benefit levels for programs. Furthermore, this

measure of total income already includes benefit income from various programs, making it a

poor input to an eligibility determination procedure.

          To address this issue, we use the data on earnings that are collected when a household is

in the outgoing rotation group of the CPS (the households in month 4 or 8 of the data collection).

To obtain the earnings data, we match each member of a December CPS FSS family over the age

of 15 to earnings data from the appropriate month. For a quarter of the sample, the outgoing

rotation group questions are asked in December, while the other three quarters of the sample are

matched to data from January, February, or March. We do the matching on the basis of




percent. Eligibility for SNAP, SSI and TANF is almost non-existent in the 200-300% of poverty

income range.
10
     Disability status is reported only for those ages 15 and up.


                                                    9
identifiers available in the CPS data, and we check the quality of matches using reported

information in both months on sex, age, and race. 11

         Once the FSS is matched to the outgoing rotation group earnings data, we use these data

to determine predicted eligibility and benefit amounts for the safety net programs of interest for

each family. Using program eligibility and benefit rules and parameters, we develop calculators

that predict eligibility and benefit levels for TANF, SSI, Medicaid/CHIP, and food assistance

programs (including SNAP, WIC, and school lunch). Food assistance programs are monetized

as described in Appendix B. We do not monetize Medicaid but instead examine how the fraction

of the family that is eligible relates to food insecurity.

         We use the National Bureau of Economic Research’s TAXSIM program to predict

eligibility and benefit levels for federal and state EITCs. Inputs to the calculators include family

type (married versus single parents), number of children, ages of children, earnings of respondent

and spouse (where applicable), disability status of respondent and spouse (where applicable), and

state and year of residence. Family groups vary depending upon the family composition rules for

each specific safety net program. We assume no unearned income other than that generated by

our calculators for the programs mentioned above.

         In order to model the interactions between programs correctly, we use a linear process:

the merged FSS data are run through the TAXSIM program to calculate federal and state EITCs,




11
     We are able to match about 85% of families for both the reference person and spouse

(applicable only in the alternative samples including married parents). Families with unmatched

adults are excluded from the sample.


                                                   10
which are assumed to be unaffected by other benefits; 12 the output is run through the SSI

calculator, which adds SSI benefits; then through the TANF calculator (since TANF eligibility

and benefits are affected by SSI receipt); then through the Medicaid/CHIP calculator (since

eligibility is affected by SSI and TANF receipt); then through the food assistance calculator

(since eligibility and benefits are affected by both SSI and TANF). At the end of this process we

have imputed potential benefits for each program; we refer to them as potential benefits because

they are calculated assuming full take-up.        Details about the assumptions underlying the

programming of the calculators are provided in Appendix B.

          Appendix Table 1 presents imputed eligibility rates and average potential benefit levels

for our main sample: single parent families under 300 percent of poverty. Almost 90 percent of

the families in the sample are imputed to be eligible for some cash or food benefits, with EITC

and food assistance reaching the most families. The average annual potential combined cash and

food package is imputed to be around $5700 (in 2005 dollars). Eighty-six percent of sample

families have at least one family member imputed to be eligible for Medicaid.

          Because program participation is not reported in the December CPS, we analyze the

March CPS for the subsequent year to show actual participation rates and benefit levels for

TANF, SSI, and Medicaid. Appendix Table 1 shows imputed potential benefits and actual

benefits in the March CPS. Reported participation rates and benefit amounts are lower than

imputed eligibility and potential benefits.      The shortfall is due to some combination of




12
     We assume that EITC benefits are not counted as income towards eligibility or benefits of

other programs (see Appendix B).


                                                 11
incomplete take-up, measurement error in the imputation, and under-reporting. 13 Including non-

participants, the average sample family reports receiving $317 in TANF, $405 in SSI, and $1,258

in food assistance annually. Adding to these an imputed $1492 in EITC benefits (EITC receipt

is not observed), the average package actually received is $3473. About half of families report

participating in Medicaid or food assistance, and a small minority of families participate in

TANF or SSI.

          Appendix Table 2 describes trends in benefits over the 2001-2009 sample period. Annual

means of potential benefits are shown in Panel A and reported benefits actually received are in

Panel B.      As discussed below, the increases in benefit levels observed towards the end of the

sample partly reflect the weakened economy and partly reflect changes in benefit parameters.

          If potential benefit levels were determined exogenously for each household, we would be

interested in estimating linear probability models of the form:

                        (1)    lfsicst = β0 + β1benefiticst + X icstα + θ s + λt + uicst

where lfs is an indicator for low food security in family i in demographic cell c in state s in year

t. Benefit is the level of potential benefits for the various safety net programs the family is

13
     We do not have information on assets or non-safety-net sources of unearned income, so we are

likely to overstate program eligibility. Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2009) document significant

under-reporting in the use of safety net programs. Ignoring error in imputation and reporting, we

can calculate the fraction participating relative to the fraction eligible to serve as a proxy for the

take-up rate. Using this approach, the take-up rates in the March CPS are estimated at 0.25 for

TANF, 0.72 for SSI, 0.68 for food assistance, and 0.59 for Medicaid. We cannot observe EITC

participation, so analyses throughout assume full EITC take-up. In fact, EITC has higher take-up

rates than many other safety net programs (Holt 2011).


                                                     12
imputed to receive, X represents a vector of state and individual level controls, θ represents state

fixed effects, and λ represents year fixed effects. Time-varying state controls include the state

unemployment rate, a measure of unemployment insurance generosity, child support

enforcement expenditures, and non-cash TANF generosity. We include a number of additional

policy parameters in robustness checks. 14 Demographic controls include the age of youngest

child, number of children (topcoded at 4) interacted with disability status, and race*education

dummies. 15 Thus, the model controls for observable characteristics of families living in states in

a given year, all characteristics of states that are fixed over the study period, time-varying state

policy and economic conditions, and year-to-year national variation in low food security. The

key coefficient β1 represents the effect of benefit generosity on the prevalence of low food

security.




14
     We cannot impute unemployment insurance (UI) eligibility given the data limitations in the

December CPS. However, we incorporate the state maximum dependent allowance as a control

for UI generosity. Similarly, it is difficult to find a compelling instrument for public housing

participation, so in some specifications we control for public housing/voucher units per capita.

We also include the following policy parameters in robustness checks: TANF family caps,

TANF strict time limits, TANF strict sanctions, TANF eligible for new non-citizens, SNAP

standard utility allowance, SNAP simplified reporting, SNAP electronic benefit transfer, and

SNAP combined application for SSI recipients. Details on these variables can be found in

Appendix B. We tested additional policy parameters but they did not systematically predict

program participation.
15
     As detailed below, we also present models with additional demographic controls.


                                                13
          An important challenge with estimating equation (1) is endogeneity of potential benefits.

In particular, families with higher benefits are also more likely to be food insecure, for reasons

that may be unobservable. We thus use the average program generosity by state, year, and

demographic cell simulated for a national sample of families as an instrument for imputed

eligibility. This approach is in the spirit of that used by Currie and Gruber (1996) in the context

of Medicaid. Simulated generosity is correlated with benefit levels but should not be correlated

with individual family shocks, conditional on the other variables. To obtain this exogenous

measure of program generosity, we take the national CPS sample for 2001, strip state and year

identifiers from the data, and replicate it for each state and the District of Columbia for years

2001-2009. Running these data through our series of benefit calculators allows us to examine

the effects of state-level differences in program generosity while abstracting from state-level

differences in population characteristics and economic environment.        As documented below,

states vary in the evolution of aggregate generosity of their programs as well as the composition

of the safety net across food, cash, and medical insurance.

          After running these simulated data through the benefit calculator, we average the

predicted benefit amounts for the simulated data over a set of arguably exogenous characteristics

to create the benefit level instruments. These instruments are cell means, where the cells are

defined by state, year, any disabled person in family, married parents, any child<6, number of

children (1, or 2 or more), highest education of parents (less than high school, high school, more

than high school), and race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, and

other).    The simulated cell average benefit eligibility levels are then matched back to the CPS

FSS and used as instruments for benefit eligibility among families in a given cell. We do not use

earned income to define cells because labor market decisions may respond to safety net



                                                 14
parameters. Simulated benefit levels matched to the CPS are shown in Appendix Table 1 and

annual means of simulated benefits are shown in Panel C of Appendix Table 2. 16

          In addition, the simulated benefit levels for a fixed nationally representative sample are

shown in Panel D of Appendix Table 2. Because these numbers are based on a fixed sample,

they offer a clear picture of how program parameters evolve over time during the sample years.

The most notable change is the substantial increase in food assistance potential benefits in 2009,

which is largely driven by Federal policy changes in the Food Stamp/SNAP program and, to a

lesser extent, EITC generosity. 17 Other programs became slightly more generous as well, with

the exception of TANF, which witnessed real benefit declines of 17 percent for a fixed sample

between 2001 and 2009. 18




16
     The year-to-year changes in average imputed potential benefits shown in Panel A of Appendix

Table 2 reflect both programmatic changes and changes in the economic circumstances of

families. In Panel C, we abstract from individual economic composition by using simulated

data. However, the Panel C numbers do reflect changes in the distribution of the population

across demographic cells over time because the simulated benefits are matched to each family in

the CPS based on demographic characteristics. Panel D of Appendix Table 2 illustrates changes

for the nationally representative sample and offers a clear picture of how policy parameters

evolved over the period.
17
     Bitler and Hoynes (2013) suggest that these expansions are in line with what would have been

expected in a severe recession according to historical patterns.
18
     The imputed potential benefits reported in Panel A of Appendix Table 2 show increases for

TANF, reflecting the fact that eligibility induced by economic hardship in the recession more


                                                  15
          The instrumental variables strategy ensures that predicted eligibility and benefit levels

vary only because of variation in state and federal policy parameters and not due to economic

conditions or population characteristics in a state. For example, a rich state with generous policy

parameters might have a low imputed eligibility rate for a program because few of its residents

are poor enough to qualify for a program, but it would have a high simulated eligibility rate

because a large portion of a national sample would qualify. Because we control for state fixed

effects and year fixed effects, we rely on within-state differences in the policy parameters to

identify the effects of program participation on food insecurity. 19

          Figures 3-8 illustrate the policy variation over time on which we rely, shown here for

twelve large states. These figures represent average potential benefits for the March 2001 fixed

simulated sample run through the policy parameters in each state and year. The variation shown

in these graphs is due strictly to state variation in policy parameters; using the fixed sample

abstracts from the impacts of demographic and economic changes within states.

           Though there are common national trends, it is clear that state patterns in generosity

differed substantially over the 2001-2009 period. For example, the combined real cash and food

benefit package rose by almost 13 percent in Virginia and only 1 percent in California (Figure 3).

Similarly, TANF benefits fell by 27 percent in real terms in Pennsylvania but only fell 8 percent


than offset the changes in policy parameters reflected in Panel D that made the program less

generous for a given income level.
19
     In addition to within-state variation over time, some variation may also come from differential

impact of demographic cell membership across states. For example, the benefit generosity for

disabled versus non-disabled residents may be larger in some states than others, and this

difference would not be fully accounted for by the state fixed effect or the disability control.


                                                  16
in Illinois (Figure 4). States also vary over time in the existence and level of state supplements

for SSI (Figure 5) and EITC (Figure 6), and the degree to which they expanded or contracted

Medicaid eligibility (Figure 8).

          The approach described thus far is well suited to understanding the relationship between

the potential benefits for a family and food insecurity. However, because the imputation is

imperfect and because take-up is incomplete, the actual benefits received may be substantially

different from the imputed potential benefits. Therefore, we perform an additional analysis in

which we use simulated potential benefit levels as instruments for actual reported benefit levels

rather than for imputed eligibility. 20

          Using actual reported benefits rather than imputed potential benefits would be a

straightforward exercise if actual benefit amounts were reported in the December CPS. Because

they are not, we must turn to the March CPS and use a two-sample instrumental variables

approach. Specifically, we use the simulated benefit levels derived using the March sample to

predict actual reported benefit levels in the March Current Population Survey and use the

parameters to generate out-of-sample predictions of actual benefits in the December CPS. We

then regress low food security on the predicted actual benefit levels using the December CPS




20
     It is well known that a substantial fraction of eligible individuals fail to enroll in safety net

programs. Take-up rates are determined in part by program parameters; for this reason we have

explored a wide range of control variables related to program characteristics. Take-up also

varies over time and we do not explore such variation here. Ganong and Liebman (2013)

provide a comprehensive exploration of SNAP take-up. Further reviews of the take-up literature

are available in Remler and Glied (2003) and Currie (2004).


                                                   17
sample to create two-sample instrumental variables estimates. We report cluster bootstrapped

standard errors generated using 2000 replications.

       In sum, an overview of the empirical approach is as follows:

1. Create a five-program eligibility and potential benefit calculator that incorporates cross-
program eligibility effects for each state and year 2001-2009 and adjusts for inflation.

2. Take a nationally representative low-income sample from the December 2001 CPS and
subject the entire sample to the calculator for each state and year adjusting for inflation. For
each family in the sample find Imputed Real Potential Benefits for each state and year. Find the
average imputed real potential benefit level for each demographic cell in the national sample for
each state and year; these averages are the Simulated Real Potential Benefits defined by cell-
state-year.

3. Take the actual December CPS samples and subject them to the calculator. For each family
in the sample find Imputed Real Potential Benefits.

4. Merge the Simulated Real Potential Benefits into the December CPS samples by cell, state,
and year.

5. Perform a one-sample IV regression examining Low Food Security where Simulated Real
Potential Benefits serve as instruments for Imputed Real Potential Benefits. (First stage reported
in Table 3, second stage reported in Table 4).

6. Repeat Steps #2-#4 for the March CPS.

7. Combine the March and December samples. Perform a two-sample IV regression examining
Low Food Security where Simulated Real Potential Benefits are used to predict Actual Reported
Real Benefits in the March CPS data and to make an out-of-sample prediction in the December
CPS data. These predicted actual benefits are then used as a right hand side variable in a low
food security regression using the December CPS. (First stage reported in Table 5, second stage
reported in Table 6).

8. Repeat Step #7 2000 times to bootstrap standard errors.


In the end, we use the one-sample IV to estimate the impact of program potential benefits and

eligibility on food insecurity, and we use the two-sample IV to estimate the impact of program

actual benefits and participation. The results of both analyses are reported in the next section.




                                                 18
IV. Results and Discussion

A. One Sample Regressions

       Table 3 presents results from the first stage of the one-sample regressions (using the

December CPS only), and it shows that the first stage prediction is indeed sufficiently strong to

apply an instrumental variables strategy. In all cases, simulated potential benefit levels for a

particular program are strongly and positively related to imputed potential benefit levels.

Furthermore, in all cases the instruments are jointly significant with F-statistics above 35.

       It is important to note, however, that there are a number of cross-program effects. In

other words, exogenously determined benefits for one safety net program may be positively or

negatively correlated with imputed potential benefits in another. For example, state-years with

higher simulated Medicaid eligibility have lower imputed TANF and SSI benefits, after

controlling for simulated benefit levels for the cash programs. Though a full discussion of cross-

program effects is beyond the scope of this paper, these findings highlight the importance of

jointly considering programs when assessing the effectiveness of the safety net.

       Table 4 presents the main results from the one-sample analysis. For comparison, the first

column presents results from an OLS regression. The OLS results demonstrate that eligibility

for safety net programs is positively related to low food security for low-income single parent

families. This result is unsurprising, since more economically disadvantaged families within this

population are both more likely to qualify for social safety net programs and more likely to be

food insecure.

        To address the selection problem and isolate the causal impact of program generosity on

food insecurity, we turn to the instrumental variables strategy described above. The IV strategy

purges the estimates of bias stemming from the fact that a family’s economic circumstances are



                                                 19
correlated both with program eligibility and food insecurity. The key finding, shown in column

II of Table 4, is that the safety net does matter. Raising a family’s combined potential cash and

food package by $1000 reduces LFS by 2.0 percentage points, on a base of 33 percent. Moving

from the 10th percentile state (Kentucky, with a mean potential benefit package of $4698 for the

simulated sample) to the 90th percentile state (Vermont, with a package of $6961) would increase

predicted imputed benefits by about $1018 and reduce low food security by 2.1 percentage

points. 21 The estimated coefficient on Medicaid eligibility is also negative, but the standard error

is large and the coefficient is not statistically different from zero.

          Column III investigates the marginal effect of individual programs. Point estimates on

each of the cash and food programs are negative.          SSI and food assistance have statistically

significant effects: each $1000 in SSI (food) potential benefits reduces low food security by 3.2

(1.8) percentage points. The EITC has a similarly sized point estimate but is not statistically

significant. The Medicaid coefficient is positive and insignificant.

          Column IV of Table 4 shows the effect of all cash programs combined, food programs

combined, and Medicaid/CHIP.           All three coefficients lie between -0.010 and -0.025; the

coefficients on cash and food are statistically significant. Given the similar magnitudes of the

cash and food coefficients and the lack of statistical difference between them, it is not possible to

reject the hypothesis that cash and food have equivalent impacts. This finding is consistent with

evidence from Hoynes and Schazenbach (2009) that food stamps are treated like cash by

recipients.




21
     This calculation uses the fact that each dollar of simulated cash and food benefits is associated

with a 52-cent increase in imputed benefits, as shown in column I of Table 3.


                                                   20
          This point is echoed in the subsequent columns, which include combined cash and food

benefits as well as each program one at a time. The coefficients on individual programs in

columns V through VIII represent the extra effect of cash and food benefits from one program

over and above their contribution to the total benefit package. The coefficients are

indistinguishable from zero after controlling for the total cash and food benefit level. Though

there may be small differences in program efficacy that we cannot detect, we can reject large

differential program effects. In short, the aggregate safety net matters, but the exact form of

benefits appears to be less important for food insecurity.



B. Two Sample Regressions

          We now turn to our two-sample analysis. Using actual reported benefits levels allows us

to assess the effect of actual benefits received rather than potential benefits. Table 5 presents

results from the first stage, which shows that in the March CPS, simulated potential benefits for a

program predict actual reported benefits for that same program. 22 The estimated coefficients are

lower than those reported in Table 3, in part due to incomplete take-up of transfer programs. F-

tests show that the instruments are strong for cash and food programs, but in columns II and V

models predicting Medicaid participation the F statistic is below 10.          The results for the

Medicaid program (insignificant throughout) therefore should be interpreted with caution.

          Table 6 reports our main results from the two-sample analysis. Results are broadly

consistent with those reported in Table 4 for the one-sample analysis, but the estimates have

larger standard errors. The point estimate of β1 implies that actual receipt of a $1000 cash and

22
     EITC is treated differently in the analysis. Since EITC amounts are not reported in the March

CPS, we again regress imputed EITC benefits on simulated potential EITC benefits.


                                                 21
food package reduces LFS by 4 percentage points. These estimates imply that moving from the

10th percentile state of Kentucky to the 90th percentile state of Vermont would increase actual

benefits by about $432 and reduce low food security by 1.7 percentage points, a very similar

estimated impact as in the one-sample analysis. 23

          Another way to gauge the magnitude of the coefficient is to consider the expansion of the

safety net during the recession. Between 2007 and 2009, the average combined cash and food

package actually received increased by $628 in the single-parent sample. Most of this increase

was associated with Federal expansions in the SNAP and EITC programs. 24 At the same time,

food insecurity rose over the period by 6.9 percentage points in the sample, from 29.0 to 35.9.

The estimates suggest that without the safety net expansion, the 2009 rate of food insecurity

would have been 1.1 percentage points higher than it was, with 37 percent of low-income single-

parent families experiencing low food security.

          Columns II through VII of Table 6 show results for separate programs, but we do not

have enough power to identify differences across programs. As in the one-sample analysis,

coefficients on Medicaid have large standard errors, and the weak first stage makes it difficult to

draw any conclusions about the effects of public health insurance on food security.




23
     This calculation is based on the fact that each dollar in simulated benefits is associated with 19

cents in actual benefits received, as shown in Table 5.
24
     In the fixed simulated sample, the package of potential benefits increased by $561 over the

two year period, including a $394 increase in food assistance and $151 increase in the EITC.


                                                    22
C. Additional Analyses

          In Table 7, we explore alternative markers of food consumption over the twelve months

prior to the survey. Results from both one-sample and two-sample analyses suggest that a

stronger safety net significantly reduces both measures of food-related anxiety and actual food

deprivation. A more generous cash and food package significantly reduces the probability a

family reports they that they need more money to meet their food needs or that they have run

short of money for food. It also significantly reduces the likelihood that they ever cut the size of

meals or skipped meals because there was not enough money for food; that they ever ate less; or

that sometimes often their food did not last. Interestingly, however, the safety net does not

increase usual food expenditures (see columns I and II). One possible explanation for this

pattern of results is that safety net benefits help families manage occasional shocks that would

otherwise lead to temporarily reduced food consumption. 25

          We motivated our analysis by discussing the importance of looking at the safety net as a

whole, given high levels of multiple program participation. In Table 8, we provide some

evidence on the importance of looking at the whole safety net by examining each individual

program one at a time, to get a sense of how results differ in a ‘naïve’ analysis that does not take

into account the interactions between the programs. In the one sample analysis, the results are

similarly signed when we consider programs individually or together, except for the case of


25
     This interpretation is supported by further analysis (not shown) of how frequently respondents

ate less than they thought they should or cut the size of their meals – almost every month, some

months, or only one or two months. The safety net appears to contribute to the largest reduction

in the “some months” category and has no significant impact on chronic food insecurity

occurring almost every month.


                                                 23
Medicaid. However, TANF, SSI and food assistance have point estimates of larger magnitude

when other programs are not considered simultaneously.         This finding is consistent with the

evidence shown in Table 1; participants in any one of these three programs are more likely than

others to participate in the other two as well. Considering TANF, SSI, or food assistance alone

may overstate the effectiveness of the individual program.

       On the other hand, the EITC coefficient is closer to zero when other programs are not

considered. This is consistent with the fact that EITC recipients are less likely to participate in

cash and food transfer programs than other sample families, so the marginal benefit of the EITC

program is potentially understated in a naïve specification.

       Though we cannot establish a statistical difference between our preferred estimates

(column I of Table 8) and those derived from the naïve specifications (columns II through VI),

the pattern of results highlights the importance of considering multiple programs. These findings

are echoed in the two-sample version of the naïve specification, though lack of statistical power

makes some coefficients difficult to interpret.

       The evidence from Table 5 (the first stage in the two sample analysis) also suggests that

exogenous eligibility in any one of the safety net programs is correlated with participation in

other programs that may also influence food insecurity. This finding serves as a reminder to

poverty researchers that even exogenously induced eligibility for a single program may generate

impacts on the outcome of interest by raising or lowering participation in other programs.

       Appendix Table 3 presents a limited set of results for alternative samples - married and

single-parent families who are below 300%, 200%, and 100% of the poverty line. The estimates

suggest no measurable impact of the safety net for married families. One explanation for this is




                                                  24
the comparatively low rate of food insecurity for this group. 26 It may be the case that two-parent

families are better able to weather temporary economic shocks without a safety net. The food

security of single-parent families does appear to benefit from safety net receipt throughout the

low to moderate range of the income distribution.

          Appendix Table 4 shows that the results are robust to a number of alternate

specifications.    Column I duplicates our baseline results, which used a minimal set of control

variables (from Column III of Table 4). Column II adds a more detailed set of individual level

controls, including the age of the respondent, whether the parent is male or female, age of the

youngest child interacted with disability status, and race-education cell interacted with disability

status. These controls make little difference and are excluded from the baseline specification to

improve power in the two-sample analysis.           Column III adds a set of controls detailing

parameters of the TANF, SNAP, and public housing programs in each state. 27 Column IV

includes both the individual controls and policy parameters. Column V of Appendix Table 4

controls for whether family income is below 100% or 200% of the poverty line. The key

coefficient remains stable throughout.

          Column VI investigates the impact of excluding 2009 in the analysis. This was a year of

recession and dramatic but uneven expansion of the food stamp program, and is a source of

important variation.     The coefficient excluding 2009 is about one-third smaller but retains

statistical significance. Column VII excludes three states that are unusual in terms of their policy




26
     The rate of low food security is 10-13 percentage points lower for married families in each

income category.
27
     The parameters are listed in Table 2.


                                                  25
parameters or population – Alaska, Hawaii, and District of Columbia. The results are not

substantively changed.

          The final two columns of Appendix Table 4 show the results from two placebo tests. The

instruments for safety net generosity predict neither employment nor income. These findings

offer confidence that the results are not driven by a spurious correlation between local economic

conditions and safety net generosity. In addition, these regressions indicate that the impact of the

safety net on food insecurity is not operating through changes in labor supply. 28



VI. Conclusion

          Participation in a range of safety net programs is an important means by which low-

income families may respond to the risk of food insecurity. The analysis presented here estimates

the effect of major cash, food, and medical safety net programs on food insecurity. We find

evidence that a generous cash and food safety net does reduce low food security in families with

children. The evidence on the effect of public health insurance is inconclusive.

          Our findings suggest that each $1000 in cash or food benefits for which families are

eligible reduces low food security by 2 percentage points, and that each $1000 actually received

reduces low food security by 4 percentage points. These estimates imply that moving from the

policies of the 10th percentile state of Kentucky to those of the 90th percentile state of Vermont

would reduce low food security by 1.7-2.1 percentage points on a base incidence of 33 percent.

Without expansions in the SNAP program during the Great Recession, the rate of low food

security would have risen by 8.0 percentage points rather than the 6.9 percentage point increase


28
     It is conceivable that the employment of a single parent could increase chaos in the home and

disrupt the meal schedule, for example, but that does not seem to be the mechanism here.


                                                  26
actually observed. The safety net also reduces the probability that a family reports other food-

related hardships.

          The safety net has no detectible impact on typical family food expenditures as measured

in the Current Population Survey Food Security Supplement. It does, however, appear to reduce

the likelihood of occasionally running short of money for food by providing a buffer against

shocks. In sum, providing a safety net so that families have a source of support – either cash or

food – during hard times can substantially improve food security.

          Although states differ widely in the composition of their safety net packages, we find no

evidence of a significant difference in the effectiveness of food versus cash programs – the total

generosity of the package appears to be what matters. Under current rules, states lose Federal

food assistance dollars when they expand their cash safety net. Though their budgets may suffer,

the results presented here suggest that states need not worry that food insecurity will rise as a

result.

          The analysis here also highlights an important methodological issue facing poverty

researchers. Low-income families often participate in multiple safety net programs. Analyses

that focus only on one program risk overstating or understating its impact on the outcome of

interest. Even when program participation arises exogenously, secondary effects on eligibility

for or participation in other programs need to be considered.

          Finally, the analysis highlights the role that the safety net can have in improving the

material well-being of Americans. Reductions in food insecurity, a key indicator of material

well-being, should be one of the benefits considered when evaluating policy changes to safety

net programs. With poverty rates as traditionally measured continuing at relatively high levels




                                                 27
by recent historical standards, understanding the role of the safety net in alleviating hardship is

essential. Our results demonstrate the importance of the safety net in furthering this goal.




                                                28
References

Acs, Gregory, Pamela Loprest, and Tracy Roberts. 2001. “Final Synthesis Report of Findings
      from ASPE ‘Leavers’ Grants.” The Urban Institute Working Paper, November, available
      at http://www.urban.org/uploadedPDF/410809_welfare_leavers_synthesis.pdf.

Balkus, Richard, and Susan Wilschke. 2003. “Treatment of Married Couples in the SSI
       Program.” Social Security Administration Issues Paper 2003-01.

Banthin, Jessica S., and Thomas M. Selden. 2003. "The ABCs of children’s health care: How the
       Medicaid expansions affected access, burdens, and coverage between 1987 and 1996."
       Inquiry, 40:133– 45.

Barrow, Lisa, and Leslie McGranahan. 2000, “The Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit on
      the Seasonality of Household Expenditures.” National Tax Journal, 53(4): 1211-1243.

Bhattacharya, Jayanta, Janet Currie, and Steven Haider. 2004. “Poverty, Food Insecurity, and
       Nutritional Outcomes in Children and Adults,” Journal of Health Economics, 23(4):
       839-862.

Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2013. “The More Things Change, The More They Stay
        The Same: The Safety Net, Poverty, and Living Arrangements in the Great Recession,”
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19499.

Borjas, George. 2004. “Food Insecurity and Public Assistance.” Journal of Public Economics,
       88(7-8): 1421-1433.

Brauner, Sarah, and Sheila R. Zedlewski. 1999. “Declines in Food Stamp and Welfare
      Participation: Is there a connection?” Urban Institute Assessing the New Federalism
      Discussion Paper No. 99-13.

Breunig, Robert, and Indraneel Dasgupta. 2002. “Do Intra-Household Effects Generate the
       Food Stamp Cash-Out Puzzle?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 84(4):
       552-568.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Andrew J. Houtenville and Jennifer R. Tennant. 2012. “Capturing the
      Elusive Working-Age Population with Disabilities: Reconciling Conflicting Social
      Success Estimates From the Current Population Survey and American Community
      Survey.” Journal of Disability Policy Studies.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Mary C. Daly, Andrew J. Houtenville and Nigar Nargis. 2002. “Self-
      Reported Work-Limitation Data: What They Can and Cannot Tell Us.” Demography
      39(3): 541-555.




                                             29
Coleman-Jensen, Alisha and Mark Nord. 2013. "Food Insecurity among Households with
      Working-Aged Adults with Disabilities." Economic Research Report #142955, US
      Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

Cook, John.T., Deborah A. Frank, Suzette M. Levenson, Nicole B. Neault, Tim C. Heeren,
      Maurine M. Black, Carol Berkowitz, Patrick H. Casey, Alan F. Meyers, Diana B. Cutts,
      and Mariana Chilton. 2006. “Child Food Insecurity Increases Risks Posed by Household
      Food Insecurity to Young Children’s Health.” Journal of Nutrition 136: 1073–1076.

Currie, Janet. 2003. “U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs,” in Means-Tested Transfer Programs
        in the United States, Robert Moffitt (ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Currie, Janet, 2004. “The Take Up of Social Benefits,” National Bureau of Economic Research
        Working Paper 10488.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
        Care, and Child Health,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 431-466.

Dubay, Lisa, Jennifer Haley, and Genevieve Kenney. 2002. "Children’s Eligibility for Medicaid
      and SCHIP: A View from 2000," Urban Insitute report B-41.

Duggan, Mark G. and Melissa Schettini Kearney. 2007. "The Impact of Child SSI Enrollment
      on Household Outcomes." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 26(4): 861-885.

Eicher-Miller, Heather, April Mason, Connie Weaver, George McCabe, and Carol. Boushey.
       2009. “Food Insecurity is Associated with Iron Deficiency Anemia in U.S. Adolescents.”
       American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 90: 1358–1371.

Feenberg, D. and Coutts, E. 1993. “An introduction to the TAXSIM model.” Journal of Policy
      Analysis and Management, 12: 189–194.

Fraker, Thomas M. 1990. “Effects of Food Stamps on Food Consumption: A Review of the
       Literature.” Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.

Fraker, Thomas M., Alberto Martini, and James Ohls. 1995. “The Effect of Food Stamp
       Cashout on Food Expenditures.” Journal of Human Resources 30: 633-49.

Fraker, Thomas, Alberto Martini, James Ohls, and Michael Ponza. 1995. “The Effects of
       Cashing-Out Food Stamps on Household Food Use and the Cost of Issuing Benefits.”
       Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 14(3): 372-392.

Ganong, Peter, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2013. “The Decline, Rebound, and Further Rise in
      SNAP Enrollment: Disentangling Business Cycle Fluctuations and Policy Changes,”
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19363.




                                              30
Garrett, Bowen and Sherry Glied. 2000. “Does State AFDC Generosity Affect Child SSI
        Participation?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 19(2): 275-295.

General Accounting Office. 1997. “Welfare Reform: States’ Early Experiences with Benefit
      Termination.” Report to the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate, HEHS-97-74.

Golden, Olivia and Amelia Hawkins. 2012. “TANF Child-Only Cases.” Urban Institute
      Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program—Research Synthesis Brief #03.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. “Cash Welfare as a Consumption Smoothing Mechanism for Divorced
       Mothers.” Journal of Public Economics, 75:157–182.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Aaron Yelowitz. 1999. "Public health insurance and private savings."
       Journal of Political Economy, 107 (6, pt. 1): 1249– 74.

Gundersen, Craig and Brent Kreider. 2009. “Bounding the Effects of Food Insecurity on
      Children’s Health Outcomes.” Journal of Health Economics 28: 971–983.

Gundersen, Craig, Brent Kreider, and John Pepper. 2011. “The Economics of Food Insecurity
      in the United States.” Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 33(3): 281–303.

Gundersen, Craig, Brent Kreider, and John Pepper. 2012. “The Impact of the National School
      Lunch Program on Child Health: A Nonparametic Bounds Analysis,” Journal of
      Econometrics, 166(1): 79-91.

Gundersen, Craig and Victor Oliveira. 2001. “The Food Stamp Program and Food
      Insufficiency.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 84(3): 875–887.

Gundersen, Craig and James Ziliak. 2003. “The Role of Food Stamps in Consumption
      Stabilization.” Journal of Human Resources 38: 1051-79.

Hamersma, Sarah, and Kim, Matthew. 2009. "The Effect of Parental Medicaid Expansions on
      Job Mobility." Journal of Health Economics, 28(4): 761-770.

Herman, Dena R., Gail G. Harrison, Abdelmonem A. Afifi, and Eloise Jencks. 2004. “The
      Effect of the WIC Program on Food Security Status of Pregnant, First-Time
      Participants,” Family Economics and Nutrition Review, 16(1): 21-29.

Holt, Steve. 2011. “Ten Years of the EITC Movement: Making Work Pay Then and Now,”
        Brookings Metropolitan Policy Program Metropolitan Opportunity Series Paper.

Hotz, V. Joseph, and John Karl Scholz. 2003. “The Earned Income Tax Credit." in Means-
       Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. R. Moffitt, 141-197. University of
       Chicago Press and NBER.




                                            31
Howard, Larry. 2011. “Does Food Insecurity at Home Affect Non-Cognitive Performance at
      School? A Longitudinal Analysis of Elementary Student Classroom Behavior.”
      Economics of Education Review 30(1): 157–176.

Hoynes, Hilary W., and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2009. "Consumption Responses to In-
      Kind Transfers: Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program," American
      Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4): 109-39.

Huang, Jin, Karen Matta Oshima, and Youngmi Kim. 2010. “Does Food Insecurity Affect
      Parental Characteristics and Child Behavior? Testing Mediation Effects.” Social Service
      Review 84: 381–401.

Huang, Jin, Baorong Guo, and Youngmi Kim. 2010. "Food Insecurity and Disability: Do
      Economic Resources Matter?" Social Science Research, 39:111-24.

Kirkpatrick, Sharon, Lynn McIntyre, and Melissa Potestio. 2010. “Child Hunger and Long-term
       Adverse Consequences for Health.” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 164
       (8): 754–762.

Leininger, Lindsey, Helen Levy, and Diane Schanzenbach. 2010. "Consequences of SCHIP
       Expansions for Household Well-Being." Forum for Health Economics & Policy 13(1),
       article 3.

Meyer, Bruce, Wallace K.C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. 2009. “The Under-Reporting of
      Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences,” National Bureau of
      Economic Research Working Paper 15181.

Meyer, Bruce and James X. Sullivan. 2004. “The effects of welfare and tax reform: the material
       well-being of single mothers in the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Public Economics,
       88:1387–1420.

Mykerezi, Elton, and Bradford Mills, 2010. “The Impact of Food Stamp Program Participation
      on Household Food Insecurity,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 92(5):
      1379-1391.

National Research Council. 2006. Food Insecurity and Hunger in the United States: An
       Assessment of the Measure. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2001. “Using the EITC to Help Poor Families: New
     Evidence and a Comparison with the Minimum Wage.” National Tax Journal, 54(2):
     281-317.

Nord, Mark, Margaret Andrews, and Steven Carlson. 2009. Household Food Security in the
      United States, 2008. Measuring Food Security. USDA, Economic Research Service.
      Economic Research Report Number 83.



                                             32
Nord, Mark and Anne Marie Golla. 2009. “Does SNAP Decrease Food Insecurity? Untangling
      the Self-Selection Effect.” USDA Economic Research Service Research Report #85.

Nord, Mark and Mark Prell. 2011. “Food Security Improved Following the 2009 ARRA Increase
      in SNAP Benefits.” USDA, Economic Research Service, Economic Research Report No.
      116.

Parish, Susan L., Roderick A. Rose, and Megan E. Andrews. 2009. "Income Poverty and
        Material Hardship among U.S. Women with Disabilities." Social Service Review, 83(1):
        33-52.

Ratcliffe, Caroline, Signe Mary McKernan, and Sisi Zhang. 2011. “How Much Does the
        Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Reduce Food Insecurity?” American
        Journal of Agricultural Economics, 93(4), 1082-1098.

Remler, Dahlia, and Sherry Glied, 2003. “What Other Programs Can Teach Us: Increasing
      Participation in Health Insurance Programs,” American Journal of Public Health, 93(1).

Schmidt, Lucie, and Sheldon Danziger. 2012. "Filling Holes in the Safety Net? Material
      Hardship and Subjective Well-being among Disability Benefit Applicants and Recipients
      after the 1996 Welfare Reform.” Social Science Research 41(6): 1581-97

Shaefer, H. Luke, Colleen M. Grogan, and Harold Pollack. 2011. "Transitions from Private to
       Public Health Coverage among Children: Estimating Effects on Out-of-Pocket Medical
       Costs and Health Insurance Premium Costs," Health Services Research 46(3): 840-58.

She, Peiyun and Gina A. Livermore. 2007. "Material Hardship, Poverty and Disability Among
       Working Age Adults." Social Science Quarterly, 88(4): 970-89.

Shore-Sheppard, Lara. 2008. “Stemming the Tide? The Effect of Expanding Medicaid
       Eligibility on Health Insurance Coverage,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and
       Policy: Vol. 8, Iss. 2 (Advances), Article 6.

Skalicky, Anne, Alana Meyers, William Adams, Zhaoyan Yang, John Cook, and Deborah Frank.
       2006. “Child Food Insecurity and Iron Deficiency Anemia in Low-Income Infants and
       Toddlers in the United States.” Maternal and Child Health Journal 10(2): 177–185.

Smeeding, Timothy M., Katherin Ross Phillips, and Michael O’Connor. 2000. “The EITC:
      Expectation, Knowledge, Use and Economic and Social Mobility.” National Tax Journal,
      Volume 53(4): 1187-1209.

Tax Policy Center. 2012. “Spending on the EITC, Child Tax Credit, and AFDC/TANF, 1975-
      2009.” (Available at http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts.)

Trenkamp, Brad and Michael Wiseman. 2007. “The Food Stamp Program and Supplemental
      Security Income.” Social Security Bulletin, 67(4): 71-87.

                                            33
Wamhoff, Steve, and Michael Wiseman. 2005/2006. “The TANF/SSI Connection.” Social
     Security Bulletin, 66(4): 21-35.

Williams, Erica, Nicholas Johnson, and Jon Shure. 2010. “State Earned Income Tax Credits:
       2010 Legislative Update.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities Brief, Accessed
       3/8/2011 at: http://www.cbpp.org/files/11-10-09sfp.pdf.

Winship, Scott and Christopher Jencks. 2004. “How Did the Social Policy Changes of the
      1990s Affect Material Hardship among Single Mothers? Evidence from the CPS Food
      Security Supplement.” Harvard Kennedy School Working Paper No. RWP04-027.

Ziliak, James, Craig Gundersen, and David Figlio. 2003. “Food Stamp Caseloads Over the
        Business Cycle.” Southern Economic Journal 69(4): 903-919.




                                           34
Appendix A. Appendix Describing Individual Safety Net Programs

TANF.     The Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) program (formerly Aid to

Families with Dependent Children, AFDC) provides cash assistance to very low-income families

with children who either have a single parent or (more rarely) an unemployed parent. The cash

assistance program provides a state-set level of benefits, which is reduced as the parent earns

other income. This basic structure began to be modified by states under waivers of the federal

rules in the mid-1990s in order to encourage greater connection to the labor force among

recipient parents. The waiver period was followed by the enactment of welfare reform in 1996,

which established TANF in place of the entitlement program AFDC, giving states considerably

more freedom in designing and implementing their programs. Importantly for this project,

eligibility for TANF confers automatic eligibility for SNAP, and the design of SNAP offsets to

some extent the variation in state maximum benefits.         Thus there is less variation in the

combined maximum TANF/SNAP benefit across states than there is in the maximum TANF

benefit alone, although SNAP benefits do not entirely eliminate differences (Currie, 2003).

        As described above, despite the extensive literature on the effect of food programs on

food sufficiency, there are surprisingly few papers focusing on the marginal impact of cash

welfare on food security. Borjas (2004) finds evidence of such a relationship using variation

induced by state responses to welfare reform to identify the effect. Similarly, studies of “welfare

leavers” following the implementation of TANF show some evidence that families leaving

welfare experienced food hardships after exiting (see Acs, Loprest, and Roberts, 2001, for a

summary). Winship and Jencks (2004) find no evidence that welfare reform aggravated food-

related problems among single mothers or their children between 1995 and 2002. By focusing




                                                35
on general trends, however, they are largely picking up effects of economic growth and

stagnation, rather than on effects of cash assistance per se.

          Papers examining the effect of cash assistance on consumption are also informative for

our analysis. Meyer and Sullivan (2004) find improvements in consumption of single mother

families relative to comparison families following welfare reform. Gruber (2000) examines how

the maximum cash assistance benefit level in a state affects consumption of families where a

woman becomes a single mother through divorce. He finds that raising the state maximum

benefit level by one dollar raises the level of food and housing consumption by 28 cents.



SSI. The Supplemental Security Income Program (SSI) is a federally funded program that

provides income support to disabled individuals with limited financial resources. 29 The SSI-

disabled program has been expanding dramatically over time, with the number of adult recipients

growing 89% between 1990 and 2010, and the number of child recipients quadrupling over this

same time period.      Some of this increase is likely due to movements of individuals from

AFDC/TANF to SSI in the aftermath of welfare reform (General Accounting Office, 1997;

Wamhoff and Wiseman, 2007). Individuals cannot enroll in both TANF and SSI, though many

families have members participating in both programs.

          There has been very little research examining the effects of SSI on either general well-

being or food security, despite evidence that suggests that the disabled have high levels of overall

material hardship and food insecurity (She and Livermore, 2007; Parish, Rose, and Andrews




29
     The SSI program also provides means-tested income support to the elderly, but that is beyond

the focus of this paper.


                                                 36
2009; Huang, Guo, and Kim 2010). 30 Duggan and Kearney (2007) find that enrollment of a

child on the SSI program increases family income and reduces the likelihood of poverty.

Coleman-Jensen and Nord (2013) find that disability income recipients are more likely to be

food insecure than other disabled individuals, but note that this likely reflects differences in the

severity of their disabilities. However, Schmidt and Danziger (2012) analyze a sample of former

welfare recipients and find that disability benefit recipients are significantly more likely than

unsuccessful applicants to report food insufficiency, even after controlling for detailed health

conditions, activity limitations, and individual fixed effects.

          Though SSI benefits are set at the federal level, a number of states provide additional

optional supplements. In 2010, 21 states provided SSI supplements that ranged in maximum

dollar amounts from $1 to $362. These supplement amounts also vary over time, both in

nominal and in real terms. Higher state supplements have been shown to be associated with the

share of children on SSI (e.g., Garrett and Glied, 2000).



EITC. The federal Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is a refundable credit administered

through the tax system for low-income families with earned income.       It has grown rapidly since

its creation, from $5.0 billion (2009$) in 1975 to $60.4 billion in 2009 (Tax Policy Center,

2012), in part due to a series of expansions to the credit in the 1980s and 1990s (Hotz and

Scholz, 2003). The EITC differs in several important ways from the other programs considered

in this project. First, it is targeted at families with workers. Second, because it is administered

through the tax system, most EITC recipients receive their credit in a lump sum in February or


30
     For example, She and Livermore (2007) find that of the poor and near-poor individuals in the

SIPP who experienced hunger, 62% reported a disability.


                                                  37
March, rather than spread throughout the year. Research that examines how recipients spend

their credit focuses on the one-time nature of the cash transfer.             Using the Consumer

Expenditure Survey, Barrow and McGranahan (2000) find that EITC-eligible households spend

9% more on durable goods in February than do similar households that are not eligible for the

credit. Smeeding, Ross Phillips, and O’Connor (2000) surveyed low-income households in

Chicago that filed tax returns about their plans for using their EITC. While 75% of those

receiving credits reported plans to use at least part of their credit for “social mobility” uses, 69%

reported that they would use part of their EITC to make ends meet. 23% of those receiving

credits said they would use part of it on food.

          EITC benefits are set at the federal level, but a number of states (24 plus the District of

Columbia in 2001) have their own EITCs (Williams, Johnson, and Shure, 2010). The state-level

EITCs tend to be a percentage of the federal credit ranging from 3.5% to 50% in 2010. Five

states have enacted new EITCs since 2006, and a number of states have recently increased their

EITC subsidies. Neumark and Wascher (2001) find large effects of the state EITCs on income

and income-to-needs ratios.



Food Assistance. The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, formerly known as

the Food Stamp program) is the largest Federal nutrition program. Because eligibility for SNAP

is not linked to family structure, it serves an important function as a safety net for disadvantaged

individuals who lack access to other programs. SNAP assistance is provided in the form of an

electronic benefit transfer card, which can be used to purchase non-prepared food items from

stores.




                                                  38
The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) is aimed

at meeting nutritional need for children under five years of age, as well as pregnant, post-partum,

and nursing women. WIC recipients receive vouchers for particular food items; the exact items

provided are determined locally subject to Federal nutritional guidelines.

       The National School Lunch Program provides free or reduced cost meals children in

school. Children are eligible if their family meets a means test or if the school has a sufficiently

high fraction of low-income students.

       A large literature examines the relationship between food assistance and food insecurity.

Gundersen and Oliveira (2001) use an instrumental variables technique and find that SNAP

participants do not face higher rates of food insecurity after controlling for selection. Nord and

Golla (2009) use the Current Population Survey Food Security Supplement linked across years to

trace out dynamic patterns of very low food security relative to SNAP entry. They find that food

security appears to deteriorate in the 6-8 months prior to entering SNAP, but that after SNAP

receipt begins, the likelihood of very low food security (VLFS) declines by about one third

within a month or so. Ratcliffe, McKernan, and Zhang (2011) use recent state-level changes in

SNAP rules to instrument for SNAP participation, and also find that SNAP reduces LFS and

VLFS. Mykerezi and Mills (2010) use state administrative error rates and self-reported loss of

benefits while still eligible in an instrumental variables framework and find that participation in

SNAP lowers rates of food insecurity. Nord and Prell (2011) find that the temporary increase in

SNAP benefits in the economic stimulus package of 2009 reduced food insecurity among SNAP-

eligible families relative to non-eligible families. Herman et al. (2004) show that food insecurity

is reduced when families enter the WIC program. Gundersen, Kreider, and Pepper (2012) show

that the school lunch program improves food security.



                                                39
       A related literature examines the effects of food programs on food consumption. Theory

predicts that food programs raise the quality and quantity of food consumed in a household in

two ways: by increasing the total resources available to the household and by shifting the

allocation of household resources towards food. Gundersen and Ziliak (2003) find that due to

SNAP, food consumption is significantly less volatile than income. A number of papers have

found that the marginal propensity to consume food out of a dollar of food stamps is higher than

that out of a dollar of cash income (e.g. Fraker 1990; Breunig and Dasgupta 2002; Fraker,

Martini, and Ohls 1995; Fraker et al. 1995). Using the diffused introduction of the Food Stamp

Program across counties, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009) estimate that the marginal propensity

to consume food out of a dollar of food stamps is comparable to that out of a dollar of income.



Medicaid/CHIP. These programs provide health insurance for children and some parents in

low-income families.      Although originally linked tightly to eligibility for AFDC or SSI,

eligibility limits have steadily risen since the mid-1980s, allowing children in families with

incomes as high as 200 percent of the federal poverty line or higher to be eligible for public

insurance. This expansion of eligibility means that roughly a third of all children are income-

eligible for Medicaid and about half of all children are income-eligible for Medicaid or CHIP

(Dubay, Haley, and Kennedy, 2002). The income limits for eligibility vary substantially across

states and, following seminal work by Currie and Gruber (1996), exogenous state variation in

eligibility is typically captured by a variable measuring the fraction of a national sample that

would be eligible under the rules in effect in each state.

       Access to public health insurance may affect the likelihood of a child experiencing food

insecurity in two ways: first, families who receive public insurance for their children do not have



                                                 40
to pay the premium cost to cover their children, and second, Medicaid and CHIP have little to no

cost-sharing. For both reasons, eligibility for public health insurance frees up resources for the

family to use for other expenditures, including food.       While there has been no research

specifically investigating the effect of Medicaid/CHIP on food insecurity, there have been

several papers studying consumption impacts of public health insurance. Gruber and Yelowitz

(1999) report an approximately $538 increase in annual consumption associated with Medicaid

participation. More recently, Leininger, Levy, and Schanzenbach (2010) find that eligibility for

Medicaid/CHIP is associated with an increase in consumption, although their results suggest that

most of the increase is allocated to consumption of transportation or saving for retirement. Other

work supporting a relationship between public insurance eligibility and consumption potential

includes Shaefer, Grogan and Pollack (2011) and Banthin and Selden (2003). Thus, there is

scope for even a non-cash program like Medicaid to affect food consumption and food

insecurity.




                                               41
Appendix B. Data Appendix

I. Benefits Calculator

       Our benefits calculator first reads in the raw December CPS data for 2001-2009. It then

reads in the Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) files for January-March of each year, and matches

the December data to the appropriate ORG. We then form appropriate family groups in the

December data corresponding to the family composition rules for each safety net program to be

modeled. Families are defined as one or two parents or step-parents ages 18-64 and their minor

children (where the definition of “minor” varies by program); extended family members and

unmarried partners are not included in the family.

       The resulting data are then run through the National Bureau of Economic Research’s

TAXSIM calculator to calculate federal and state Earned Income Tax Credits.       Output from

TAXSIM is run through the SSI calculator, and output from the SSI calculator is then run

through the TANF calculator. The output from the TANF calculator, combined with data on

children, is run through the Medicaid/CHIP calculator, and finally, the output from the

Medicaid/CHIP calculator is run through the food assistance calculator. We provide details on

each of these steps below.



Matching of December CPS to Outgoing Rotation Groups

       The December CPS lacks adequate information on earnings for this analysis. The income

variable conflates earned and unearned income and, importantly, already includes any safety net

benefits. For the program calculators, we need to obtain earned income from the CPS outgoing

rotation group (ORG) sample. For participants in the December CPS, the ORG is split between

December, January, February, and March CPS surveys. Thus, roughly three-quarters of the



                                               42
sample require using CPS identifiers to match individuals across survey months. Matches are

excluded if there are implausible race, age, or gender differences. The match may fail because of

identifier error, because a family moves, or because an individual exits the family. Furthermore,

a successful match may yield incomplete earnings information, most often because an individual

is self-employed. Overall, about 85% of families successfully match with complete earnings

information.



TAXSIM

We use the National Bureau of Economic Research’s TAXSIM Version 9 program

(http://www.nber.org/taxsim) with the Stata ado interface to calculate federal and state Earned

Income Tax Credits (variables v29 and v35, respectively).       Our sample is defined to include

only families with children, so we have no single taxpayers. We assume that all married CPS

respondents file as married and that all single parents file as heads of household. The number of

dependents for tax purposes includes all children under the age of 19, as well as disabled and

full-time students between the ages of 19 and 23. For more information on TAXSIM, see

Feenberg and Coutts (1993).

          Transfer income (TANF, SNAP, SSI) is not counted as income towards EITC eligibility

or benefits. In most states, the EITC is not counted as income for eligibility/benefit calculations

of other transfer programs. 31 In a number of states, the EITC is counted as a resource after a

period of time if the credit is not spent. 32

31
     Two exceptions exist: In Connecticut (all years 2001-2010), the EITC is counted as earned

income for TANF purposes in the month it is received. In Florida (from 2006-2010), the EITC is

not counted for TANF eligibility, but it is counted as a lump sum in the month it is received for


                                                 43
          We assume no unemployment compensation, and assume that all types of income used in

tax calculations (other than own earnings and spousal earnings) are zero. This includes dividend

income, other property income, taxable pensions, and gross social security benefits. We also

assume that rent paid and real estate taxes paid are zero, as well as child care expenses and other

itemized deductions such as state and local taxes and deductible medical expenses. We assume

no capital gains and losses.        There is a TAXSIM variable for “Other non-taxable transfer

Income such as welfare, and child support that would affect eligibility for state property tax

rebates but would not be taxable at the federal level.” We enter this as zero since it does not

affect EITC calculations.



SSI Calculator

          We assume that respondent families are eligible for SSI if the respondent or spouse (or

both) reports a work-limiting disability and if their countable income makes them financially

eligible for SSI. 33 We ignore child SSI because reliable data on disability among children is not


benefit calculation. We are currently ignoring EITC income in our TANF calculations for these

states.
32
     In no state is EITC counted as an asset in the month it is received. It is counted as an asset in

the month after receipt in only one state. Most states that do count remaining portions as an asset

do so in the 2nd or 3rd month after receipt.
33
     There are a number of issues associated with using self-reported disability measures to

estimate eligibility for SSI. Some individuals who report work-limiting disabilities may not have

disabilities severe enough to pass the Social Security Administration’s five-step process for

determining qualifying disabilities. Some individuals who are SSI recipients (and therefore have


                                                    44
available in the dataset. This means we are potentially underestimating the effect of SSI on the

well-being of families with children (Duggan and Kearney, 2007).

       We assume no unearned income in our calculations of SSI eligibility and benefits. As

such, we are overstating eligibility benefits for households who are receiving OASDI or

Unemployment Insurance income.

       Individuals are eligible for SSI if their countable income is less than the federal benefit

rate, and the benefit level is the difference between the two. In calculating countable income,

there is a $20 general income exclusion. The first $65 of earned income is excluded, then 1/2 of

earnings over $65. These exclusion amounts were constant in nominal terms throughout the

2000s. Married couples are subject to the same $20/$65 income exclusions as an individual

regardless of whether they both have income.

       Federal SSI benefit rates for couples and individuals are collected from the Social

Security Bulletin’s Annual Statistical Supplement, various years. State supplement levels for

couples and individuals are collected from the 2004 Green Book, and State Assistance Programs

for SSI Recipients, various years. In states with a SSI supplement, it is the federal benefit rate

plus the supplement that is used as the point of reference in determining eligibility and payment

amounts (Trenkamp and Wiseman 2007).

       For couples where one spouse is eligible and one is ineligible, if the ineligible spouse's

income is less than or equal to the difference between the couple federal benefit rate and the

individual federal benefit rate, then there is no deeming of spousal income, so we calculate SSI

benefits as if the eligible spouse is an individual. If the ineligible spouse's income is greater than


made it through this process) may not report work-limiting disabilities. See Burkhauser et al.

2002 and Burkhauser, Houtenville, and Tennant 2012 for further discussion.


                                                 45
the difference between the couple federal benefit rate and the individual federal benefit rate, then

deeming of spousal income applies. We then calculate countable income as a couple, and

subtract from the couple federal benefit rate (Balkus and Wilschke 2003).



TANF Calculator

       Our measure of net income for TANF eligibility and benefit calculation only includes

earned income of family members. SSI recipients are not eligible for TANF, and it is generally

more advantageous to enroll in SSI if possible. We exclude SSI income for SSI recipients in

family when determining TANF benefits for other members of the family (Golden and Hawkins,

2012). We ignore all other types of income, including Unemployment Insurance.

       The size of the TANF unit varies by state. Information obtained on inclusion in the unit

is from the Welfare Rules Database at the Urban Institute. For most states, this includes children

under age 18, with children 18 years old included if they are full-time students. SSI recipients

are not included in the TANF unit.

       All TANF eligibility and benefit parameters (gross and net income and earnings

thresholds, need standards, maximum payments, and earned income disregards) are collected

from the Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database. Earned income disregards differ in many

states for eligibility versus benefits. For eligibility disregards, we use the rules that apply to new

applicants, and ignore disregards based on earnings history. For benefit disregards, we use the

rules that apply to someone who has been on the program 12 months (+one day), who is

continuously employed for 6 months (+ one day), and is working 25 hours/week. We ignore

disregards for child care expenses in our calculator.         For states with no explicit income

thresholds, we assume that the need standard is used as the threshold. We calculate income



                                                 46
eligibility for TANF based on whether the family meets any gross or net earned or unearned

income thresholds set by the state. We also account for the statutory eligibility of two-parent

non-disabled families set by states.     For families that we determine to be TANF-eligible, we

then use the benefit computation formula with parameters from the WRD to determine benefit

levels.



Medicaid/CHIP Calculator

          We first impute Medicaid eligibility for adults in the household. Eligibility thresholds as

a percent of the poverty line for working and non-working adults vary by state. Unit size for

Medicaid includes all children under the age of 19 (except in Minnesota, which includes all

children ages 20 and under). Earnings include those of both spouses and all children considered

to be in the Medicaid unit.

          Adults are eligible for Medicaid if they are working and family income as a percent of the

poverty line is below the working cutoff; or if they are not working and family income as a

percent of the poverty line is below the non-working cutoff, or if they are on SSI. We thus

impute Medicaid eligibility for adults in the household by comparing earned income as a percent

of the federal poverty level to the eligibility threshold. Eligibility thresholds vary by state, by

year, and by whether the adult is working or not. The Medicaid family unit that is used to

determine earnings and the appropriate poverty threshold includes all adults and children under

the age of 19 (except in Minnesota, which includes all children ages 20 and under) who are not

SSI recipients.




                                                  47
Children are eligible for Medicaid (or CHIP) if the income of their Medicaid family unit is below

their state-specific, age-specific, and year-specific cutoff. Again, SSI recipients are not included

in the family unit, nor is their income counted. Information on eligibility thresholds for both

children and adults was obtained primarily from the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the

Uninsured, which conducted a periodic 50-state survey of Medicaid and CHIP eligibility rules

over the 2000-2010 period. Additional information on eligibility thresholds was obtained from

previous work by Shore-Sheppard (2008) and Hamersma and Kim (2009).



Food Assistance Calculator

       The food assistance calculator considers three Federal programs – SNAP, WIC, and the

National School Lunch program. The smaller school breakfast program and other nutrition

programs are not included.

       SNAP eligibility is based on a gross income screen (130% of the poverty line) and a net

income screen (100% of the poverty line). Gross income includes earned income, imputed SSI

benefits, and imputed TANF benefits. Net income is equal to gross income, less 20 percent of

earned income, less a standard deduction.

       The SNAP unit includes all members of the family, including TANF and SSI recipients,

except in California, where SSI recipients and their income are excluded. The SNAP unit

includes children 21 years of age and younger regardless of their work/school status, (2004

Green Book; Food and Nutritional Act of 2008), so our earned income measure includes

earnings of all children up to and including 21 year olds. Families where all members are either

TANF or SSI recipients are categorically eligible.




                                                48
        In California, the SNAP benefit for SSI recipients is “cashed out” in the state supplement.

SSI recipients living independently in CA are ineligible for SNAP.              Benefits for other

households that include SSI recipients are calculated without including the SSI recipient in the

budget unit or counting the SSI recipient’s income in assessing household resources (Trenkamp

and Wiseman, 2007).

        All relevant parameters (gross and net income screen values, standard deductions, and

maximum benefits) are collected from the Food and Nutrition Service at the United States

Department of Agriculture.      Most parameters vary by family size.        Eligibility and benefit

parameters are the same for all states in the continental US but different for Alaska and Hawaii.

        The SNAP benefit for families that pass the gross and net income screens are equal to the

SNAP maximum benefit less 30% of net income.           It is possible for the imputed benefit to be

negative, even for eligible families. The minimum benefit level for families of 1 and 2 persons is

$10 in early years. The Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 changes the minimum

benefit for 1 and 2 person families to be equal to 8% of the maximum SNAP allotment for a one

person household. This means it now differs in Alaska and Hawaii from the continental US, and

changes by year. There is no minimum benefit level for families of 3+ persons.

        For the school lunch imputation, the unit size for eligibility determination is calculated by

the number of children 21 and younger in the household plus one for a single parent or two for a

married parent. Income includes SSI and TANF income. Income limits are 130% of poverty for

free lunch and 185% of poverty for reduced cost lunch. SNAP and TANF eligibility imply free

lunch eligibility.




                                                 49
To impute the value of a free lunch, we use the maximum value per lunch that the federal

government reimburses the states for lunch provision. 34 The contiguous states have a fixed rate;

higher rates apply in Alaska and Hawaii. Rates vary by year. Reduced lunch reimbursement

rates are 40 cents lower under the assumption that schools will charge students 40 cents for these

lunches.

          To determine the number of lunches per year, we assume there are 180 school days

except in states where laws as of March 2013 set minimum required days at a level different than

180. 35 In those cases we use the current state minimum number of days as the number of school

lunches; we do not consider historical variation in school year length. To impute the total annual

value of the program to a family, we multiply the dollar value of annual lunches by the number

of children ages 5 through 17 in households that are income eligible.

          The income eligibility threshold for WIC is 185% of the federal poverty line. TANF and

SNAP eligibility imply WIC income eligibility. Families with pregnant, postpartum, or nursing

women or children under 5 are eligible. WIC food packages vary by whether the mother is

pregnant, postpartum, or nursing, and by the age of the children. Packages also vary the local

level subject to Federal nutrition guidelines.

          To impute a value for WIC, we use the national average annual WIC food costs per

person. 36 We apply these imputed values to all children under five in a WIC-eligible household.


34
     These are published annually in the federal register and can be found on the USDA website:

http://www.fns.usda.gov/cnd/Governance/notices/naps/naps.htm.
35
     School year lengths can be found at the Educational Commission of the States,

http://www.ecs.org/html/Document.asp?chouseid=10668.
36
     The USDA publishes these costs by year: http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/wisummary.htm


                                                 50
We do not explicitly add the value for maternal WIC. However, the food packages for nursing

mothers combined with the minimal food package for a nursing infant may approximate the

USDA average. Non-nursing mothers are eligible for the program for six months and their

children receive formula, suggesting our imputation is likely understated in families with

formula-fed newborns.



II. Additional Policy and Control Variables

State unemployment rate:       Collected from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area

       Unemployment Statistics.

Unemployment Insurance weeks: The average number of UI weeks available over the 12-month

       period to which the CPS Food Screener pertains. We received data from Henry Farber

       and Rob Valletta on the number of extended weeks of UI available, beyond the normal

       26. We then calculated the average total number of UI weeks (extended weeks + 26)

       available by state over the 12 months from December – November before the December

       Food Security Supplement survey is conducted.

Unemployment Insurance dependent allowances: Maximum dependent allowances in dollars

       come from the US Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration

       (http://www.ows.doleta.gov/unemploy/statelaws.asp). Yearly data reflects the status of

       state law enacted as of January 1 of that year.

TANF generous asset limit: Equals 1 if state had an asset limit greater than $3000 or had no

       asset limit. TANF asset limits in dollars collected from the Urban Institute’s Welfare

       Rules Database.




                                                51
TANF family cap: Equals 1 if a state had a family cap in place that denied additional benefits or

       reduced benefit amounts to a family that had additional children while on public

       assistance. Data through 2005 obtained from Rebecca Blank and Jordan Matsudaira,

       updated with information from the Urban Institute Welfare Rules Database.

TANF strict time limit: Equals 1 if a state had a lifetime time limit of less than 60 months. Data

       through 2007 obtained from Rebecca Blank and Jordan Matsudaira, updated with

       information from the Urban Institute Welfare Rules Database.

SNAP standard utility allowance for a family of 3: We use the dollar amount of the HCSUA,

       which is the standard utility allowance including heating and cooling. Data for 2005-

       2010 collected from SNAP Quality Control data generated by Mathematica, F Tables.

       Data are for fiscal years.        http://hostm142.mathematica-mpr.com/fns/download.htm.

       Monthly data for 2001-2004 were provided by Katie Fitzpatrick, and were averaged to

       generate annual data. We used averages for Alaska and New York, where SUA depends

       upon location within the state.

Child support enforcement dollars per capita: Total administrative expenditures on child support

       were collected from HHS Office of Child Support Enforcement Annual Reports to

       Congress. 2005-2009 values from 2009 Annual Report to Congress, Table 43; 2001-

       2004 values from 2004 Annual Report to Congress, Table 30.

Public Housing Units and Vouchers Per Capita: Data on the number of subsidized housing units

       by state is available from HUD for years 2000 and 2004-2009. Linear interpolation is

       used for 2001 through 2003 data years.

        (http://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets/assthsg.html).




                                                52
                                                            Figure 1. Low Food Security in Sample Families
                                           0.45



                                            0.4



                                           0.35
Fraction Families with Low Food Security




                                            0.3



                                           0.25



                                            0.2



                                           0.15



                                            0.1
                                                                                                                                         Note: Authors' calculations
                                                                                                                                         based on December CPS.
                                                                                                                                         Sample excludes immigrant
                                           0.05
                                                                                                                                         families.


                                             0
                                                  2001   2002     2003              2004        2005            2006              2007       2008           2009
                                                                                                Year

                                                                     All Families          Single Parent Families <300% Poverty
                                                                              Figure 2. Cash vs. Food Imputed Potential Benefits
                                                                                For Representative Sample Using 2001 Policies
                                                                 3
Average Imputed Potential Food Benefits in Thousands of $2005




                                                                2.5                                                                           HI




                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                      AK
                                                                                              ALMS
                                                                                                 AR SCNC
                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                      KY
                                                                                                      TN
                                                                                                       GA ID
                                                                                                         LAMO  NV
                                                                                                             ILNE
                                                                                                               OK
                                                                                                                AZNJIA        MD
                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                                 DE
                                                                                                                CO   FLSD
                                                                                                                        WY
                                                                                                                        ORKS
                                                                                                                          WV
                                                                                                                         NMINOH
                                                                                                                          VA   DC
                                                                                                                             UTWA
                                                                1.5                                                             MENH
                                                                                                                                 MIMT
                                                                                                                                  NDCT       NY
                                                                                                                                                   MA RIVT
                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                             MN
                                                                                                                                                                      WI

                                                                 1




                                                                0.5




                                                                 0
                                                                      0   1          2               3                4                  5                   6    7        8
                                                                                         Average Imputed Potential Cash Benefits in Thousands of $2005
                                                                                                          (Includes EITC, TANF & SSI)
                                       Figure 3. Average Real Combined Potential Cash and Food Benefits
                                                                Relative to 2001
                                                        Fixed Simulated National Sample
                                                              Twelve Largest States
                               1.2




                              1.15


                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                            FL
                               1.1
                                                                                                            GA
Generosity Relative to 2001




                                                                                                            IL
                                                                                                            MI
                              1.05                                                                          NC
                                                                                                            NJ
                                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                            OH
                                1
                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                            TX
                                                                                                            VA
                              0.95




                               0.9
                                     2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009
                                                   Figure 4. Average Real Potential TANF Benefits
                                                                   Relative to 2001
                                                           Fixed Simulated National Sample
                                                                 Twelve Largest States
                               1.1



                              1.05



                                1                                                                             CA
                                                                                                              FL
                                                                                                              GA
Generosity Relative to 2001




                              0.95
                                                                                                              IL
                                                                                                              MI

                               0.9                                                                            NC
                                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                                              NY
                              0.85
                                                                                                              OH
                                                                                                              PA

                               0.8                                                                            TX
                                                                                                              VA

                              0.75



                               0.7
                                     2001   2002        2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008   2009
                                                   Figure 5. Average Real Potential SSI Benefits
                                                                 Relative to 2001
                                                         Fixed Simulated National Sample
                                                               Twelve Largest States
                               1.1




                              1.05
Generosity Relative to 2001




                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                     MI

                                1                                                                    NJ
                                                                                                     NY
                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                     FL, GA, IL, NC, OH, TX, VA


                              0.95




                               0.9
                                     2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007    2008   2009
                                                   Figure 6. Average Real Potential EITC Benefits
                                                                  Relative to 2001
                                                          Fixed Simulated National Sample
                                                                Twelve Largest States
                               1.4


                              1.35


                               1.3


                              1.25
Generosity Relative to 2001




                                                                                                       IL
                               1.2
                                                                                                       MI
                                                                                                       NC
                              1.15
                                                                                                       NJ
                                                                                                       NY
                               1.1
                                                                                                       CA, FL, GA, OH, PA, TX
                                                                                                       VA
                              1.05


                                1


                              0.95


                               0.9
                                     2001   2002    2003    2004   2005   2006   2007   2008    2009
                                                  Figure 7. Average Real Potential Food Benefits
                                                                 Relative to 2001
                                                         Fixed Simulated National Sample
                                                               Twelve Largest States
                              1.5




                              1.4

                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                             FL
                              1.3                                                                            GA
Generosity Relative to 2001




                                                                                                             IL
                                                                                                             MI

                              1.2                                                                            NC
                                                                                                             NJ
                                                                                                             NY
                                                                                                             OH
                              1.1
                                                                                                             PA
                                                                                                             TX
                                                                                                             VA
                               1




                              0.9
                                    2001   2002       2003    2004     2005    2006    2007    2008   2009
                                                  Figure 8. Average Fraction Medicaid Eligible
                                                                Relative to 2001
                                                        Fixed Simulated National Sample
                                                              Twelve Largest States
                              1.5



                              1.4



                              1.3                                                                              CA
                                                                                                               FL
                                                                                                               GA
Generosity Relative to 2001




                              1.2
                                                                                                               IL
                                                                                                               MI

                              1.1                                                                              NC
                                                                                                               NJ
                                                                                                               NY
                               1
                                                                                                               OH
                                                                                                               PA

                              0.9                                                                              TX
                                                                                                               VA

                              0.8



                              0.7
                                    2001   2002      2003    2004    2005     2006    2007       2008   2009
                                                      Table 1. Multiple Program Participation
                                         Non-Immigrant Single-Parent Families Under 300% of the Poverty Line
                                                               March CPS 2002-2010


                                                                                                                         Any Household
                                                                    Any Family TANF   Any Family SSI   Any Family EITC   Food Assistance      Any Family
                                                   Fraction With…      Reported         Reported          Imputed           Reported       Medicaid Reported
Conditional On…
Any Family TANF Reported                                                 1.00             0.15              0.49              0.94               0.99
Any Family SSI Reported                                                  0.24             1.00              0.33              0.82               0.96
Any Family EITC Imputed                                                  0.07             0.03              1.00              0.53               0.49
Any Household Food Assistance Reported                                   0.17             0.09              0.67              1.00               0.72
Any Family Medicaid Reported                                             0.19             0.11              0.64              0.76               1.00

Unconditional                                                            0.10             0.06              0.66              0.53               0.51


Note: Weighted by CPS sample weights.
                                          Table 2. Summary Statistics for Key December Sample Variables
                                        Non-Immigrant Single-Parent Families Under 300% of the Poverty Line
                                                                    (N=28189)

Variable                                                                                         Mean        SD        Min        Max

Food Insecurity
            Low Food Security                                                                    0.329       0.470     0.000     1.000
            Log(Usual Weekly Food Spending, topcoded) (N=26698)                                  4.514       0.690     0.000     6.907
            Usual Weekly Food Spending (N=26998, topcoded)                                      110.354     75.078     0.000    999.000
            Need to Spend More to Meet Needs (N=26986)                                           0.284       0.451     0.000     1.000
            Ever Run Short of Money For Food Last 12 Months (N=28068)                            0.489       0.500     0.000     1.000
            Adults Cut Size of Meal Last 12 months (N=28146)                                     0.176       0.381     0.000     1.000
            Ate Less Than You Thought You Should (N=28142)                                       0.178       0.383     0.000     1.000
            Often/Sometimes Food We Bought Did Not Last (N=28142)                                0.336       0.472     0.000     1.000

Demographic Characteristics
           Any Disability in Family                                                               0.089      0.285     0.000      1.000
           Parent Disabled                                                                        0.084      0.277     0.000      1.000
           Number of Kids=2                                                                       0.329      0.470     0.000      1.000
           Number of Kids=3                                                                       0.131      0.337     0.000      1.000
           Number of Kids= 4 or More                                                              0.053      0.223     0.000      1.000
           Race/Ethnicity = Non-Hispanic Black                                                    0.313      0.464     0.000      1.000
           Race/Ethnicity = Hispanic                                                              0.127      0.333     0.000      1.000
           Race/Ethnicity = Non-White Non-Hispanic                                                0.020      0.141     0.000      1.000
           Parental Education = High School                                                       0.392      0.488     0.000      1.000
           Parental Education = Some College                                                      0.350      0.477     0.000      1.000
           Parental Education= College Graduate or More                                           0.087      0.282     0.000      1.000
           Age of Youngest Child                                                                  7.394      5.403     0.000     18.000
           Age of Parent                                                                         34.435      9.285    18.000     64.000
           Single Father Family                                                                   0.147      0.354     0.000      1.000
           Family Monthly Earnings                                                              1228.136   1132.043   0.000     5749.544
           Under 200% of the Poverty Line                                                         0.819      0.385     0.000      1.000
           Under 100% of the Poverty Line                                                         0.510      0.500     0.000      1.000

State Policy/Economic Controls
             Unemployment Rate                                                                   5.773       1.694     2.500     13.300
             UI Dependent Allowance                                                              5.152      15.662     0.000    111.000
             Child Support Enforcement Expenditure Per Capita                                   17.444      7.770      0.573     95.164
             Non-Cash TANF Expenditures Per Capita                                              19.402     14.556      0.108    180.128
             TANF Family Cap                                                                     0.470       0.499     0.000      1.000
             TANF Strict Time Limit                                                              0.415       0.493     0.000      1.000
             TANF Strict Sanctions                                                               0.395       0.489     0.000      1.000
             TANF New Non-Citizen Eligibility                                                    0.357       0.479     0.000      1.000
             SNAP Standard Utility Allowance (N=27968, analysis includes zero for missing HI)   303.612    105.311    150.000   744.000
             SNAP New Non-Citizen Adult Eligibility                                              0.147       0.354     0.000      1.000
             SNAP Simplified Reporting                                                           0.715       0.428     0.000      1.000
             SNAP Electronic Benefit Transfer                                                    0.959       0.176     0.000      1.000
             SNAP Combined App Project for SSI Recipients                                        0.302       0.449     0.000      1.000
             Public Housing and Voucher Units Per Capita                                         0.011       0.004     0.004      0.035

Imputed Real Potential Benefits (Thousands of $2005)
           Cash and Food Combined                                                                5.711      4.903      0.000     35.203
           TANF                                                                                  2.017      3.074      0.000     17.256
           SSI                                                                                   0.615      2.071      0.000     11.817
           EITC                                                                                  1.324      1.543      0.000     7.364
           Food Assistance                                                                       1.755      2.201      0.000     16.329
           Fraction Family Medicaid Eligible                                                     0.705      0.344      0.000     1.000

Note: Weighted by CPS sample weights.
                                                                                                   Table 3. First Stage for One-Sample Regressions (N=28189)

                                                                                   I                   II                  III                 IV                   V                   VI                 VII                 VIII                 IX                   X


                                                                       Imputed Potential
                                                                        Real Combined                        Imputed Potential Imputed Potential                      Imputed Potential Imputed Potential Imputed Potential Imputed Potential
                                                                         Cash & Food     Imputed Family Real Cash Benefits Real Food Benefits Imputed Family Real TANF Benefits Real SSI Benefits Real EITC Benefits Real SNAP Benefits Imputed Family
                                                    Dependent Variable: Benefits (000s) Medicaid Eligibility      (000s)            (000s)       Medicaid Eligibility      (000s)            (000s)            (000s)            (000s)       Medicaid Eligibility


Simulated Potential Real Combined Cash & Food Benefits (000s)                  0.4518**            -0.0142**
                                                                               (0.0432)             (0.0022)
Simulated Potential Real Cash Benefits (000s)                                                                          0.7009**            -0.1223**           -0.0124**
                                                                                                                       (0.0640)             (0.0215)            (0.0038)
Simulated Potential Real TANF Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                                       0.6366**              0.0065             0.0210             -0.1189**           -0.0107**
                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.0555)            (0.0140)           (0.0163)             (0.0207)            (0.0033)
Simulated Potential Real SSI Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                                          0.0319            0.7715**            0.0958**             0.1198+              -0.0144
                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.0903)            (0.0675)           (0.0246)             (0.0642)            (0.0125)
Simulated Potential Real EITC Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                                       -0.2584**            0.0441+            0.7531**            -1.0180**           -0.0300**
                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.0725)            (0.0260)           (0.0473)             (0.0410)            (0.0088)
Simulated Potential Real Food Benefits (000s)                                                                           -0.1351*           0.4248**            -0.0164**            -0.1656**            0.0283*            0.0321+              0.5457**           -0.0144**
                                                                                                                        (0.0573)            (0.0176)            (0.0023)             (0.0582)            (0.0110)           (0.0183)             (0.0190)            (0.0025)
Simulated Family Medicaid Elig                                                 -3.4130**           0.6258**            -1.3695**           -1.3733**            0.6349**             -0.7009+           -0.5759**            0.1728               -0.3006            0.6529**
                                                                                (0.7511)           (0.0479)             (0.3791)            (0.2261)            (0.0463)             (0.3730)            (0.1371)           (0.1615)             (0.1931)            (0.0502)

Individual Controls                                                               yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
Policy Controls                                                                   yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
State Fixed Effects                                                               yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
Year Fixed Effects                                                                yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
F Statistic on Instruments                                                       85.86               85.35               60.93               199.70               65.00               55.79               45.42               54.02               330.19               40.62
P-Value on F test                                                                 0.00                0.00                0.00                0.00                 0.00                0.00                0.00                0.00                0.00                 0.00




Note: Standard errors in parentheses clustered on state. +, *, and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. Individual Controls include age of youngest child, number of kids interacted with disability status, and indicators for race*education.
Policy Controls include state unemployment rate, child support enforcement spending per capita, and UI dependency allowance. All regressions include state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Amounts in thousands of real 2005 dollars. Weighted by CPS sample weights.
                                                                                                                               Table 4. One-Sample OLS and IV (N=28189)


                                                                                           I                      II                     III                   IV                      V                      VI                    VII                    VIII
                                                                                          OLS              IV (one sample)        IV (one sample)        IV (one sample)        IV (one sample)        IV (one sample)        IV (one sample)        IV (one sample)

                                                           Dependent Variable:             LFS                   LFS                    LFS                    LFS                    LFS                    LFS                    LFS                    LFS

Imputed Real Potential Benefits Cash & Food (000s)                                     0.0072**               -0.0202**                                                            -0.0237**              -0.0192*               -0.0152**              -0.0177**
          (Instrumented in Columns III and higher)                                     (0.0013)                (0.0061)                                                             (0.0077)              (0.0084)                (0.0054)               (0.0054)
Imputed Real Potential Benefits Cash (000s)                                                                                          -0.0177**
          (Instrumented in Columns III and higher)                                                                                    (0.0054)
Real Imputed Potential TANF Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                   -0.0090                0.0131
          (Instrumented in Columns III and higher)                                                                                                           (0.0091)               (0.0110)
Real Imputed Potential SSI Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                   -0.0328*                                      -0.0087
          (Instrumented in Columns III and higher)                                                                                                           (0.0166)                                      (0.0236)
Real Imputed Potential EITC Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                   -0.0272                                                             -0.0164
          (Instrumented in Columns III and higher)                                                                                                           (0.0179)                                                             (0.0183)
Real Imputed Potential Food Benefits (000s)                                                                                           -0.0257*               -0.0181+                                                                                    -0.0080
          (Instrumented in Columns III and higher)                                                                                    (0.0125)               (0.0094)                                                                                    (0.0120)
 Family Medicaid Eligibility                                                           0.0781**                -0.0226                 -0.0105                 0.0138                0.0196                -0.0357                 0.0303                -0.0105
          (Instrumented in Columns III and higher)                                     (0.0145)                (0.0786)               (0.0709)               (0.0708)               (0.0625)               (0.0742)               (0.0648)               (0.0709)

Individual Controls                                                                        yes                   yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes
Policy Controls                                                                            yes                   yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes
State Fixed Effects                                                                        yes                   yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes
Year Fixed Effects                                                                         yes                   yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes                    yes




Note: Standard errors in parentheses clustered on state. +, *, and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. Individual Controls include age of youngest child, number of kids interacted with disability status, and indicators for race*education. Policy
Controls include state unemployment rate, child support enforcement spending per capita, and UI dependency allowance. All regressions include state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Amounts in thousands of real 2005 dollars. Weighted by CPS sample weights.
                                                                              Table 5. First Stage for Two-Sample Regressions (N=68702)




                                                                         Actual Reported
                                                                        Benefits Real Cash    Fraction Family     Actual Reported    Actual Reported        Fraction Family     Actual Reported   Actual Reported
                                                                        & Food Combined       Medicaid Actual    Benefits Real Cash Benefits Real Food      Medicaid Actual    Benefits Real TANF Benefits Real SSI   Imputed Real EITC
                                                                              (000s)           Participation           (000s)             (000s)             Participation           (000s)           (000s)               (000s)
                                                                                 I                   II                  III                IV                     V                    VI               VII                 VIII
Simulated Potential Real Combined Cash & Food Benefits (000s)               0.1909**              0.0048*
                                                                             (0.0255)            (0.0021)
Simulated Potential Real Cash Benefits (000s)                                                                         0.3260**             -0.0474*              0.0050
                                                                                                                      (0.0250)             (0.0199)             (0.0049)
Simulated Potential Real TANF Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                                       0.2211**             0.0440+           -0.0048
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0370)             (0.0231)         (0.0142)
Simulated Potential Real SSI Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                                         0.0637             0.2761**          0.1128**
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0388)             (0.0841)         (0.0211)
Simulated Potential Real EITC Benefits (000s)                                                                                                                                        -0.0078            -0.1765**         0.9783**
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0508)             (0.0490)         (0.0408)
Simulated Potential Real Food Benefits (000s)                                                                           0.0196            0.0718**               0.0046             -0.0607*              0.0071            0.0175
                                                                                                                       (0.0219)            (0.0148)             (0.0036)            (0.0237)             (0.0183)         (0.0155)
Simulated Family Medicaid Elig                                               -2.0039**            0.1161*              -0.2607            -1.4128**             0.1169*              -0.2951             -0.2125            0.0201
                                                                              (0.5246)            (0.0483)             (0.2331)            (0.2825)             (0.0503)            (0.2019)             (0.1835)         (0.1261)

Individual Controls                                                             yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                  yes                  yes                 yes              yes
Policy Controls                                                                 yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                  yes                  yes                 yes              yes
State Fixed Effects                                                             yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                  yes                  yes                 yes              yes
Year Fixed Effects                                                              yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                  yes                  yes                 yes              yes
F Statistics on Instruments                                                    37.91                9.30                84.90               11.48                 7.71                32.12               19.34            297.06
P-Value on F test                                                              0.00                 0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.00             0.00


Note: Standard errors in parentheses clustered on state. +, *, and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. Individual Controls include age of youngest child, number of kids
interacted with disability status, and indicators for race*education. Policy Controls include state unemployment rate, child support enforcement spending per capita, and UI dependency allowance. All
regressions include state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Amounts in thousands of real 2005 dollars. Weighted by CPS sample weights.
                                                               Table 6. Two-Sample IV (N=68702 first stage, N=28189 second stage)

                                                                                                I                     II                    III                  IV                    V                     VI              VII
                                                                Dependent Variable:            LFS                   LFS                   LFS                  LFS                   LFS                   LFS              LFS

(Instrumented) Actual Reported Real Cash & Food (000s)                                       -0.0405*                                                        -0.0589**              -0.0379              -0.0362*          -0.0310
                                                                                             (0.0180)                                                         (0.0228)              (0.0351)             (0.0166)          (0.0301)
(Instrumented) Real Cash (000s)                                                                                                         -0.0310
                                                                                                                                        (0.0265)
(Instrumented) Actual Reported Benefits Real TANF (000s)                                                           -0.0011                                     0.0542
                                                                                                                  (0.0548)                                    (0.0512)
(Instrumented) Actual Reported Benefits Real SSI (000s)                                                            -0.0886                                                          -0.0187
                                                                                                                  (0.0801)                                                          (0.1161)
(Instrumented) Imputed Real EITC (000s)                                                                           -0.0610*                                                                               -0.0166
                                                                                                                  (0.0255)                                                                               (0.0162)
(Instrumented) Actual Reported Benefits Real Food (000s)                                                           -0.0406              -0.0748                                                                            -0.0438
                                                                                                                  (0.0381)              (0.0730)                                                                           (0.0884)
(Instrumented) Fraction Family Medicaid Actual Participation                                 -0.2263               -0.0893              -0.5206               -0.1533               -0.2741              -0.0567           -0.5206
                                                                                             (0.3158)             (0.1836)              (0.7760)              (0.2881)              (0.6091)             (0.1590)          (0.8900)

Individual Controls                                                                            yes                   yes                   yes                  yes                   yes                   yes              yes
Policy Controls                                                                                yes                   yes                   yes                  yes                   yes                   yes              yes
State Fixed Effects                                                                            yes                   yes                   yes                  yes                   yes                   yes              yes
Year Fixed Effects                                                                             yes                   yes                   yes                  yes                   yes                   yes              yes



Note: Standard errors in parentheses cluster bootstrapped using 2000 replications. +, *, and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. Individual Controls include age of youngest child,
number of kids interacted with disability status, and indicators for race*education. Policy Controls include state unemployment rate, child support enforcement spending per capita, and UI dependency
allowance. All regressions include state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Amounts in thousands of real 2005 dollars. Weighted by CPS sample weights.
                                                          Table 7. Alternative Outcomes for One-Sample and Two-Sample IV

                                                                                               I                II              III              IV               V               VI               VII


                                                                                                                                                                  Last 12 Months
                                                                                                                                                   Last 12 Months Ever Ate Less
                                                                                                                                                    Ever Cut Meal Than Thought Food Bought
                                                                                                                       Need More to                  Size or Skip You Should b/c Didn't Last and
                                                                                      Log (Usual                        Meet Food Last 12 Months Meals b/c Not      Not Enough    Didn't Have
                                                                                     Weekly Food          Usual Weekly   Needs of   Ever Ran Short Enough Money     Money for    Money to Buy
                                                                 Dependent Variable:  Spending)          Food Spending  Household   of Food Money     for Food          Food         More

One Sample Results
         (Instrumented) Imputed Eligibility Real Cash & Food (000s)                        -0.0114         -3.0494**         -0.0147*        -0.0155*         -0.0115*         -0.0123*         -0.0141*
                                                                                           (0.0111)         (1.0414)         (0.0073)        (0.0061)         (0.0055)         (0.0054)         (0.0056)
           (Instrumented) Family Medicaid Eligibility                                      -0.1805         -33.4863*          -0.0412         0.0308           0.0236           -0.0181          0.0805
                                                                                           (0.1567)        (16.7018)         (0.0926)        (0.0602)         (0.0679)         (0.0816)         (0.0798)


THESE TWO SAMPLE ARE CORRECT AS OF 8.2.13
Two Sample Results
         (Instrumented) Reported Actual Cash & Food (000s)                                  0.0014          -1.8219          -0.0266         -0.0383*         -0.0283*         -0.0240+        -0.0424**
                                                                                           (0.0297)         (3.2945)         (0.0190)        (0.0171)         (0.0144)         (0.0144)         (0.0156)
           (Instrumented) Reported Actual Family Medicaid Participation                    -0.6128         -119.0012         -0.2268          -0.0356          -0.0242          -0.1506          0.1157
                                                                                           (0.5896)        (76.2278)         (0.3519)        (0.2380)         (0.2691)         (0.3055)         (0.3310)



Note: Standard errors in parentheses clustered on state. For two sample analyses standard errors are cluster bootstrapped using 2000 replications. +, *, and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10,
5, and 1 percent levels. All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and all other controls in previous tables. Amounts in thousands of real 2005 dollars. Weighted by CPS sample
weights.
                                                    Table 8. Preferred and Naïve One-Sample IV and Two-Sample IV Estimation

                                                                                 I                     II                    III                  IV                      V                     VI
One-Sample IV                                    Dependent Variable:            LFS                   LFS                   LFS                   LFS                    LFS                   LFS

Real Imputed Potential TANF Benefits (000s)                                   -0.0090              -0.0179*
                       (Instrumented)                                        (0.0091)              (0.0081)
Real Imputed Potential SSI Benefits (000s)                                   -0.0328*                                    -0.0411**
                       (Instrumented)                                        (0.0166)                                     (0.0105)
Real Imputed Potential EITC Benefits (000s)                                   -0.0272                                                           -0.0184
                       (Instrumented)                                        (0.0179)                                                           (0.0179)
Real Imputed Potential Food Benefits (000s)                                  -0.0181+                                                                                 -0.0280*
                       (Instrumented)                                        (0.0094)                                                                                 (0.0131)
Family Imputed Medicaid Eligibility                                           0.0138                                                                                                        -0.0350
                       (Instrumented)                                        (0.0708)                                                                                                       (0.0805)




Two-Sample IV                                    Dependent Variable:            LFS                   LFS                   LFS                    LFS                   LFS                   LFS

Actual Reported Benefits Real TANF (000s)                                     -0.0011              -0.0517+
                      (Instrumented)                                         (0.0548)              (0.0297)
Actual Reported Benefits Real SSI (000s)                                      -0.0886                                    -0.1001*
                      (Instrumented)                                         (0.0801)                                    (0.0501)
Imputed Real EITC (000s)                                                     -0.0610*                                                           -0.0154
                      (Instrumented)                                         (0.0255)                                                           (0.0151)
Actual Reported Benefits Real Food (000s)                                     -0.0406                                                                                  1.2454
                      (Instrumented)                                         (0.0381)                                                                                 (15.6068)
Fraction Family Medicaid Actual Participation                                 -0.0893                                                                                                       -0.1151
                      (Instrumented)                                         (0.1836)                                                                                                       (0.3496)




Note: Standard errors in parentheses clustered on state. For two sample analyses standard errors are cluster bootstrapped using 2000 replications. +, *, and ** indicate statistical significance at the
10, 5, and 1 percent levels. All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and all other controls in previous tables. Amounts in thousands of real 2005 dollars. Weighted by CPS sample
weights.
                        Appendix Table 1. Summary Statistics on Program Benefits and Participation
                          Non-Immigrant Single-Parent Families Under 300% of the Poverty Line
                                          (N=28189 December, N=68702 March)

Variable                                                                             Sample                 Mean         SD     Min      Max

Cash & Food Combined
       Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                     December                5.301       3.339   1.473   26.595
       Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                      March                  5.416       3.332   1.512   24.703
       Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                       December                5.711       4.903   0.000   35.203
       Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                        March                  5.678       4.882   0.000   34.520
       Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                               December                0.896       0.306   0.000    1.000
       Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                                March                  0.896       0.306   0.000    1.000
       Actual Reported Real Benefits (000s, includes imputed EITC)                   March                  3.473       3.699   0.000   53.965
       Any Reported Benefits (includes imputed EITC)                                 March                  0.849       0.358   0.000    1.000

Cash Only (includes TANF, SSI, and EITC)
       Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                     December                3.652       2.601   1.183   22.759
       Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                      March                  3.767       2.647   1.233   22.187
       Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                       December                3.956       3.620   0.000   26.302
       Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                        March                  3.938       3.629   0.000   24.799
       Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                               December                0.892       0.311   0.000    1.000
       Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                                March                  0.893       0.310   0.000    1.000
       Actual Reported Real Benefits (000s, includes imputed EITC)                   March                  2.215       2.670   0.000   52.319
       Any Reported Benefits (includes imputed EITC)                                 March                  0.742       0.438   0.000    1.000

TANF
        Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                    December                1.648       1.328   0.000   12.583
        Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                     March                  1.541       1.378   0.143   10.863
        Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                      December                2.017       3.074   0.000   17.256
        Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                       March                  1.768       2.860   0.000   17.870
        Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                              December                0.384       0.486   0.000    1.000
        Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                               March                  0.365       0.481   0.000    1.000
        Actual Reported Real Benefits (000s)                                         March                  0.317       1.338   0.000   27.140
        Any Reported Benefits                                                        March                  0.096       0.294   0.000    1.000

SSI
        Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                    December                0.619       1.994   0.000   11.817
        Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                     March                  0.678       2.128   0.000   11.817
        Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                      December                0.615       2.071   0.000   11.817
        Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                       March                  0.678       2.128   0.000   11.817
        Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                              December                0.083       0.275   0.000    1.000
        Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                               March                  0.097       0.296   0.000    1.000
        Actual Reported Real Benefits (000s)                                         March                  0.405       1.910   0.000   51.000
        Any Reported Benefits                                                        March                  0.059       0.236   0.000    1.000

EITC
        Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                    December                1.385       0.581   0.000   3.413
        Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                     March                  1.492       1.527   0.000   7.374
        Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                      December                1.324       1.543   0.000   7.364
        Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                       March                  1.492       1.527   0.000   7.374
        Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                              December                0.549       0.498   0.000   1.000
        Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                               March                  0.665       0.472   0.000   1.000
        Actual Reported Real Benefits (000s)                                         March                   n/a         n/a     n/a     n/a
        Any Reported Benefits                                                        March                   n/a         n/a     n/a     n/a

Food Assistance
       Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                     December                1.649       1.434   0.249    9.164
       Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                      March                  1.740       2.185   0.000   20.078
       Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                       December                1.755       2.201   0.000   16.329
       Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s)                                        March                  1.740       2.185   0.000   20.078
       Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                               December                0.780       0.414   0.000    1.000
       Any Imputed Potential Benefits                                                March                  0.778       0.416   0.000    1.000
       Actual Reported Real Benefits (000s)                                          March                  1.258       2.002   0.000   14.616
       Any Reported Benefits                                                         March                  0.532       0.499   0.000    1.000

Medicaid
       Simulated Fraction Family Eligible                                           December                0.680       0.176   0.200   1.000
       Simulated Fraction Family Eligible                                            March                  0.702       0.344   0.000   1.000
       Imputed Fraction Family Eligible                                             December                0.705       0.344   0.000   1.000
       Imputed Fraction Family Eligible                                              March                  0.702       0.344   0.000   1.000
       Any Family Member Imputed Eligible                                           December                0.861       0.346   0.000   1.000
       Any Family Member Imputed Eligible                                            March                  0.861       0.346   0.000   1.000
       Actual Reported Fraction Family Participating                                 March                  0.406       0.433   0.000   1.000
       Any Reported Family Member Participating                                      March                  0.507       0.500   0.000   1.000

Note: All amounts in real 2005 dollars. See text for a description of variable construction. Weighted by CPS sample weights.
                                             Appendix Table 2. Annual Means of Program Benefits and Participation (weighted)
                                                  Non-Immigrant Single-Parent Families Under 300% of the Poverty Line


                                                                       2001       2002       2003       2004       2005       2006       2007       2008       2009     Percent Change 2001-2009

Panel A. Imputed Real Potential Benefits (000s), December CPS
              Cash and Food Combined                                  5.396      5.483      5.576      5.621       5.643      5.523      5.567      5.901      6.591               0.22
              Cash                                                    3.910      3.899      3.947      3.910       3.952      3.858      3.924      3.940      4.239               0.08
              TANF                                                    1.762      1.825      1.954      1.925       2.058      1.948      2.078      2.226      2.440               0.38
              SSI                                                     0.642      0.547      0.560      0.576       0.613      0.654      0.643      0.624      0.674               0.05
              EITC                                                    1.324      1.370      1.313      1.344       1.281      1.317      1.324      1.296      1.344               0.02
              Food Assistance                                         1.486      1.584      1.629      1.711       1.691      1.665      1.643      1.961      2.351               0.58
              Fraction Medicaid Eligible                              0.678      0.678      0.687      0.692       0.692      0.695      0.715      0.738      0.760               0.12

Panel B. Actual Reported Benefits (000s), March CPS
              Cash and Food Combined                                  3.300      3.301      3.378      3.393       3.475      3.443      3.380      3.538      4.008                0.21
              Cash                                                    2.292      2.242      2.247      2.184       2.236      2.193      2.150      2.137      2.260               -0.01
              TANF                                                    0.352      0.351      0.411      0.322       0.353      0.310      0.259      0.249      0.259               -0.26
              SSI                                                     0.407      0.375      0.354      0.404       0.466      0.416      0.383      0.403      0.438                0.08
              EITC (imputed)                                          1.533      1.516      1.482      1.458       1.416      1.467      1.509      1.486      1.563                0.02
              Food Assistance                                         1.007      1.059      1.131      1.208       1.239      1.250      1.230      1.401      1.748                0.73
              Fraction Family Receiving Medicaid                      0.364      0.372      0.401      0.406       0.408      0.407      0.410      0.433      0.449                0.23

Panel C. Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s), December CPS
              Cash and Food Combined                                  5.338      5.322      5.214      5.300       5.247      5.182      5.177      5.145      5.749                0.08
              Cash                                                    3.810      3.741      3.665      3.659       3.656      3.613      3.592      3.440      3.702               -0.03
              TANF                                                    1.815      1.776      1.711      1.685       1.673      1.600      1.574      1.504      1.518               -0.16
              SSI                                                     0.648      0.559      0.560      0.581       0.628      0.671      0.664      0.604      0.655                0.01
              EITC                                                    1.347      1.406      1.394      1.392       1.355      1.343      1.355      1.333      1.529                0.14
              Food Assistance                                         1.528      1.581      1.549      1.641       1.590      1.569      1.585      1.705      2.047                0.34
              Fraction Medicaid Eligible                              0.678      0.667      0.667      0.674       0.674      0.680      0.686      0.689      0.701                0.03

Panel D. Simulated Real Potential Benefits (000s), Fixed March 2001 Sample
              Cash and Food Combined                                   5.623     5.668      5.593      5.553       5.437      5.394      5.425      5.454      5.986                0.06
              Cash                                                     4.016     4.035      3.963      3.867       3.780      3.746      3.724      3.653      3.891               -0.03
              TANF                                                     1.836     1.811      1.760      1.691       1.627      1.578      1.529      1.493      1.517               -0.17
              SSI                                                      0.612     0.618      0.611      0.606       0.599      0.603      0.605      0.595      0.634                0.04
              EITC                                                     1.568     1.605      1.592      1.570       1.554      1.565      1.590      1.566      1.741                0.11
              Food Assistance                                          1.607     1.633      1.630      1.686       1.656      1.648      1.701      1.801      2.095                0.30
              Fraction Medicaid Eligible                               0.685     0.679      0.688      0.692       0.706      0.719      0.726      0.745      0.744                0.09




Note: All amounts in real 2005 dollars. See text for a description of variable construction. March samples are attached to the previous survey year. Weighted by CPS sample weights.
                                                                            Appendix Table 3. Alternative Samples



                                                              Sample:        Married<300            Single <300          Married <200           Single<200           Married<100            Single<100
One-Sample IV                                      Dependent Variable:           LFS                    LFS                  LFS                    LFS                  LFS                    LFS

Imputed Eligibility Real Cash & Food (000s)                                     -0.0062              -0.0202**              -0.0069              -0.0193**              0.0628               -0.0124
                                                                                (0.0080)              (0.0061)              (0.0094)              (0.0069)             (0.1670)              (0.0101)
Family Medicaid Eligibility                                                      0.0413               -0.0226                0.1045               -0.0678               1.1349                0.3098
                                                                                (0.0684)              (0.0786)              (0.1434)              (0.1281)             (2.6574)              (0.3112)




                                                              Sample:        Married<300            Single <300          Married<200            Single <200          Married<100            Single<100
Two-Sample IV                                      Dependent Variable:           LFS                    LFS                  LFS                    LFS                  LFS                    LFS

Imputed Eligibility Real Cash & Food (000s)                                     -0.0898              -0.0405*               -0.0998              -0.0310+               -0.0296              -0.0390+
                                                                                (1.4152)             (0.0180)               (2.4263)             (0.0180)               (0.5811)             (0.0226)
Family Medicaid Eligibility                                                      1.2893               -0.2263                1.7784               -0.3225                0.7718               -0.0657
                                                                               (21.7888)             (0.3158)              (41.3058)             (0.3635)              (13.2677)             (0.3725)


Note: Standard errors in parentheses clustered on state. For two sample analyses standard errors are cluster bootstrapped using 2000 replications. +, *, and ** indicate statistical significance at the
10, 5, and 1 percent levels. All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and all other controls in previous tables. Amounts in thousands of real 2005 dollars. Weighted by CPS sample
weights.
                                                                    Appendix Table 4. Robustness and Placebo Tests (One-Sample IV)

                                                                   I                    II                   III                  IV                    V                    VI                  VII                  VIII                  IX



                                                                                                                                                                                                              Placebo: Outcome Placebo: Outcome
                                                                               Detailed Individual    Detailed Policy      Detailed Ind &        Family Income                            Drop AK, HI, and       is Income as a     is Parent
                                                               Baseline            Controls              Controls          Policy Controls         Controls             Drop 2009               DC            Percent of Poverty  Employment


                                  Dependent Variable:             LFS                  LFS                  LFS                  LFS                   LFS                  LFS                Income               Income             Employment

Imputed Eligibility Real Cash & Food (000s)                   -0.0202**            -0.0223**             -0.0203**            -0.0225**            -0.0204**             -0.0141*             -0.0208**              0.4132               0.0057
                                                               (0.0061)             (0.0074)              (0.0061)             (0.0075)             (0.0061)             (0.0058)              (0.0062)             (1.0032)             (0.0069)
Family Medicaid Eligibility                                     -0.0226              -0.0986               -0.0243              -0.1090              -0.0683              0.0223                -0.0291             -26.0256              -0.0421
                                                               (0.0786)             (0.0979)              (0.0835)             (0.1036)             (0.0967)             (0.0893)              (0.0807)            (17.4938)             (0.0915)




Note: Standard errors in parentheses clustered on state. +, *, and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and all other controls in previous tables.
Detailed individual controls include the age of the respondent, whether the parent is male or female, age of the youngest child interacted with disability status, and race-education cell interacted with disability status. Detailed policy
controls discussed in the text. Income Controls include whether the family is under 100% of poverty or under 200% of poverty. Amounts in thousands of real 2005 dollars. Weighted by CPS sample weights.
