NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MINING SURPLUS: MODELING JAMES A. SCHMITZ'S LINK BETWEEN COMPETITION
AND PRODUCTIVITY
Jeremy Greenwood
David Weiss
Working Paper 19556
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19556
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jeremy Greenwood and David Weiss. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Mining Surplus: Modeling James A. Schmitz's Link Between Competition and Productivity
Jeremy Greenwood and David Weiss
NBER Working Paper No. 19556
October 2013
JEL No. E13,J51,O47
ABSTRACT
James A. Schmitz (2005) documents, in a well-known case study, a dramatic rise in productivity in
the U.S. and Canadian iron-ore industry following an increase in competition from Brazil. Prior to
the increased competition, the industry was not competitive. Surplus in profits was divided between
business and unions. Schmitz attributes the increase in productivity to a change in work practices in
the industry, as old negotiated union work rules were abandoned or modified. This research formalizes
a mechanism through which a rise in competition can lead to increased productivity in the iron-ore
industry.
Jeremy Greenwood
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil Building, Rm 160
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
David Weiss
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978
Israel
davidweiss@post.tau.ac.il

Mining Surplus: Modeling James A. Schmitz’s Link
Between Competition and Productivity
Jeremy Greenwood and David Weiss
University of Pennsylvania and Tel Aviv University

Abstract
James A. Schmitz (2005) documents, in a well-known case study, a dramatic rise
in productivity in the U.S. and Canadian iron-ore industry following an increase in
competition from Brazil. Prior to the increased competition, the industry was not
competitive. Surplus in pro…ts was divided between business and unions. Schmitz
attributes the increase in productivity to a change in work practices in the industry, as
old negotiated union work rules were abandoned or modi…ed. This research formalizes
a mechanism through which a rise in competition can lead to increased productivity
in the iron-ore industry.
Keywords: bodies, e¤ort, James A. Schmitz, iron ore, membership, monopoly
pro…ts, Nash bargaining, productivity, unions
JEL nos: E13, J51 and O47

1

Introduction

In a thought-provoking case study, James A. Schmitz documents how an increase in competition in the U.S. and Canadian Iron-Ore Industries, due to the entrance of Brazilian ore,
led to large increases in productivity. The story is striking. Over the course of a few years,
increased competition caused prices in the iron-ore industry to fall by 55%. While output
initially fell by some 30%, it quickly returned to 92% of it’s pre-crisis level. Real wages
fell by 7%, but by 25% relative to pre-crisis trend. Simultaneously, labor productivity rose
Please address correspondence to David Weiss. Address: The Eitan Berglas School of Economics, Tel
Aviv University, P.O.B. 39040, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel. Email : davidweiss post.tau.ac.il.

1

by 68%, and measures of total factor productivity (TFP) rose by 42%. In short, a rather
large change in the market for iron ore led to a signi…cant increase in various measures
of productivity.1 He systematically details that these changes were not due to standard
reasons, such as adopting new technology or closing ine¢ cient mines, but rather due to
reducing oversta¢ ng and loosening workplace rules. The new and old work practices were
the result of negotiations between mines and unions.
He ends with a question: if the workplace rules and oversta¢ ng led to lower productivity, why were they implemented in the …rst place? Simply put, why would a …rm choose
to be unproductive? A simple model is presented here to answer this question. These
…rms were experiencing pro…ts due to a lack of competition. The mines faced a unionized
workforce. Unions have preferences both over the size of their membership and the utility
of their members. The utility of a member is captured both by wages they earn and workplace practices, which dictate how much e¤ort they must expend on the job. The surplus
from mines is split between the …rm and unions. When competition increases, this surplus
shrinks. This leads to a reduction in membership (oversta¢ ng). At the same time, union
members exert more e¤ort (due to more e¢ cient workplace rules). Productivity increases.
Schmitz’s (2005) case study is important. It suggests that the cost of unions may be
larger than a simple Rees (1963) welfare-loss triangle, which computes the deadweight loss
that arises from the fact that unionized wages are higher than non-unionized ones. Unions
may have a deleterious impact on productivity. There is now a growing literature on the
connection between productivity and competition. Holmes and Schmitz (2010) survey the
literature on case studies concerning the impact of competition on productivity in particular industries, and discuss mechanisms by which competition a¤ects productivity. One
paper that looks at the macroeconomic e¤ects of competition on productivity is Cole and
Ohanian (2004). They show how the National Industrial Recovery Act led to a symbiotic
relationship arising between …rms and unions. Pro…ts and wages in some industry soared,
despite the fact that the economy at large was su¤ering through the Great Depression.
Cole, Ohanian, Riascos, and Schmitz (2005) study Latin America, and provide evidence
that anticompetitive policies, rather than di¤erences in human capital or other factors, are
the main reasons for low productivity in Latin American countries. Last, Dinlersoz, Green1

The statistics presented here are for the Canadian iron-ore industry. The experience, and statistics,
for the U.S. industry are very similar. One di¤erence between the two countries is that Canada produces a
measure for total factor productivity while the United States does not. This explains the focus on Canada
here.

2

wood and Hyatt (2013) present evidence suggesting the unions target young and pro…table
…rms in certi…cation elections, suggesting indeed that unions target …rms with extractable
surplus, as assumed in this paper.

2

The Model

Consider an industry where there is a monopolistic …rm and a single union. All workers in
the …rm are identical and are unions members. Decisions are the outcomes of negotiations
between the …rm and the union.

2.1

The Firm

The …rm produces output, y, using a constant-returns-to-scale technology that employs
capital, labor, and materials. In particular, the production process is described by
y = zl m k 1

; with 0

; ; +

1,

where
f = y:
Here k is the stock of capital, l represents the services of labor, m and f represent the
inputs of materials, and z stands for TFP. Observe that the …rst type of material input,
m, is allowed substitute in standard fashion with other inputs in response to changes in
prices. For example, when labor is expensive, the …rm might use better materials and
supplies in order to cut back on the workers used in maintenance and repairs. The second
type of materials, f , represents the …xed amount of some resources that simply must be
used to create a certain amount of output. Bentonite and the lumber used for shafting
might be such examples. Bentonite is used as a binder for creating iron ore pellets from
the processed iron ore that derives from …nely crushed taconite rock. These inputs are
proportional to scale of the mining operation. The introduction of two types of materials
serves to capture the fact that material’s share of income is large and relatively constant
in the iron-ore industry. By normalizing the price of f , relative to output, to 1, the above
formulation is equivalent to:
y = (1

)zl m k 1

3

:

(1)

Labor services, l, are a function of both the number of workers, or bodies, b, and their
e¤ort level, e. Speci…cally, l is described by the constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES)
aggregator
l = [ b + (1
where

1

)e ] ; with 0

1 and

controls the elasticity of substitution, and

1,

(2)

regulates the relative importance of

bodies in production.
The monopolist faces an inverse demand function:
p = ( ) , with 0 <
y

< 1.

Here y is the …rm’s output, p is the price of output,

(3)
is a demand parameter, and

controls the elasticity of demand.2 Along with union wages, w, the price of materials, q,
and the rental rate on capital, r, this gives the …rm’s pro…ts, :
=

y1

(w; b; e; m; k) =

wb

rk

qm:

(4)

Since r and q are …xed in the analysis they are suppressed in the function . Also suppressed
is the second form of materials, f , which is assumed to be taken into account in y. Implicitly,
the price of these materials relative to the price of the output good is assumed to be one.

2.2

The Worker

Workers have preferences over wages, w, and the exertion of e¤ort e. Preferences are
assumed to take the CES form shown below:
1

e) ] ; with

U (w; e) = [w + (1
The parameter

1:

governs the elasticity of substitution between wages, w, and rest, 1

(5)
e.

Think about wages as representing consumption. Rest is just the total amount of energy
2
Note that cannot equal one or expenditures would be equal to . This would imply that the …rm’s
revenues are independent of the level of output. The …rm would therefore set production arbitrarily low,
see (4). Alternatively, one could assume an exogenous price and then put decreasing returns to scale
into the production function in order to generate a monopoly pro…ts. The second choice creates a force
for productivity to increase whenever production decreases. Schmitz (2005) documents that the rise in
productivity is not due to either low productivity mines closing, or existing mines reducing their scale.
Given his …ndings, it may be inappropriate to use a decreasing-returns-to-scale production function.

4

that a worker has, 1, less the what he expends in e¤ort, e.

2.3

The Union

There is a union that negotiates on behalf of the workers. It has CES preferences over
membership (or bodies), b, and worker utility in the union, U (w; e):
1

W (w; b; e) = [U (w; e) + b ] ; with
where

2.4

1;

(6)

captures the elasticity of substitution.

Bargaining

In order to determine employment, e¤ort, and wages, the …rm and union engage in Nash
bargaining. The surplus they are bargaining over is the amount of pro…t that the monopolist can create. Assume the threat point for each party is shutting down operations, with
the …rm stopping production or the union going on strike. Recall that pro…ts,

, are given

by equation (4) and union welfare, W , is given by equation (6). Given these functional
forms, the utilities for the worker and union are bounded below by zero. The …rm’s pro…ts
are also bounded below by zero. The threat points are therefore zero. Let the bargaining
weight for the union be given by . The outcome of bargaining is therefore the solution to:
(w; b; e; m; k) = arg max[ (w; b; e; m; k)1

W (w; b; e) ]; with 0

1:

(7)

w;b;e;m;k

The form of this bargaining problem implies that the …rm will earn strictly positive pro…ts.
Bargaining between the …rm and the union is e¢ cient in the sense that one party
cannot do better without hurting the other one. Still, from a societal perspective, things
might be better without the union. First, the bargaining process exploits the fact that the
…rm has market power in the iron-ore business. The …rm and union share the resulting
monopoly rents. Second, the union places a value on high levels of employment in the
iron-ore industry that might not be bene…cial for the economy.3 It uses some of its rents to
increase employment and lower the amount of on-the-job e¤ort required by union members.
3

How the union should value the size of its membership, per se, is unclear. Equation (6) is fairly ‡exible
in this regard. For instance, when = 0 it says that the union simply cares about the number of members
times the utility each member earns. These tastes may not represent the preferences of any particular
person in the economy.

5

The extra workers could be better used elsewhere and union members should put in more
e¤ort on the job.4

3

The Mechanism

The main idea is that any monopoly surplus will be shared by the …rm and union. Suppose
that pro…ts decrease, say as demand decreases or competition increases. This is modeled as
a decrease in the demand parameter, , and an increase in the elasticity of demand,
to

0

and

to

0,

(from

respectively). As a consequence, there are less rents to be shared between

the …rm and union. How will …rm and union react? To be consistent with the data, the
model must match certain trends that were observed during the crisis experienced by the
iron-ore industry in the 1980s. Speci…cally, output, prices, employment, and wages must all
decrease, while e¤ort and various measures of productivity should increase. The elasticities
of substitution for the worker, …rm and union all play important roles in generating the
desired response.
The following features help to replicate the trends in the data:
1. Bodies, b, and e¤ ort, e, are substitutes in the monopolist’s production function, > 0.
Each body costs w. A prime way to reduce costs is to cut bodies. In face of the
reduction in demand, this feature allows the …rm to substitute toward e¤ort and
away from bodies, in order to reduce costs and mitigate the decline in rents.
2. Rest, 1

e, and wages, w, are complements in a worker’s utility,

< 0. In this

situation, the marginal rate of substitution between rest and wages changes (in percentage terms) rapidly with a (percentage) shift in the ratio of rest to wages. To
enjoy consumption the worker needs rest, so to speak, and vice versa. Thus, any
required reduction in utility should be spread out relatively evenly across rest and
wages. This force makes it desirable for workers to decrease their rest, 1

e, in a

fairly lock-step fashion with the decline in wages, w.
3. Member’s utility, U , and membership, b, are complements in the union’s utility function,

< 0. Here the union is unwilling to trade-o¤ a bigger decline in membership

against a smaller decline in a worker’s utility, or the other way round. This favors a
balanced drop in membership and utility.
4

The fact that the …rm is a monopoly implies that too little iron ore is produced in the economy. So,
on this account, there may be too little labor input in the iron-ore sector.

6

4

Calibration

The model developed will now be …t to the Canadian data. The choice of Canada over
the U.S. is due to the greater availability of data, such as total factor productivity. The
industries in the two countries re‡ect each others experiences closely. There are 14 parameters to be picked,

;

0 ; r;

; q; ; ; ; ; ; ; 0 ; , and . Some are imposed and some

are calibrated to the data; this is discussed below. The calibration strategy will focus on
two periods in the data, pre and post crisis. The year 1981 will be taken to re‡ect the
pre-crisis era and the post-crisis era, which is taken as an average of the years from 1986 to
1990. The year 1981 is chosen as the pre-crisis year since this is when the data begins. An
average of the years 1986 to 1990 is taken to help smooth out volatility in the post-crisis
data. It will be assumed that the model is in a steady state for each of these periods.
As was discussed earlier, the increase in competition is modeled by a shift in the demand
parameters from to from

to

0

and

to

0,

respectively. Speci…cally, demand will fall, as

will be represented by a fall in , and simultaneously become more elastic, as measured by
a rise in .

4.1

Parameters Set Exogenously

Four parameters are chosen outside of the calibration routine, namely r, q, , and . The
rental rate on capital, r, is set at 10%, re‡ecting an 8% depreciation rate in this industry
together with a 2% net interest rate. The price of materials, q, is normalized to be 1, an
innocuous assumption. The parameters

and

control the elasticity and level of demand,

which are important for monopoly rents. As this is a model of imperfect competition,
these two parameters govern the amount of surplus that can be generated. What is most
important, however, is the change in these parameters over the course of the crisis. So,
and

are selected to be 0:5 and 1:0 to begin with. Then, the Canadian data will be used

to determine how these demand parameters shift with the crisis, as re‡ected by

4.2

0

and

0

.

Matching Model Moments

The remaining parameters will be picked to match moments in the model to moments in the
data. For the calibration exercise, there are ten parameters to select,
and

0;

; ; ; ; ; 0; ;

and there will be ten targets in the data. While all the parameters are jointly

determined, what follows is a heuristic discussion of the identi…cation strategy.

7

The change in total factor productivity and the change in labor productivity inform on
the importance of labor in the production function, , and the willingness of workers to
substitute between wages and e¤ort, . The willingness of the union to substitute between
worker utility and number of employees, along with the bargaining power of the union,
speak to labor’s share of income, and are chosen to match this statistic both before and
after the crisis. The weight of materials in the production function, , and the amount
of …xed materials per unit of output, , are selected to match material’s share of income
both before and after the crisis. The ability to substitute between bodies and e¤ort in the
production function, as re‡ected by , is set to match the change in output. The importance
of bodies in the production function, , is picked to match the change in bodies. The new
level of demand,

0

, is selected to match the decline in prices, while the change in change

in elasticity of demand,

0,

is chosen to match the decline in wages.
Table 1: Stylized Facts
Target

Data

Model

Labor Prod

68%

67%

42%

42%

Wages

-25%

-38%

Output

-8%

-8%

Bodies (hrs)

-45%

-45%

Prices

-51%

-51%

Labor’s Share (pre)

20%

26%

Labor’s Share (post)

22%

20%

Material’s Share (pre)

53%

53%

Material’s Share (post)

58%

60%

TFP

8

Table 2: Parameter Values
Param

Meaning

Value

Identi…cation

Elast. of Dem. (pre)

0.5

Exog.

Level of Dem. (pre)

1

Exog.

r

Cost of Capital

10%

8% Dep + 2%

q

Rel Price Mat

1

Normalization

Labor Weight

0.14

Labor Prod

Worker CES

-0.37

TFP

CES union

-0.18

Labor’s Share (pre)

Barg. Weight

0.53

Labor’s Share (post)

Material Weight

0.52

Material’s Share (pre)

Fixed material cost

0.45

Material’s Share (post)

Prod Fcn Exponent

0.94

Output

"

Prod Fcn Wgt Bodies

0.10

Bodies

0

Level of Dem. (post)

0.63

Prices

0

Elast of Dem (post)

0.73

Wages

As can be seen in Table 1, the model is able to match the facts quite well. Importantly,
the model can match both the rise in labor productivity and measured TFP. This is due to
an increase in e¤ort by union members, which increases by a factor of …ve. (Whether there
is any meaning to the units that e¤ort is measured in is unclear.) On this, a report by
PaineWebber (1987, p. 1-51) attributed the increase in Minnesota mining labor productivity to factors such as (i) increased ‡exibility in job classi…cations, (ii) grouping vacations
so that plants are only temporarily shut down, (iii) changes in work assignments, (iv) increased pace of work by labor and management, and (v) rationalizing plant maintenance
and repair. For example, negotiated union work practices dictated that when a machine
broke down workers had to stand by idlely until a union designated repair man came by,
even when a simple …x might work. More ‡exible work practices, which allows the regular
workforce to do minor repairs and servicing, reduces such delay. The model overstates the
decline in wages, but matches the decline in bodies, and is able to match the change in
prices and output quite well. Importantly, the model matches the level of labor’s share
of income. This is crucial, given the centrality of labor in the proposed mechanism. Had
labor’s share been substantially larger (smaller) than the target, the model would have
had an easier (harder) time matching the observed productivity changes. Labor’s share of
9

income rose slightly over the time period. The model predicts a decline, as it over predicts
the decline in wages.5 Material’s share of income is is matched well by the model. It rises
slightly in both the data and the model.
The results con…rm the intuition from Section 3. E¤ort and wages are complements
in the worker’s utility function, with

=

0:36. Membership and worker utility are also

complements in the union’s utility function ( =

0:18). Finally, bodies and e¤ort are

close substitutes in the production function ( = 0:94). The convex cost to the worker of
providing e¤ort implicitly generates an extra form of imperfect substitutability, however;
while the …rm doesn’t care if there are two workers, or one worker exerting twice as much
e¤ort, the workers, and hence the union, will care.

5

Conclusion

James A. Schmitz (2005) documents the striking response of productivity to changes in the
competitive environment of the iron-ore industry. A quantitative model of the interaction
between a monopolist and a union is developed here that captures the basic elements of
his case study. In the analysis, the monopolist cares about its pro…ts while the union
values the both the size of its membership and the utility of its workers. The monopolist
and the union bargain over how to split the surplus. When surplus decreases, due to
competition, the union is forced into accepting reduced oversta¢ ng and increasing worker
e¤ort, resulting in higher productivity. The mechanisms that allow for the model to match
the data are explored. Key considerations in the analysis are: (i) the union’s willingness to
trade o¤ membership and the welfare of its workers; (ii) the substitutability of bodies and
e¤ort in production; and (iii) the form of workers’preferences over wages and on-the-job
e¤ort. The model can match both the increase in labor productivity and the rise in total
factor productivity that are observed in the data.

6

Data Sources

Data comes from two sources. First, James A. Schmitz, generously shared the data set for
his case study. Second, some data is taken from Statistics Canada. The data analysis is
5
Had the model managed to match the observed decline in wages relative to trend, the decline in labor’s
share of income would have been halved. Alternatively, had the model matched the actual decline in real
wages, rather than the decline relative to trend, labor share of income would have risen by a percentage
point more than it did in the data.

10

Schmitz (2005) is followed as much as possible, with a few exceptions. Data from Statistics
Canada is used to compute trends in pre-1980 real wage growth in the Iron Mines industry.6
When comparing the real wage change in this time series, relative to trend, to the real wage
time series, relative to trend, in Schmitz (2005), the numbers are quite similar (changes of
20% and 25%, respectively). CPI data from Statistics Canada is used as well. The data
on depreciation is from Statistics Canada. It an average of the depreciation rates in the
Iron Mines industry over the time period studied.
Labor’s and material’s shares of income are also from James A. Schmitz’s data. These
series are somewhat volatile, but do not appear to have a signi…cant trend. Again, two
data periods are focused on: 1981 for the pre-crisis period, and an average of 1986-1990
for the post-crisis period. The speci…c numbers here are not as important as the general
magnitudes and the fact that they did not seem to change much over this time period.

6

See Statistics Canada table 152-0002, variable 617976.

11

References
[1] Cole, Harold L. and Lee E. Ohanian. 2004. “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of
the Great Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis,”Journal of Political Economy,
112 (4): 779-816.
[2] Cole, Harold L., Lee E. Ohanian, Alvaro Riascos, and James A. Schmitz. 2005. “Latin
America in the Rearview Mirror,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52 (1): 69-107.
[3] Dinlersoz, Emin, Jeremy Greenwood and Henry Hyatt. 2013. “Whom do Unions Target?
Unionization over the Life-Cycle of U.S. Businesses,”U.S. Census Bureau (in process).
[4] Holmes, Thomas, and James A. Schmitz. 2010. “Competition and Productivity: A
Review of Evidence,” Annual Review of Economics, 2: 619-642.
[5] Marcus, Peter F., Kirsis, Karlis M. and Peter Kakela. 1987. World Steel Dynamics: The
Threatened North American Iron Ore Industry: Break-through Analysis. PaineWebber.
[6] Rees, Albert. 1963. “The E¤ects of Unions on Resource Allocation.” Journal of Law
and Economics, 6 (2): 69-78.
[7] Schmitz, James A. 2005. “What Determines Productivity? Lessons from the Dramatic
Recovery of the U.S. and Canadian Iron Ore Industries Following Their Early 1980s
Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy, 113 (3): 582-625.

12

