                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE MISSING MANUAL:
USING NATIONAL STUDENT CLEARINGHOUSE DATA TO TRACK POSTSECONDARY OUTCOMES

                                              Susan M. Dynarski
                                              Steven W. Hemelt
                                              Joshua M. Hyman

                                             Working Paper 19552
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w19552


                           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          October 2013




    The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
    of Education, through Grants R305B110001 and R305E100008 to the University of Michigan, as well
    as through Grant R305C110011-11A to the Teachers College, Columbia University. The opinions
    expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute of Education Sciences
    or the U.S. Department of Education. We are grateful for the help of our partners at the Michigan Education
    Department: Tom Howell, Venessa Keesler, and Joseph Martineau, as well as exceedingly helpful
    support from state analysts including Rod Bernosky, Melissa Bisson, and Karen Conroy. We had several
    very helpful conversations with Jason DeWitt and Travis Maciejewski at the National Student Clearinghouse.
    We also thank Hassan Enayati, Joanna Frye, Emily House, and Chris Zbrozek for providing excellent
    research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
    the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2013 by Susan M. Dynarski, Steven W. Hemelt, and Joshua M. Hyman. All rights reserved. Short
    sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
    that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Missing Manual: Using National Student Clearinghouse Data to Track Postsecondary
Outcomes
Susan M. Dynarski, Steven W. Hemelt, and Joshua M. Hyman
NBER Working Paper No. 19552
October 2013
JEL No. I2,I21,I23

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper explores the promises and pitfalls of using National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) data
to measure a variety of postsecondary outcomes. We first describe the history of the NSC, the basic
structure of its data, and recent research interest in using NSC data. Second, using information from
the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), we calculate enrollment coverage rates
for NSC data over time, by state, institution type, and demographic student subgroups. We find that
coverage is highest among public institutions and lowest (but growing) among for-profit colleges.
Across students, enrollment coverage is lower for minorities but similar for males and females. We
also explore two potentially less salient sources of non-coverage: suppressed student records due to
privacy laws and matching errors due to typographic inaccuracies in student names. To illustrate how
this collection of measurement errors may affect estimates of the levels and gaps in postsecondary
attendance and persistence, we perform several case-study analyses using administrative transcript
data from Michigan public colleges. We close with a discussion of practical issues for program evaluators
using NSC data.


Susan M. Dynarski                                   Joshua M. Hyman
University of Michigan                              University of Michigan
Weill Hall                                          Weill Hall
735 South State Street                              735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091                            Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
and NBER                                            http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jmhyman/
dynarski@umich.edu                                  jmhyman@umich.edu

Steven W. Hemelt
Department of Public Policy
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill
Abernethy Hall, Campus Box 3435
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
hemelt@email.unc.edu
        1. Introduction

        By many measures, those who attend and complete college are better off. They have

higher earnings (Oreopoulos & Petronijevic, 2013), better health (Hout, 2011; Lleras-Muney,

2005), more robust networks, and higher job satisfaction (Oreopoulos & Salvanes, 2011).

College attendance, persistence, and completion are therefore key outcomes by which

researchers and policymakers evaluate the effectiveness of elementary and secondary schooling.

Tracking students into and through college is critical for such evaluations. Yet measures of these

outcomes have rarely been available at the levels of granularity at which elementary and

secondary education policies function: the school, the district, and the state.

        The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) proposed to address this data gap by

replacing information in the Integrated Postsecondary Education System (IPEDS) with a unit-

record system that would track individual students over time (Cunningham & Milam, 2005). In

response to concerns about student privacy, and colleges’ fears that the system would be used for

accountability, 1 Congress effectively banned the creation of any national unit-record database in

the 2008 reauthorization of the Higher Education Act (Higher Education Opportunity Act of

2008, 113).

        In the wake of the failure of the federal government to produce a dataset that tracks

students into and through college, states have attempted to construct their own unit-record

systems. Every state now has a longitudinal data system that tracks individual students through

elementary and secondary school (hereafter referred to as “K-12”). Some state systems also

follow students into in-state public tertiary institutions (e.g., Florida, Ohio); a few have also

1
 For example, see letters and policy statements from the National Association of Independent Colleges and
Universities (NAICU) directed as key policymakers that argue against the creation of such a system:
http://www.naicu.edu/news_room/detail/national-association-of-independent-colleges-and-universities-views-
spellings-commission-final-report-as-improved-but-still-problematic
integrated in-state private institutions into their systems (e.g., Texas). Students who enroll in out-

of-state colleges are generally lost to these systems. 2

         The National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), founded in 1993, has filled the void left by

Congress’ ban and the gaps in states’ systems. NSC was originally tied to the loan industry and

called the National Student Loan Clearinghouse. NSC gathered enrollment data from

participating colleges; these data were used to confirm that a borrower was enrolled and

therefore exempt from paying back (or accruing interest on) student loans. This history explains

many of the strengths and weaknesses of NSC data. The NSC primarily tracks enrollment (but

not credits or major), since that is what determines a student’s ability to defer payment. While

NSC has long recorded that a student had graduated from a given institution (often along with

the type of degree earned), only recently (as of 2012) did it start to use CIP codes 3 to more

systematically record a student’s major. 4

         The federal government has stimulated the market for NSC’s products by both imposing

reporting requirements and funding states’ efforts to track their students into college. States

receiving federal State Fiscal Stabilization Funds (SFSF) are required to report statistics on

college enrollment and persistence rates. 5 The Statewide Longitudinal Data Systems (SLDS)

grant program (which operates within the Institute of Education Sciences of the U.S. Department

of Education), funds the efforts of states to develop their data systems. SLDS has held

competitions since 2005, with 47 states receiving a total of $612 million. Early rounds

2
  A recent report from the Data Quality Campaign (2012) finds that while 43 states in 2012 have been able to make
some sort of link between their K-12 data and postsecondary information, “meaningful and useful P-20W data
sharing is still lacking” (p. 9). DQC pointed, in particular, to the lack of data on students who enroll outside their
home state.
3
  Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP): http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/cipcode/
4
  Employer demand for a centralized way to verify that college graduates applying for jobs actually earned the
degrees they claimed to have earned is what drove NSC to collect more information about degrees (NSC, personal
communication, August 2, 2012).
5
  For more information on the SFSF, please see: http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/leg/recovery/factsheet/stabilization-
fund.html; and http://www2.ed.gov/programs/statestabilization/guidance.pdf

                                                          2
encouraged the linking of K-12 data to college outcomes, while the later rounds required it

(Garcia and L’Orange, 2012). Many states have turned to the NSC for data to fill the gaps in

their data systems. NSC writes contracts on a state-by-state basis with local officials, with

pricing a function of student enrollment.

       NSC data are relatively new to academic researchers and policymakers. A growing

number of papers make use of NSC data for research purposes (e.g., Kane, 2003; Richburg-

Hayes et al., 2009; Bettinger et al., 2012; Deming et al., 2013; Dynarski et al., 2013; Hemelt et

al. 2013; Chingos & Peterson, 2012; Hyman, 2013). These papers use NSC data to explore the

effects of various programs or policies on postsecondary attendance, persistence, and attainment.

A recent interchange between academics over the methods and data used to draw conclusions

about the postsecondary impacts of randomly offering vouchers to high school students in New

York City (Goldrick-Rab, 2012; Chingos & Peterson, 2012; Lederman, 2012) highlights the need

for a more comprehensive and relevant source of evidence about potential measurement error in

NSC data. As research using NSC data becomes even more common, researchers need to be

aware of the benefits and challenges of working with these data.

       This paper examines the promises and pitfalls of NSC data for a variety of research and

evaluation purposes. We first describe the basic process of obtaining data from the NSC and the

structure of the data. Within the national context, we then quantify several sources of potential

measurement error relevant to using NSC data to construct measures of postsecondary

enrollment, persistence, and completion. To illustrate some ways in which these sources of

measurement error may affect the work of researchers and policy analysts, we use administrative

data from Michigan and perform several case-study analyses. Finally, we close with a discussion

of salient issues for analysts using NSC data.



                                                 3
         2. National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) Data Basics

         The NSC was founded in 1993 with roots in the student loan industry. To this day, one of

its primary services is to report on students receiving financial aid at American postsecondary

institutions to both the education finance industry and the U.S. Department of Education. The

Clearinghouse supplies these basic reporting services to colleges and universities at no charge.

Employers and high schools also use NSC’s services to verify students’ degrees and to track the

postsecondary success of students after high school graduation. Academic researchers and policy

analysts have also started using NSC data for a variety of purposes. The NSC now has a

“Research Center” that was created in 2010 and seeks to better understand how NSC data can be

used to support postsecondary research.

         When researchers or policymakers obtain data form the NSC, they generally use the

service called “StudentTracker.” This service uses a proprietary algorithm to match a list of

students supplied by the researcher to the NSC’s detailed enrollment and degree information.

This algorithm matches primarily on student name and date of birth. For those students who are

found in NSC’s database, a wealth of information is returned. Colleges submit enrollment data to

the NSC several times each academic year, reporting the beginning and ending date that students

are enrolled during each term, and at what intensity they are enrolled (i.e., part-time or full-time).

Every college that reports enrollment information to the NSC is also supposed to report whether

or not a student has earned a degree, and the date the degree is earned. 6 A subset of NSC

colleges also participates in another NSC service called “DegreeVerify.” 7 For these colleges,

NSC data also include the college major (e.g., English) and degree type (e.g., Bachelor of Arts)

of all degrees earned by their students. Overall, the NSC provides a rich source of information on

6
 In practice, it appears that some colleges do not report information on degree receipt.
7
 The list of participating colleges, along with the date they began reporting degree information to the NSC can be
found at: http://www.studentclearinghouse.org/verifiers/degree/schools.php

                                                         4
when and where students enroll, at what intensity, whether and when they earn a degree, and in

many cases the major and type of degree earned.

       3. Quantifying Postsecondary Outcomes in a Pre-NSC World

       Prior to the NSC and state longitudinal data systems, it was very challenging for

researchers and policymakers to follow students through K-12 education and into the

postsecondary realm. Researchers mainly relied on nationally representative surveys that asked

respondents to report information on educational attainment. Such survey data necessarily have a

limited capacity to follow particular groups of students over time. This restricts the ability of

researchers and policy analysts to meaningfully evaluate state programs or policies of interest

that affect a particular group or cohort of students in time, track long-term outcomes for children,

and responsively steer state-, district-, or school-level policymaking. Indeed, recent work has

employed NSC data to overcome such challenges in order to estimate the impacts of financial aid

programs on student success in college (Bettinger et al., 2012; Kane, 2003), the relationships

between school choice, vouchers, and postsecondary outcomes (Deming et al. 2013; Chingos &

Peterson, 2012), as well as the long-run impacts of childhood educational programs or policies

(Dynarski et al., 2013; Hemelt et al., 2013).

       As a way to illustrate many of the challenges presented by large survey data, we perform

an exercise in which we calculate college attendance rates for recent cohorts of Michigan high

school students using such data sources. The sources for such an analysis are indeed limited,

since it requires an annual survey with large and representative samples at the state level in

which a respondent’s state of high school graduation and current education level are recorded.

The only surveys with sufficiently large state-level samples are the Current Population Survey

(CPS) and American Community Surveys (ACS). Prior to NSC, the NCES primarily used data



                                                  5
from the CPS to calculate national college enrollment rates for high school graduates. 8 Yet,

neither is suitable for this type of state-level analysis, for several reasons.

         First, neither the CPS nor the ACS records the state in which a person graduated from

high school. In the case of the ACS, state of birth and state of residence are provided. In the CPS,

only state of residence is provided. 9 State of residence is an imperfect measure of state of high

school graduation, since young people migrate across state lines for both work and school. And,

depending on whether the migration is for work or for school, CPS will record the state of

residence as either the sending or receiving state. For a student who has migrated for college, the

CPS considers the state of residence to be the location of the parental home. For a person who

has migrated for work, the new state is the state of residence. Second, neither the CPS nor the

ACS consistently records the year in which a person earned a high school degree. The October

CPS asks the question of recent high school graduates only, which does not allow the tracking of

a given high school graduation cohort over time. Still, we can use some rules of thumb to try to

identify a sample of high school students that graduated from a given state in a given year.

         3.1 Current Population Survey (CPS)

         We begin with the October education supplement of the CPS from 2008 through 2010. In

each wave we are able to identify whether respondents graduated from high school in the current

year or in a prior year. We use this information, along with respondents’ ages, to proxy for

different time periods over which these classes of high school graduates could have enrolled in

college (i.e., by the first or second fall after high school graduation). So, to approximate

“immediate college enrollment,” we limit our sample to individuals ages 18-19 who identify


8
  As an example, see Table 170 in the NCES Digest of Education Statistics (1990, p. 181): “Enrollment rates of 18-
to 24-year-olds in institutions of higher education, by race/ethnicity.” Access: http://nces.ed.gov/pubs91/91660.pdf
9
  The CPS Migration Survey, which is administered every few years in March, captures the state of residence five
years earlier.

                                                          6
Michigan as their state of residence, and who are “current graduates” (Table 1, panel A). As a

way to extend the time period over which each class of graduates could have entered college, we

use data from the subsequent CPS surveys, keep graduates from “prior years” and restrict the

sample to a slightly older group of students (Table 1, panel B). For example, to arrive at the

estimates of college enrollment by the second fall after high school graduation (panel B) for the

class of 2008, we use the CPS 2009 survey wave and restrict our sample to those individuals who

are “prior year (or earlier)” grads and who are 19-20 years old. Table 1 presents pooled estimates

of college-going for the Michigan high school classes of 2008 and 2009.

           3.2 American Community Survey (ACS)

           The ACS is a yearly survey that was developed by the U.S. Census Bureau as a

replacement for the long form on the decennial census. Thanks to the ACS, researchers and

policymakers can now obtain information on social, economic, and housing characteristics of

different populations on a yearly basis (instead of only every decade) at the county level. The

ACS is sent to about 3 million people annually and, depending on the size of the county, 1-year,

3-year, and/or 5-year estimates of the survey variables are available. The ACS produced test data

from 2000 to 2002 and was fully implemented for the first time in 2005. 10

           The ACS allows us to increase our sample sizes representing the Michigan high school

classes of 2008 and 2009. We again begin with ACS survey waves from 2008 through 2010 and

restrict to individuals who identify Michigan as their state of residence. In the ACS data, we

cannot identify whether a respondent is a “current year” graduate like we can in the CPS.

Therefore, we identify high school graduates and use age to proxy for high school graduation

year. We then use a combination of rising age restrictions and subsequent waves of ACS data,

just as we did with the CPS, to operationalize different time periods over which respondents
10
     For more information on the ACS, please consult: http://www.census.gov/acs/www/

                                                        7
could have enrolled in higher education. The right half of Table 1 presents college-going

estimates for recent Michigan high school graduates based on ACS data.

       3.3 Estimates of College-going based on CPS and ACS Data: Michigan High School

       Classes of 2008 and 2009

       On average, about 80 percent of the classes of 2008 and 2009 enroll in college by the

second fall after graduating from high school (according to both the CPS and ACS). While this

aggregate estimate is quite steady across the two surveys, when we examine college enrollment

among various demographic subgroups of interest, these estimates are based on quite limited

numbers of respondents, making questions about gaps in college-going between groups difficult

to answer. For example, only two black students in Michigan responded to the 2008 and 2009

CPS surveys and no students of Hispanic ethnicity responded in the 2008 wave. Given such

imprecision, any researcher or policymaker interested in estimating gaps between such groups in

college enrollment rates is left with substantial uncertainty about their degree of accuracy and

representativeness.

       Given the larger samples sizes afforded by the ACS, estimates of gaps in college

enrollment across student subgroups looks quite different than those based on CPS data. This is

not surprising given the exceptionally small subgroup sample sizes we observe in the CPS data

(at the state level). For example, according to the CPS, the proportion of female students from

the Michigan classes of 2008 and 2009 who attend college by the second fall after graduating

from high school is 11 percentage points higher than the proportion of male students who do so.

When using ACS data, this female-male gap shrinks to 7 percentage points. Similarly the white-

black gap using CPS data is 17 percentage points, but only 10 percentage points when using

ACS information.



                                                 8
       This exercise makes clear the challenges faced by researchers and policy analysts

interested in using frequent, detailed, and precise measures of postsecondary outcomes generated

in close intervals in order to evaluate policies and make meaningful, responsive contributions to

policymaking. The use of NSC data has the potential to overcome such challenges. Yet, no data

source is perfect. To help guide the growing use of NSC data in research and policy analysis, we

turn to an exploration of potential sources of measurement error in this new and detailed source

of comprehensive postsecondary information.

       4. Potential Sources of Measurement Error in NSC Data

       There are several main sources of measurement error in NSC data relevant to estimating

postsecondary outcomes for students. Each of these sources of error results in students who are

enrolled in college to not appear in the NSC. Students who do not appear in the NSC data due to

these reasons are indistinguishable from students who do not enroll in college. We describe the

main sources of error, their magnitudes, and how their magnitudes vary across time and space,

and by student and college characteristics.

       4.1 Coverage Rates

       4.1.1 Enrollment Coverage

       The first and perhaps most salient way in which measurement error appears when using

NSC data is that not all colleges report enrollment information to the NSC. Participation in NSC

by colleges is voluntary, and has increased markedly over time. As of fall 2011, the NSC reports

that they cover 93 percent of postsecondary enrollment. We calculate and report NSC coverage

rates over time, by Census region, state, college type, and demographic subgroups of students.

We explore the sensitivity of our calculations to different definitions of college enrollment.




                                                 9
         We calculate the NSC coverage rate by dividing postsecondary enrollment at NSC-

participating colleges by total enrollment at all U.S. colleges. 11 In February 2012, we acquired a

list from NSC of all participating colleges along with the date each institution started submitting

data to the NSC. 12 We use enrollment counts from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data

System (IPEDS), a federally-generated database that lists every college, university, and technical

or vocational school that participates in the federal financial aid programs (over 6,000

institutions nationwide; National Center for Education Statistics, 2010). We use fall enrollment

counts from IPEDS, and include a college as in the NSC for the fall of a given year if it joins by

October 15th of that year. 13

         Figure 1a shows NSC coverage over time for all U.S. Title IV institutions. 14 The solid

line weights the coverage rate by total undergraduate enrollment, and shows that NSC coverage

increased drastically in the mid-1990s through early 2000s from less than 20 percent to over 80

percent. Since then, the rate of coverage growth has slowed, reaching 91.6 percent in 2011.

Weighting the coverage rates by first-time (and first-year) full-time-equivalent (FTE)

undergraduate enrollment (the dashed line) slightly lowers the coverage rates. 15 This suggests

that coverage is lower at colleges in which there are a higher proportion of such students. For the


11
   This assumes that institutions participating in the NSC report all of their enrollment data to the NSC. Based on our
conversations with the NSC, this seems to be an entirely reasonable assumption. To the extent that this is untrue, our
coverage rate estimates may slightly overstate coverage. In Michigan, we find no evidence that NSC misses
enrollment from participating colleges, except for a small share of dually-enrolled students (i.e., those students
enrolled in college while still in high school).
12
   We use the master list maintained by NSC staff. A slightly modified list is publically available at:
http://www.studentclearinghouse.org/colleges/studenttracker_for_outreach/participating_schools.php
13
   Our choice of October 15th follows the method used in-house by NSC to calculate their coverage rate. The rates
we report are virtually identical when we use a more conservative cutoff date of August 31st.
14
   In NSC-reported coverage calculations, they restrict the postsecondary institutions to those that are degree-
granting. Degree-granting institutions, as defined in IPEDS, are those that award associate’s degrees or higher. So
this definition excludes institutions such as trade schools that offer only certificates and similar awards or diplomas.
We include these institutions because we believe most users of NSC aim to capture any and all postsecondary
enrollment. Coverage rates are about two percentage points higher if we limit to degree-granting institutions.
15
   FTE enrollment is calculated by adding full-time enrollment counts to down-weighted part-time enrollment
counts, down weighting by college-type specific fractions provided by IPEDS.

                                                          10
remainder of this section we focus on coverage rates calculated using total non-FTE-weighted

undergraduate enrollment, since undergraduates (regardless of whether first-time and first-year)

are the population of interest for the majority of analyses (and since weighting by FTE is

inconsequential).

       We first explore how NSC enrollment coverage varies across space within the United

States. It is important for researchers and policymakers to understand how coverage varies across

states and Census regions since analyses of particular programs or policies often focus on

students from a particular state or region, and since students generally tend to enroll in college

close to home.

       In Figure 1b we illustrate how NSC enrollment coverage differs across Census regions.

Since the early 2000s, coverage has been similar across all regions but the South. Enrollment

coverage in the South continues to be a few percentage points lower than in other regions of the

country. When we look across states, there is substantially more variation in coverage. Table 2

reports coverage rates over time by state for all Title-IV institutions. Wyoming and Virginia are

currently the states with the highest coverage rates at 99.6 and 97.4, respectively. West Virginia

and Louisiana bottom out the list, at 64.5 and 81.9, respectively. Different states have

experienced shifts in coverage over this time period: For example, between 1997 and 2011, New

Mexico’s coverage rate catapulted from 10 to 90 percent. Yet during the same time period, North

Dakota saw a 3 percentage point decline in its overall coverage rate. For a complete set of

coverage rates by college type (2-year/4-year; public/private; non-profit/for-profit) and state for

all years 1995-2011, please consult the online set of Appendix tables (Tables A1 through A6).

       NSC data also vary in the degree to which they capture enrollment at different types of

colleges. In Figure 2a we see that coverage rates are quite high for public institutions and private,



                                                 11
non-profit (4-year) institutions, but much lower among for-profit institutions of any level.

Coverage is over 99 percent in 2011 among public 4-year institutions, but only 48 percent at for-

profit schools. While enrollment in for-profit institutions represents a relatively small share of

total postsecondary enrollment, it has grown drastically over the last decade – from 3 to 9

percent of U.S. undergraduate enrollment (Ackermann et al., 2011). NSC coverage among for-

profits has more than doubled since 2000, but improving coverage in this sector remains an

ongoing challenge for the NSC. Figure 2b illustrates a persistent gap in coverage by institutional

selectivity: Coverage is consistently higher among selective institutions (i.e., those admitting half

or less of applicants). 16 This finding largely mirrors the fact that coverage is highest at 4-year

institutions of all types and lowest among the largely nonselective for-profit sector.

           In order to get a sense of how NSC-participating institutions, and their enrollees, compare

to postsecondary institutions in the United States more broadly, we merge IPEDS data with the

NSC participant list and present information on institutional and student body composition

across the higher education landscape in Table 3. This exercise is similar in spirit to Figure 2a

except that here we also present the student-weighted fraction of total U.S. enrollment

represented by each type of college (column 1). We confirm that while NSC coverage is low at

for-profit institutions, enrollment at such institutions accounts for a relatively small share of all

undergraduate enrollment (i.e., around 10 percent). Coverage at private non-profit 2-year

institutions is also low, but these institutions account for virtually zero percent of all

undergraduate postsecondary enrollment (and we omit this sector from the table).

           Table 3 also allows us to explore, on average, how NSC enrollment coverage varies by

student characteristics. Coverage among males is about 1.5 percentage points higher than among

females. Figure 3a shows that this small sex gap in coverage has existed since the early 2000s.
16
     We thank Michael Bastedo and Ozan Jaquette for sharing their compilation of Barron’s ranking data.

                                                          12
At present, postsecondary enrollment among black students is less well covered than enrollment

among white students. To a lesser extent, this is also true for Hispanic students. The coverage

rate among black students at all Title-IV institutions is 88 percent compared to 93 percent among

white students. Figure 3b shows that coverage has historically been similar for whites and

students grouped into an “other race” category, 17 but lower for minority students. Since the early

2000s, this white-minority coverage gap has remained steady at between 4 and 6 percentage

points. Very recently, coverage has increased slightly among Hispanic enrollees. Since the early-

2000s, the race gap in coverage has been more pronounced than the sex gap, with white males

and females having similarly higher coverage than minority males and females.

        We now take a more detailed look at gaps in enrollment coverage based on the most

recent year in our data (2011-2012) in Table 4. We report shares of white non-Hispanic (NH),

black non-Hispanic, and Hispanic students by region that attend a particular type of

postsecondary institution, alongside subgroup-region specific coverage rates for each institution

type. These estimates allow us to better contextualize the gaps in coverage we present in Table 3,

since college enrollees with different demographic characteristics are not equally distributed

across geographic regions and types of postsecondary institutions.

        As an illustration, we find in Table 3 an overall white-black gap in coverage of 5.4

percentage points. We see a white-black gap of a similar magnitude (5.8 percentage points)

within the private, non-profit 4-year sector. Yet, we also see that college enrollment of black

students accounts for a much higher share of total undergraduate enrollment in for-profit

institutions (across regions) than it does for any other sector: The top rows of Table 4 show that

blacks comprise 14 percent of undergraduates at any college (column 2), but 23 percent of


17
  Other race includes Asian students, students with multiple races, and students whose race is not known by the
postsecondary institution.

                                                        13
students at for-profits (column 14). So, the relative concentration of black students in poorly

covered for-profit schools (especially in the South) and the relatively poor coverage of the small

share of black students at 4-year private institutions appear to account for the overall white-black

gap in coverage.

        4.1.2 Degree Coverage

        Colleges that participate in the NSC are supposed to report whether a student graduates

and their date of graduation for every student on whom they report enrollment information. We

have performed degree coverage rate calculations analogous to our enrollment calculations

above, simply weighting by number of degrees awarded instead of undergraduate enrollment

counts. However, unlike with enrollment, it is not necessarily reasonable to assume that NSC-

participating institutions report degree information for all of their students. 18 Thus, these

calculations may provide an overestimate of the true rates of degree coverage in NSC data. For

this reason, we use state administrative data in Michigan to more carefully speak to rates of

degree coverage in NSC data.

        In Table 5 we descriptively explore this concern by counting the number of

undergraduate degrees (i.e., Associate’s and Bachelor’s) awarded in our NSC data to Michigan

college-goers during the 2011-2012 academic year (column 2) and compare these counts to the

number of degrees awarded among Michigan postsecondary institutions as reported in the IPEDS

in the same year (column 1). We focus on undergraduate degrees: We exclude degrees where the

title indicates the degree is at the master’s or doctoral level as well as degrees with a missing title

earned by students who previously earned a degree from a 4-year school. 19 We also exclude


18
   We learned this based on our past research using degree completion information in NSC data, and from
conversations with research staff at the NSC.
19
   This method will mistakenly include graduate degrees that have a missing degree title and are earned by students
who received their undergraduate degree in another state or at a college not in the NSC.

                                                        14
degrees with a title that indicates a certificate or diploma. Yet, in our NSC data, 16 percent of

degrees have a missing degree title. We exclude (include) all such degrees to form the lower

(upper) bound on NSC degrees. To arrive at an informed middle ground, we calculate the

fraction of total degrees that are certificates by sector in Michigan using the IPEDS data, assume

that this is the share of the degrees with missing degree titles in our NSC data by sector that are

certificates or diplomas, and exclude only that number of the degrees with missing titles. 20

Columns 3, 4, and 5 report the raw degree coverage rates for our “best approximation,” lower,

and upper bound degree counts.

        Since IPEDS includes degrees earned in Michigan regardless of where students attended

high school, and our sample of NSC students only includes students who attended public high

school in Michigan, the degree coverage rate will be artificially low: Students who earn a degree

in Michigan but attended a private high school in Michigan, or a high school outside of

Michigan, will be counted in the IPEDS data but not in our NSC data. Therefore, we create a

weighted degree coverage rate – weighting the raw coverage rate by the proportion of total

undergraduate enrollment in Michigan that we observe in our NSC data. The resulting weighted

degree coverage rates appear in columns 8-10, and can be interpreted as the rate of degree

coverage conditional on being observed as enrolling in the NSC data. 21

        On average, we observe roughly 81 percent of all degrees earned conditional on

enrollment in an NSC-participating institution. Degree coverage is highest at public colleges (82

20
   The number of degrees in column 2 by sector do not sum to the total number of degrees due to the variation across
sector in this share.
21
   The weighted coverage rate is the unweighted rate multiplied by the inverse of the fraction of MI undergraduate
enrollment that we observe in our NSC data. This “enrollment fraction” is calculated as follows: the denominator is
the 12-month unduplicated undergraduate head count as reported by IPEDS for a year and sector. The numerator is
the number of undergraduate NSC students in the same year and sector enrolled at a MI college (where we proxy for
undergraduate by including only students who have not previously earned a degree from a 4-year college). For
example, assume we observe 600 degrees in the NSC data and 1,000 degrees in the IPEDS data, yielding an
unweighted coverage rate of 0.6. We observe 3,000 undergraduates in the NSC data and 4,000 in IPEDS for that
year and sector for a weight of 0.75. Thus, the weighted coverage rate is 0.6 * (0.75)−1 = 0.8.

                                                        15
percent) and lowest at private, non-profit institutions (62 percent). Given the number of moving

parts in this exercise, readers should interpret these degree coverage rates with care. At

minimum, these estimates suggest that NSC-participating institutions in Michigan may not

always report degree completion for all undergraduates. Analysts using NSC data in other states

and regions to examine degree receipt should be aware of this potential drawback.

           4.2 Matching Errors

           A second way in which measurement error may appear when using NSC data to estimate

postsecondary outcomes for students is simply due to the matching process used by the NSC.

The NSC considers their matching algorithm proprietary; but, from communication with NSC

staff we know that this process tends to err on the side of “false negatives.” We also know that

the primary information used to match students to their postsecondary records is name and date

of birth. In our Michigan case-study below, we test the robustness of this matching algorithm to a

variety of typos or inconsistencies in student names.

           4.3 Suppressed Student-level Information

           A final way in which NSC data may not fully capture information on the postsecondary

experiences of a desired sample of students has to do with the Family Educational Rights and

Privacy Act (FERPA). FERPA is a federal law that protects the privacy of student education

records. The law applies to all schools that receive funds from the U.S. Department of Education.

Under FERPA, both students and schools can block their enrollment and degree information. 22

So, NSC cannot release student-level information if the record is “FERPA-blocked.”

           The NSC has published a report that provides state-specific statistics on the overall

number of blocked records processed by NSC in 2006-2007, 2008-2009, and 2010-2011 (NSC,

2012). Nationally, the NSC finds FERPA-blocking to be most prevalent among students at 2-
22
     The overwhelming majority of “FERPA-blocked” records (nationally) are due to student-level blocking.

                                                         16
year institutions (both public and private). Within this 2-year group, student records at for-profits

experienced the lowest block rate, white students at 2-year publics blocked the most (NSC, 2012,

Figure 1).

        Records of students with different characteristics are blocked at different rates. Over 7

percent of Asian/Pacific Islanders’ records were blocked, 5 percent of Hispanic students’

records, and only about 3 percent of white and black students’ records (NSC, 2012, Figure 2). By

their nature, FERPA blocks are unobservable to researchers. Upon receipt of the NSC data, there

is no way to know the attributes of students who blocked their records. The blocking patterns

detailed by the NSC have different implications for states and regions, depending on the

composition of the postsecondary system as well as the relative size of each student

subpopulation. We explore the implications of FERPA-blocking in Michigan in our case study

analysis below.

        4.4 Comprehensive Coverage Rates

        Given the three sources of measurement error, we find two to be the most crucial:

coverage and FERPA-blocking. We tie these two sources of measurement error together and

create a “comprehensive coverage rate.” To arrive at this rate we take our initial enrollment

coverage rates and multiply it by one minus the FERPA block rate. 23 This procedure down-

weights the original coverage rate by the likely share of blocked records. Thus, this figure

represents the fraction of enrollment at NSC-participating colleges observable to researchers at

the detailed student-level. This is the relevant statistic for researchers and policymakers who

want to know what fraction of undergraduate college enrollment is captured by their NSC data.




23
  These state- and sector-specific rates are only available from the NSC for three years: 2006-2007, 2008-2009, and
2010-2011 (NSC, 2012).

                                                        17
       The comprehensive coverage rate increases from 82.1 percent in 2006-2007 to 86.1

percent in 2010-2011. This comprehensive coverage rate varies by sector, with for-profit

institutions experiencing the lowest coverage. Though private, non-profit 2-year institutions also

have low comprehensive coverage, recall that such institutions account for virtually zero percent

of total undergraduate enrollment (see Table 3). We provide comprehensive coverage rates by

state and sector for 2006-2007, 2008-2009, and 2010-2011 in Appendix Table A7.

       5. Michigan Case-Study: Estimates of Postsecondary Outcomes Using NSC Data

       As a way to illustrate how analysts and researchers can use the estimates provided in this

paper in their own work, and how these potential sources of measurement error affect estimates

of key postsecondary parameters, we turn to state administrative data on all public colleges and

universities in Michigan.

       5.1 Coverage Rates in Michigan

       At a first-order exploration, we present enrollment coverage rates overall and by

institutional sector for Michigan in Figures 4a and 4b. In Figure 4a, we see that enrollment

coverage in Michigan follows a similar pattern to the national trend, rising 4 percentage points

above the national average by 2011. As is the case nationally, for-profits have the poorest

coverage in Michigan (Figure 4b). Prior to 2009, a few key 4-year private colleges in Michigan

were also driving down the aggregate coverage rate, but joined the NSC in 2009. These colleges

explain the sharp uptick in coverage between the fall of 2008 and the fall of 2009.

       5.2 NSC’s Matching Algorithm and Michigan Data

       Even though the NSC’s matching algorithm is proprietary, it is important for researchers

to have a sense of how well this process functions. As a way to test the robustness of the NSC’s

matching algorithm to typos or inconsistencies in student names, we introduce slight variations



                                                18
to the names of a subset of students (N = 10,000) that we previously observed matching to the

NSC database. We then re-submit these name variants to the NSC and examine which variants

match and which do not. 24

        From this process, we learned a few things that may improve match rates for others using

NSC data: (1) Adding a letter to a first name is much more harmful to the overall match rate than

deleting a letter; (2) The NSC matching algorithm seems to be very good at handling odd non-

alpha-numeric characters in names (e.g., “%”). Appending these types of characters to the end of

first names does little to the overall match rate; (3) Resubmitting names using popular first name

variants for students who did not initially match (e.g., “Chris” for “Christopher”) is likely to

increase the overall match rate by about 1 percentage point; (4) For students who have a suffix

that goes along with their name, it is crucial that this suffix be placed in a field separate from the

student’s first and last names. At least in our state data, suffixes often appeared as characters

appended to last names – and we found it important that these suffixes be removed and placed in

the separate field that NSC has for suffixes. Yet, students with suffixes represented a very small

portion of our random sample (0.3 percent), and therefore the improvement in the overall match

rate was minimal.

        5.3 FERPA-Blocking in Michigan

        To illustrate the consequences of the fact that FERPA-blocking rates are time-sensitive,

we use NSC data from Michigan over the course of several different submissions to the NSC to

estimate rates of college enrollment. These submission time points span roughly three years. In

Table 6, we estimate rates of college enrollment for the Michigan high school class of 2009 by a


24
  This entire process was completed all within the same month; therefore, any changes in NSC’s interpretation of
FERPA laws, algorithm processes, etc. are not likely to confound our name variant analysis – nor are changes in
students’ choices about whether to block their detailed information under the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act (FERPA).

                                                        19
constant point in time (i.e., the fall of 2010) separately based on three different pulls of NSC

data. Therefore, since the underlying group of individuals submitted to the NSC did not change

across time points and there were no changes in the stock of NSC-participating institutions, any

shifts in the estimated enrollment rates can be attributed to changes in FERPA-blocking

behavior.

           Generally, our estimates of college enrollment for the class of 2009 are quite stable and

trend downward only slightly (mostly between 0 and 3 percentage points) over time. As a way to

capture all relevant student-level information, we then combine our NSC data across pulls. This

allows us to observe student-level data for those students who may have attended a school that

subsequently FERPA-blocked their information (or for students who blocked their information

during an earlier pull only to unblock it later). Naturally, this also allows us to capture updated

enrollment information for all students. In the final column of Table 6, we present pooled

estimates of the same parameters – by institution type, and by student subgroup. These pooled

estimates are of the same magnitude or larger compared to their corresponding parameters from

any individual NSC pull. This suggests that there is value added in submitting a group of

students multiple times to the NSC.

           In our Michigan NSC data we also observe institution-specific patterns of FERPA-

blocking over these three time points that suggest (at least in some cases) changes in FERPA-

blocking are largely a school-level, rather than student-level, phenomenon. 25 We see

exceptionally large increases in the FERPA-blocking rate at particular institutions in our sample.

For example, at one large public research institution, the FERPA-blocking rate jumped from 8.5

percent in the fall of 2010 to 24.2 percent about a year later. Yet, at another large public research

intuition, the FERPA-blocking rate barely budged over this same time period, from 0.02 to 0.09
25
     NSC provides back to researchers the total number of blocked records by institution for a given submission.

                                                           20
percent. We observe similar examples in the 2-year sector: One community college in Michigan

saw its FERPA-blocking rate increase from essentially zero (0.01 percent) to nearly 31 percent

during the same period. 26 Regardless of the mechanisms underlying changing patterns of

FERPA-blocking rates, researchers should be cognizant of the degree to which blocked

information for the state and time period under study may affect estimates of key college-going

parameters.

        5.4 Exploring Estimates of Postsecondary Enrollment and Persistence in Michigan

        With an improved understanding of how these three main sources of measurement error

are likely to show up in our Michigan NSC data, we now exploit the existence of an additional

rich data source in Michigan as a way to illustrate implications of this collection of measurement

error concerns for estimating a range of postsecondary outcomes. We first describe the student-

level administrative transcript data, and then conduct analyses in which we compare estimates of

college enrollment and persistence for a recent graduating class of Michigan high school students

based on each data source.

        5.4.1 Michigan’s Student Transcript and Academic Record Repository (STARR)

        STARR consists of electronic college transcripts for all students who attend public

institutions of higher education in Michigan, including community colleges. The database

contains information about each course a student takes, including course title, credits earned, and

grade. It also contains information on declared majors and minors, degrees or certificates a

student earns, and demographic information as collected by the participating colleges.

        The collection of these data was mandated as a requirement for Michigan to receive State

Fiscal Stabilization Fund (SFSF) dollars under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act


26
  Perhaps this is suggestive of different institutions changing the way in which a FERPA-blocking option is
presented to undergraduate students (i.e., the default).

                                                        21
(ARRA). The state has just concluded its second collection of these data. The first collection

included complete transcripts for every student who was enrolled in a Michigan public college or

university at any point between June 2009 and May 2011. The second collection includes the

same set of information for any student who attended a Michigan public college between June

2011 and May 2012. STARR data will be collected annually going forward. STARR covers all

students enrolled in Michigan public institutions, whether they attended high school in Michigan

or elsewhere, are a graduate or undergraduate, or are seeking a degree or not. Since these data are

a collection of transcripts, linking to a student once captures their full history of attachment to an

institution.

        5.4.2 Enrollment

        We focus on Michigan public high school graduates in the class of 2011. We use this

class of graduates because the 2011-2012 wave of public postsecondary transcript (i.e., STARR)

data is the cleanest (i.e., many bugs in the data collection process were worked out between the

first and second waves). In Table 7, we estimate the proportion of this class that enrolls in

postsecondary schooling within one academic year after high school graduation. We calculate

this same statistic for a variety of socio-demographic subgroups of students.

        We see that nearly 70 percent enroll in college (anywhere) within the first year following

high school graduation and 55 percent enroll in a Michigan public college during that timeframe

(based on NSC data alone). If we instead examine the share of these high school graduates that

enrolls in a Michigan public college based on state administrative data, we arrive at the same

estimate (i.e., 55 percent). But, if we combine the NSC and state administrative data sources, this

figure climbs to 59 percent. This suggests that the two data sources are capturing slightly

different students.



                                                  22
       Students who we see attending a Michigan public college in one data source but not the

other tend to cluster in a few institutions. For example, nearly 30 percent of students we see

attending college in the STARR data but not in the NSC data are at community colleges we

know recently joined the NSC. Similarly, about 25 percent of students we see attending college

according to NSC data but not STARR data are at a community college that had some trouble

uploading complete transcript data for its students. No data source is perfect. These examples

illustrate holes in coverage and how states’ own postsecondary data systems can improve and be

improved by NSC data. At least in Michigan, our estimates in Table 7 suggest small to moderate

differences in the calculated college-going rate based on NSC versus state administrative data.

       5.4.3 Persistence and Progress through College

       Given the incentives and demands created by SFSF funding, one of the most salient

measures of persistence that state departments of education now calculate is the proportion of

students from recent high school graduating classes who go on to obtain a year’s worth of

college credit.

       The NSC records students’ college-going experience in terms of enrollment spells (i.e.,

particular dates of enrollment) rather than semesters. The federal government supplied states

with a formula to use with NSC data that calculates whether a student “earned” a year of credit

based on the total number of weeks a student was enrolled in college. This formula considers

students who meet any of the following criteria as having earned one year of college credit (24

credits): enrolled full-time for 28 weeks; enrolled half-time for 56 weeks; enrolled less-than-half-

time for 112 weeks; or any equivalent combination. This calculation requires information on the

intensity with which students were enrolled during each enrollment spell. Unfortunately, a




                                                23
sizeable share of intensity information is missing in NSC data: For the Michigan high school

class of 2011, about 25 percent of enrollment spells are missing intensity information. 27

        As a first-order question, we explore the adequacy of this federal formula for translating

enrollment spells into credits earned. To investigate how well this formula approximates actual

credit accumulation among students, we limit our analytic sample to college-goers from

Michigan’s high school class of 2011 who attended a public college in Michigan and have no

missing intensity information. We then compare estimates of the number of credits earned and

the share of this subsample earning at least one year of credit based on NSC data to the same

statistics calculated using the state’s transcript data instead (i.e., the truth).

        The results in Table 8 illustrate that the federal formula generally overestimates the share

of students earning at least one year of college credit by about a year after high school

graduation. Further, this overestimate is not equal for all students. The formula substantially

overestimates credit accumulation for traditionally disadvantaged groups (e.g., those eligible for

free or reduced-price meals (FARM) and minority students). For example, estimating the share

of black undergraduates who earn at least one year of college credit based on NSC data yields a

figure of 47 percent. Counting up actual credits earned by black students at Michigan public

colleges in our state administrative data instead yields a figure of only 29 percent, for a

difference of 18 percentage points.

        About a quarter of the college-going sample in Table 8 has at least one missing

enrollment intensity status associated with an enrollment spell in our NSC data. 28 How states

choose to handle these missing values also has implications for estimates of postsecondary


27
   These missing intensity values tend to be fairly evenly distributed between 4-year and 2-year schools, but
relatively more concentrated among public institutions compared to privates.
28
   The share of students with missing enrollment intensity information does not vary much across demographic
subgroups.

                                                        24
attainment. In Table 9, we impute missing intensity values in the NSC data as either less-than-

part-time (LTPT), part-time (PT), or full-time (FT), calculate the corresponding share of students

earning at least one year of college for each subgroup, and compare this figure to the “truth” we

observe in our state administrative data (i.e., actual credits earned). This exercise illustrates that

for FARM, black, and Hispanic students, imputing missing intensity values as LTPT gets one

closer to the “truth,” whereas for white and non-FARM students, the best imputation choice lies

between PT and FT. Still, in all cases, imputing all missing intensity values as FT only serves to

exacerbate the degree to which the federal formula overstates credit accumulation.

        Taken together, our findings suggest that this formula is not reliable for the very groups

whose attainment is often of concern. It may be more conservative to simply report what we

know: the number of semesters enrolled, and be agnostic about equivalent credits.

        6. Special Issues for Policy Analysts and Program Evaluators

        In this paper we describe and explore the most salient sources of measurement error in

NSC data. We examine the implications of such measurement error for estimating postsecondary

outcomes of interest to policymakers and researchers. It is our hope that these analyses will serve

as a useful reference for policy analysts and researchers using NSC data to study the impacts of

various programs and policies on postsecondary attendance, persistence, and attainment.

        Our findings illustrate that NSC data miss a shrinking but nontrivial portion of

undergraduate enrollment in the United States: Coverage is highest among public institutions (99

percent for 4-year; 96 percent for 2-year) and lowest (but growing) among the for-profit sector

(48 percent). There is substantial variation in coverage across states, institutional sectors, and

over time. Such variation underscores the need for researchers using NSC data to evaluate

programs or policies to understand the level of coverage NSC data provide for the state(s) and



                                                  25
time period under study. We find that the algorithm the NSC uses to match students to their

postsecondary enrollment records is quite robust to common computerized perturbations of

names. Such errors are unlikely to introduce appreciable measurement error (at least based on

our Michigan data). Finally, our work illustrates the value of submitting the same population of

students to the NSC multiple times, since FERPA-blocking rates are time-sensitive and

sometimes institution-specific, in order to capture the maximum amount of college-going

information for that population.

          In this concluding section we highlight a few issues relevant for program evaluators

interested in estimating the impact of some treatment on college outcomes. We focus on a

hypothetical research question in which the outcome of interest is enrollment in college (i.e.,

binary). In general, the types of measurement error we discuss in this paper will lead researchers

to incorrectly categorize some college-attenders as not attending college. This sort of

misclassification of a dichotomous dependent variable, if uncorrelated with treatment status, will

attenuate any treatment effect toward zero (Bound et al., 2001, p. 3726). The basic intuition

behind this conclusion is that for a binary outcome, there can never be a positive “measurement

error” for someone who did indeed attend college (outcome = 1). That is, for someone who did

attend college (outcome = 1), there is no way to “positively” misclassify that person. The only

feasible misclassification is to instead say they did not attend college (outcome = 0). 29 Therefore,

this implies that if non-converge in NSC data is unrelated to treatment status (as in the case of a

randomized experiment), then a simple adjustment using our reported “comprehensive” coverage

rate will scale the treatment effect (measured in percentage points) to its true magnitude.


29
   Therefore, this conclusion differs importantly from a case in which the outcome is continuous and the
measurement error of that outcome is not associated with treatment. In such cases, the measurement error will
simply cause the treatment effect to be estimated with less precision (i.e., larger standard errors), but the coefficient
itself remains unbiased (Wooldridge, 2003, pp. 302-303).

                                                           26
       In non-experimental and quasi-experimental settings, there may be reason to suspect that

NSC coverage could be correlated with treatment status. States typically submit their students to

the NSC based on the grade in which they are enrolled. In fact, states most often submit classes

of graduating public high school students to the NSC. Assume one is interested in the effect of a

9th grade curriculum change on college attendance. The change is introduced in a particular year,

t, such that those in 8th grade before time t are not exposed, but those in 8th grade in year t and

forward are exposed. If the state only submits the analogous graduating classes of students, the

analyst will not observe college outcomes for dropouts and will observe college outcomes sooner

for those students (from the treatment and control cohorts) who progressed through high school

on time. The curriculum could have affected dropout and the rate at which students progress

through school. If so, such a submission plan can lead to measurement error that is correlated

with the treatment of interest. The lesson here is to submit intact cohorts of students (e.g., first-

time 9th graders by year) and to be patient about those who are progressing slowly, or redefine

your outcomes (e.g., within one year of expected on-time high school graduation).

       For evaluations that exploit temporal variation in exposure to a treatment and compare

college-going rates over time, it is also important to consider whether there were changes in the

number and type of institutions participating in the NSC during the outcome time period under

study. A spike in NSC participation that occurs during the time when treated students would be

enrolling in college (but not control students) would confound increases in college enrollment

due to the treatment of interest with increases due to changes in NSC coverage. One way to

address this concern is to only count attendance at colleges that have joined NSC by the

beginning of the outcome period of interest: That is, code students who enroll in colleges that




                                                  27
join the NSC later as non-enrollees. This allows the analyst to assess the effect on college

enrollment among a common underlying population of colleges.

       Finally, variation in NSC coverage by institutional sector points to a potential

interpretation concern: If a treatment or policy of interest induced students currently attending

institutions with poorer coverage rates (e.g.. for-profits) to instead attend colleges that are

comprehensively covered by the NSC (e.g., publics), then researchers may incorrectly

characterize what is really a “choice effect” (i.e., moving from one type of college to another as a

result of the treatment) as an “enrollment/attendance” effect.

       Of course, all research questions are unique. We seek to provide the evidence,

framework, and key guiding principles necessary to help researchers and policy analysts

interested in higher education more carefully exploit the richness of NSC data – as well as

explore the potential impacts of the limitations inherent in using these data on their work.




                                                  28
                                           References

Ackerman, D., Cronin, J. A., Turner N., & Bershadker, A. (2011). Coordinating the American
      Opportunity Tax Credit and the federal Pell Grant. Paper presented at National Tax
      Association Conference.

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The Role of
       simplification and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
       experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1205-1242.

Bound, J., Brown, C., & Mathiowetz, N. (2001). Measurement Error in Survey Data, in Edward
      Leamer and James J. Heckman, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, v. 5, Elsevier Science,
      Chapter 59, 3705-3843.

Chingos, M. M., & Peterson, P. E. (2012). The effect of school vouchers on college enrollment:
      Experimental evidence from New York City. (Academic). Brookings Institution: Brown
      Center on Education Policy.

Cunningham, A. F., & Milam, J. (2005). Feasibility of a student unit record system within the
      Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (NCES 2005-160). U.S. Department of
      Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
      Printing Office.

Data Quality Campaign. (2012). Data for action 2012: Focus on people to change data culture.
      Washington, DC, Access: http://dataqualitycampaign.org/resources/details/1631

Deming, D. J., Hastings, J. S., Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2013). School choice, school
      quality, and postsecondary attainment. American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Dynarski, S., Hyman, J., & Schanzenbach, D. W. (2013). Experimental evidence on the effect of
      childhood investments on postsecondary attainment and degree completion. Journal of
      Policy Analysis and Management, 32(4),692-717.

Garcia, T. and L’Orange H.P. (2012). Strong Foundations: The State of State Postsecondary Data
       Systems: 2012 Update on Data Sharing with K-12 and Labor. State Higher Education
       Officers Association.

Goldrick-Rab, S. (2012). Review of “The Effects of School Vouchers on College Enrollment.”
       (Academic). National Education Policy Center, Access: http://nepc.colorado.edu/files/ttr-
       voucherscollege.pdf

Hemelt, S. W. Roth, K. B., & Eaton, W. W. (2013). Elementary school interventions:
      Experimental evidence on postsecondary outcomes. Educational Evaluation and Policy
      Analysis, forthcoming.

Higher Education Opportunity Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-315. (2008).

                                                29
Hout, M. (2011). Social and economic returns to college in the United States. Annual Review of
       Sociology, 38, 179-400.

Hyman, J. (2013). ACT for All: The effect of mandatory college entrance exams on
     postsecondary attainment and choice. Working paper, University of Michigan.

Kane, T. J. (2003). A quasi-experimental estimate of the impact of financial aid on college-
       going. NBER Working Paper Series, No. 9703.

Lederman, D. (2012, September 13). Higher ed scholars’ voucher war. Inside Higher Ed,
      Access: http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2012/09/13/researchers-argue-over-school-
      vouchers-impact-college-going

Lleras-Muney, A. (2005). The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United
       States. Review of Economic Studies, 72, 189–221.

National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
       (IPEDS), U.S. Department of Education, 2010.

National Student Clearinghouse. (2012). Impact of Directory Information Blocks on
       StudentTracker Results,
       Access: http://research.studentclearinghouse.org/working_with_our_data.php

Oreopoulos, P., & Petronijevic, U. (2013). Making college worth it: A review of research on the
      returns to higher education. NBER Working Paper Series, No. 19053.

Oreopoulos, P., & Salvanes, K. G. (2011). Priceless: The non-pecuniary benefits of schooling.
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1), 159-184.

Richburg-Hayes, et al. (2009). Rewarding persistence: Effects of a performance-based
      scholarship program for low-income parents (Academic). MDRC,
      Access: http://www.mdrc.org/sites/default/files/Rewarding%20Persistence%20ES.pdf

Wooldridge, J. M. (2003). Introductory Econometrics (2nd ed.). South-Western, Thompson
      Learning: Mason, OH.




                                               30
Figure 1a. NSC Enrollment Coverage by Enrollment Measure
        1
        .8  .6
    Fraction
  .4    .2
        0




                 1995   1997   1999    2001    2003   2005      2007   2009    2011
                                               Year

                               Undergraduate          1st-Time FTE Undergrad



Figure 1b. NSC Enrollment Coverage by Geographic Region
        1
        .8.6
   Fraction
  .4    .2
        0




                 1995   1997   1999    2001    2003   2005      2007   2009    2011
                                               Year

                                        Northeast            Midwest
                                        West                 South
Figure 2a. NSC Enrollment Coverage by Institutional Sector
         1
         .8.6
    Fraction
   .4    .2
         0




                  1995   1997   1999   2001     2003     2005    2007       2009   2011
                                                Year

                                   Public 4Yr                   Public <4Yr
                                   Private, Non-Prof            For-Profit



Figure 2b. NSC Enrollment Coverage by Institutional Selectivity
         1
         .8  .6
     Fraction
   .4    .2
         0




                  1995   1997   1999   2001     2003     2005    2007       2009   2011
                                                Year

                                  Selective            Less/Non Selective
Figure 3a. NSC Enrollment Coverage by Student Sex
        1
        .8  .6
    Fraction
  .4    .2
        0




                 1995   1997   1999   2001      2003   2005     2007   2009   2011
                                                Year

                                         Male            Female



Figure 3b. NSC Enrollment Coverage by Student Race and Ethnicity
        1
        .8.6
   Fraction
  .4    .2
        0




                 1995   1997   1999   2001      2003   2005     2007   2009   2011
                                                Year

                                        White                 Black
                                        Hispanic              Other
Figure 4a. NSC Enrollment Coverage in Michigan
        1
        .8  .6
    Fraction
  .4    .2
        0




                 1995   1997   1999   2001     2003   2005    2007     2009   2011
                                               Year

                                       National          Michigan



Figure 4b. NSC Enrollment Coverage in Michigan by Institutional Sector
        1
        .8.6
   Fraction
  .4    .2
        0




                 1995   1997   1999   2001     2003   2005    2007     2009   2011
                                               Year

                                  Public 4Yr                 Public <4Yr
                                  Private, Non-Prof          For-Profit
Notes: For all figures, the underlying sample is all U.S. Title-IV postsecondary institutions. Unless otherwise noted,
trends are weighted by total undergraduate enrollment. Year corresponds to the fall semester. Enrollment and
student characteristics are from IPEDS. An institution is counted as an NSC participant if it joins by October 15th of
a given year. Information on institution selectivity comes from 2004 Barron’s ranking data: An institution is counted
as a “selective” institution if it received a Barron’s ranking of “very competitive,” “highly competitive,” or “most
competitive.” Collectively, this group of institutions admits about half or less of their applicants.
Table 1. College Attendance Rate of Michigan High School Classes of 2008 and 2009

                                                  Current Population Survey (CPS)           American Community Survey (ACS)
                                                                              Standard                                    Standard
                                                Proportion         N                        Proportion         N
                                                                                Error                                       Error
                                                    (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
A. Immediate Enrollment
Overall                                            0.74            54            0.06          0.79          10904           0.00
Sex
    Female                                         0.68            28            0.12          0.83           5615           0.01
    Male                                           0.81            26            0.08          0.75           5289           0.01
Race and Ethnicity
    White                                          0.80            44            0.17          0.80           8974           0.01
    Black                                          0.25             4            0.23          0.69           1074           0.01
    Other                                          0.67             6            0.21          0.78            856           0.01
    Hispanic                                       1.00             2              -           0.62            471           0.02

B. Enrollment by 2nd Fall after HS graduation
Overall                                            0.80           121            0.04          0.79          12805           0.00
Sex
    Female                                         0.86            57            0.07          0.82           6544           0.01
    Male                                           0.75            64            0.05          0.75           6261           0.01
Race and Ethnicity
    White                                          0.82            96            0.10          0.80          10571           0.01
    Black                                          0.65            17            0.12          0.70           1271           0.01
    Other                                          0.86             7            0.14          0.80            963           0.01
    Hispanic                                       0.67             9            0.16          0.67            526           0.02
Notes: The sample for columns (1)-(3) and (4)-(6) is respondents from the CPS (October supplement) and ACS, respectively, whose
state of residence at the time of the survey is Michigan and who we estimate to have graduated high school (HS) in 2008 or 2009. Year
of HS graduation in the CPS is imputed using age, survey year, and approximate graduation year (current year vs. prior to survey). For
example, panel A , cols (1)-(3) use the 2008 and 2009 waves of the CPS and restrict to those individuals who are 18-19 years old and
graduated HS during the same year as the survey. Panel B uses 2009 and 2010 CPS and restricts to 19-20 year-olds who graduated HS
prior to the year of the survey. The ACS does not collect year of HS graduation data, so for columns (4)-(6) we identify HS graduates
using only age and survey year: Panel A restricts to high school graduates in the 2008 and 2009 ACS who are 18-19 years old. ACS
uses 3-year estimates.
Table 2. NSC Postsecondary Enrollment Coverage Rates: All U.S. Title IV Institutions by State and Year

State             1995           1997           1999           2001           2003          2005           2007           2009          2011
AL                0.015          0.525          0.701          0.716          0.722         0.789          0.868          0.884         0.894
AK                0.000          0.000          0.930          0.929          0.953         0.949          0.936          0.915         0.910
AZ                0.000          0.119          0.217          0.383          0.450         0.550          0.705          0.867         0.892
AR                0.000          0.444          0.720          0.773          0.778         0.860          0.852          0.921         0.921
CA                0.181          0.498          0.755          0.885          0.909         0.898          0.914          0.909         0.932
CO                0.044          0.752          0.834          0.801          0.825         0.836          0.791          0.798         0.823
CT                0.569          0.743          0.806          0.801          0.835         0.823          0.840          0.859         0.844
DE                0.000          0.010          0.542          0.614          0.641         0.640          0.618          0.952         0.938
DC                0.055          0.352          0.553          0.814          0.826         0.835          0.926          0.962         0.964
FL                0.003          0.206          0.570          0.701          0.779         0.823          0.825          0.807         0.838
GA                0.246          0.533          0.643          0.658          0.872         0.899          0.909          0.902         0.948
HI                0.008          0.028          0.073          0.791          0.823         0.820          0.864          0.879         0.888
ID                0.151          0.628          0.620          0.933          0.965         0.963          0.965          0.939         0.954
IL                0.252          0.696          0.778          0.910          0.941         0.892          0.919          0.907         0.926
IN                0.000          0.149          0.307          0.372          0.569         0.594          0.822          0.918         0.938
IA                0.000          0.517          0.612          0.872          0.887         0.863          0.833          0.764         0.838
KS                0.000          0.273          0.379          0.656          0.809         0.834          0.842          0.855         0.863
KY                0.004          0.823          0.817          0.814          0.828         0.907          0.948          0.934         0.943
LA                0.294          0.584          0.737          0.701          0.754         0.795          0.800          0.765         0.819
ME                0.000          0.712          0.808          0.826          0.838         0.916          0.931          0.938         0.944
MD                0.027          0.422          0.729          0.757          0.900         0.896          0.904          0.913         0.936
MA                0.116          0.579          0.732          0.827          0.836         0.870          0.933          0.942         0.951
MI                0.093          0.324          0.559          0.701          0.764         0.830          0.844          0.943         0.950
MN                0.127          0.930          0.942          0.933          0.945         0.952          0.952          0.946         0.950
MS                0.079          0.507          0.794          0.805          0.823         0.846          0.929          0.937         0.953
MO                0.514          0.695          0.808          0.860          0.906         0.909          0.922          0.903         0.901
MT                0.000          0.823          0.896          0.908          0.914         0.915          0.919          0.917         0.924
NE                0.356          0.761          0.846          0.935          0.958         0.959          0.959          0.954         0.968
NV                0.000          0.315          0.692          0.877          0.968         0.944          0.933          0.913         0.915
NH                0.459          0.655          0.709          0.680          0.705         0.931          0.937          0.946         0.962
NJ                0.017          0.509          0.724          0.807          0.840         0.852          0.862          0.878         0.926
NM                0.000          0.103          0.387          0.620          0.626         0.634          0.834          0.913         0.902
NY                0.250          0.784          0.851          0.865          0.862         0.869          0.892          0.902         0.933
NC                0.189          0.825          0.902          0.912          0.919         0.923          0.960          0.964         0.958
ND                0.000          0.956          0.947          0.957          0.936         0.919          0.915          0.902         0.924
OH                0.421          0.695          0.835          0.856          0.884         0.896          0.919          0.906         0.919
OK                0.081          0.331          0.554          0.646          0.639         0.640          0.646          0.742         0.838
OR                0.071          0.603          0.688          0.787          0.843         0.897          0.896          0.901         0.953
PA                0.345          0.792          0.874          0.880          0.895         0.902          0.907          0.903         0.920
RI                0.000          0.302          0.600          0.804          0.905         0.889          0.950          0.954         0.955
SC                0.124          0.803          0.886          0.929          0.950         0.947          0.955          0.955         0.956
SD                0.000          0.807          0.830          0.826          0.809         0.820          0.830          0.826         0.862
TN                0.281          0.828          0.844          0.878          0.873         0.858          0.850          0.850         0.858
TX                0.053          0.411          0.543          0.620          0.711         0.748          0.765          0.810         0.921
UT                0.504          0.757          0.785          0.938          0.935         0.928          0.913          0.919         0.907
VA                0.000          0.866          0.893          0.897          0.900         0.897          0.969          0.970         0.974
VT                0.481          0.741          0.891          0.913          0.926         0.933          0.953          0.950         0.959
WA                0.112          0.727          0.824          0.942          0.949         0.950          0.965          0.955         0.964
WV                0.000          0.288          0.599          0.688          0.710         0.697          0.693          0.722         0.645
WI                0.457          0.862          0.887          0.947          0.967         0.973          0.967          0.964         0.965
WY                0.000          0.622          0.958          0.942          0.931         0.916          0.951          0.958         0.996
Notes: Year corresponds to the fall semester. Coverage rates are calculated by dividing the total undergraduate enrollment in postsecondary
institutions participating in the NSC by the total undergraduate enrollment in all postsecondary institutions. Undergraduate enrollment counts
are from IPEDS. A school is counted as in the NSC for that year if it joins by October 15th. See appendix tables for rates for all years 1995-
2011 by state and college type.
Table 3. How Representative are NSC-Participating Colleges?

                                                   U.S. Colleges                                U.S. Colleges in NSC
                                                                                                                                           Student-weighted
                                   Proportion of                                      Proportion of
                                                 N(colleges)        N(students)                      N(colleges) N(students)                 coverage rate
                                     students                                           students
                                        (1)          (2)                (3)                (4)           (4)           (5)                         (6)
All Colleges                           1.00        6,311            18,440,536            1.00         3,121       16,887,096                     0.916
Public
    2-year                              0.39           1,267         7,161,172             0.41            925          6,871,474                 0.960
    4-year                              0.36            666          6,626,325             0.39            647          6,592,742                 0.995
Private, non-profit
    4-year                              0.15           1,303         2,675,633             0.15            976          2,490,514                 0.931
Private, for-profit                     0.10           2,828         1,911,972             0.05            531           915,839                  0.479

Student Demographics:
Race/Ethnicity
    White, non-Hispanic                 0.55              .         10,103,260             0.56              .          9,404,816                 0.931
    Black, non-Hispanic                 0.14              .          2,588,472             0.13              .          2,269,436                 0.877
    Hispanic                            0.14              .          2,607,518             0.14              .          2,337,389                 0.896
Sex
    Female                              0.57              .         10,491,909             0.56              .          9,539,568                 0.909
    Male                                0.43              .          7,948,628             0.44              .          7,347,529                 0.924
Notes: Data are from the 2011-2012 year. See notes in Table 2 for information on enrollment counts and NSC participant list. Race categories not shown include
Asian, American Indian, Multiracial, and unknown. Institution type category not shown is private, non-profit, 2-year.
Table 4. Distribution of College Enrollment and NSC Coverage: Where and for whom is coverage best?

    Institutional Sector                   Any College                             Public, 2-year                           Public, 4-year                      Private, non-profit, 4-year               For-profit
    Student Subgroup             White, NH Black, NH Hispanic             White, NH Black, NH Hispanic             White, NH Black, NH Hispanic             White, NH Black, NH Hispanic        White, NH Black, NH    Hispanic
                                    (1)        (2)     (3)                   (4)        (5)       (6)                 (7)        (8)       (9)                (10)         (11)          (12)     (13)       (14)        (15)
Entire United States
    Proportion of students         0.548         0.140         0.141        0.521         0.146         0.178        0.599         0.116         0.122           0.604    0.119       0.079       0.395      0.230      0.158
    Coverage rate                  0.931         0.877         0.896        0.959         0.955         0.954        0.996         0.994         0.996           0.938    0.880       0.918       0.459      0.507      0.399

Northeast
   Proportion of students          0.572         0.122         0.115        0.546         0.147         0.150        0.616         0.104         0.101           0.592    0.084       0.080       0.413      0.240      0.181
   Coverage rate                   0.939         0.880         0.901        0.991         0.992         0.997        0.992         0.996         0.994           0.957    0.973       0.962       0.305      0.330      0.316

South
    Proportion of students         0.527         0.216         0.137        0.532         0.229         0.137        0.557         0.182         0.144           0.535    0.221       0.081       0.349      0.323      0.166
    Coverage rate                  0.921         0.875         0.880        0.932         0.932         0.929        0.995         0.993         0.998           0.893    0.813       0.853       0.339      0.450      0.248

Midwest
   Proportion of students          0.687         0.122         0.058        0.673         0.139         0.075        0.751         0.079         0.040           0.702    0.096       0.054       0.487      0.255      0.066
   Coverage rate                   0.939         0.875         0.921        0.973         0.983         0.985        1.000         1.000         1.000           0.949    0.928       0.923       0.431      0.502      0.497

West
   Proportion of students          0.439         0.067         0.237        0.401         0.067         0.298        0.507         0.037         0.181           0.572    0.045       0.129       0.370      0.141      0.199
   Coverage rate                   0.928         0.885         0.902        0.963         0.963         0.952        0.994         0.993         0.992           0.948    0.895       0.925       0.624      0.711      0.500
Notes: NH = Non-Hispanic; Enrollment shares and coverage rates are for 2011-2012. Race categories not shown: Asian, American Indian, Multiracial, and unknown.
Table 5. NSC Postsecondary Degree Coverage in Michigan

                                              Number of undergraduate degrees:
                                                                                           NSC                NSC                                     Coverage            Coverage            Weighted         Weighted Coverage Weighted Coverage
                                                    IPEDS                NSC                                                        Coverage
                                                                                       (Lower bound)      (Upper bound)                             (Lower bound)       (Upper Bound)         Coverage          (Lower Bound)     (Upper Bound)
                                                      (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)                     (5)               (6)                 (7)                (8)                   (9)               (10)
All Colleges                                        94,459              36,937            32,013             38,299                   0.391             0.339               0.405              0.811                 0.703             0.841

Public                                              73,205              32,016             29,823              32,411                 0.437              0.407               0.443              0.821                 0.765                   0.832
   2-year                                           25,886              8,956              7,578               9,628                  0.346              0.293               0.372              0.686                 0.581                   0.738
   4-year                                           47,319              22,777             22,245              22,783                 0.481              0.470               0.481              0.744                 0.727                   0.744

Private, non-profit                                 19,419              4,887               2,189              5,090                  0.252              0.113               0.262              0.624                 0.280                   0.650
    4-year                                          19,419              4,887               2,189              5,090                  0.252              0.113               0.262              0.622                 0.279                   0.648

For-profit                                           1,835               111                  1                 798                   0.060              0.001               0.435              0.877                 0.008                   6.319

Notes: Data are for 2011-2012. Degrees in IPEDS are associates and bachelors degrees awarded at all institutions in Michigan. Degrees in NSC are all Associate's and Bachelor's degrees earned by students that attended (public) high school and college in
Michigan. Please consult text for discussion of raw and weighted degree coverage rates.
Table 6. How does Time-Sensitive FERPA-Blocking Affect College Enrollment Estimates?

                                College enrollment rate based on submission to NSC on…
                                 September         August          August        Union of
                                     2010           2011            2012       Submissions
                                      (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)
Overall                              0.66            0.64           0.64          0.67

Institution Type
   Public, 2-year                     0.36             0.34             0.34             0.37
   Public, 4-year                     0.29             0.29             0.28             0.29

   Private, 4-year                    0.08             0.08             0.07             0.08

Student Sex
   Female                             0.69             0.67             0.67             0.70
   Male                               0.62             0.61             0.61             0.64

Student Race/Ethnicity
   White, non-Hispanic                0.68             0.66             0.66             0.68
   Black, non-Hispanic                0.62             0.60             0.60             0.63
   Hispanic                           0.48             0.44             0.43             0.49
Notes: The underlying sample submitted to the NSC is always the Michigan high school class of 2009.
Each column shows the fraction enrolled in college by September 2010 (second fall after high school
graduation). Private 4-year colleges include non-profit and for-profit institutions.
Table 7. Initial College Enrollment for Michigan's Class of 2011: NSC vs. Administrative Data

   Data Source                                   NSC                      STARR             Union of NSC & STARR
                                                       Michigan          Michigan                            Michigan
   Enrollment in…                   Any College         Public            Public           Any College        Public
                                                       College           College                             College
                                          (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)              (5)
Proportion enrolling in:
   Any college                           0.69            0.55               0.55               0.72             0.59
   4-year college                        0.39            0.27               0.29               0.41             0.29
   2-year college                        0.29            0.28               0.27               0.32             0.31

Student Sex
   Male                                  0.64            0.52               0.52                0.67            0.56
   Female                                0.73            0.58               0.58                0.76            0.62

Student Race/Ethnicity
   White, non-Hispanic                   0.65            0.51               0.45                0.68            0.54
   Black, non-Hispanic                   0.70            0.56               0.58                0.73            0.60
   Hispanic                              0.52            0.42               0.44                0.57            0.48

Student FARM Status
   FARM                                  0.58            0.46               0.45                0.61            0.50
   Non-FARM                              0.74            0.60               0.61                0.78            0.64

Notes: N = 105,750; FARM = Eligibility for free/reduced price lunch; The sample includes all 2011 graduates from
Michigan public high schools. College enrollment is defined by the first college in which a student enrolls, during the
first year following high school graduation (i.e., summer 2011, fall 2011, spring 2012, summer 2012).
Table 8. Lost in Translation? Using the Federal NSC Formula to Approximate Credit
Accumulation at Public Colleges

                                         STARR                                   NSC
                                                                    Estimated       Estimated Share
                              Number of       Share with > 1
                                                                    Number of       with > 1 year of
                               credits        year of credit
                                                                     Credits             credit
                                   (1)              (2)                  (3)               (4)
All students
    All credits earned           22.25             0.55                23.34              0.63
    Earned at 4-year             15.17                                 14.69
    Earned at 2-year              6.77                                  8.64

White, non-Hispanic
  All credits earned             23.43             0.59                23.86              0.66
  Earned at 4-year               16.01                                 15.25
  Earned at 2-year                7.08                                  8.60

Black, non-Hispanic
   All credits earned            15.82             0.29                20.73              0.47
   Earned at 4-year              10.34                                 11.72
   Earned at 2-year              5.31                                   9.01

Hispanic
   All credits earned            18.68             0.40                21.13              0.51
   Earned at 4-year              10.26                                 10.52
   Earned at 2-year               8.18                                 10.62

FARM
  All credits earned             17.65             0.36                21.21              0.50
  Earned at 4-year                9.70                                 10.47
  Earned at 2-year                7.80                                 10.74

Non-FARM
   All credits earned            24.02             0.62                24.15              0.68
   Earned at 4-year              17.27                                 16.32
   Earned at 2-year               6.37                                  7.84
Notes: The sample is restricted to college-goers from the Michigan high school class of 2011 who
attended public colleges in Michigan and had NO missing enrollment intensity information (N =
38,996). College enrollment is defined over the same time horizon as in Table 7.
Table 9. Improving the Translation: Effects on Credit Accumulation of Intensity-based Imputation

                                                              Share of students           NSC: Impute missing values as…
                                                STARR           with missing
                                                             enrollment intensity        LTPT              PT              FT
                                                   (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)             (5)
All students                                                          0.25
   Number of credits earned                      21.46                                    19.36          20.90           24.00
   Share with > 1 year college credit            0.53                                     0.48           0.48            0.67

White, non-Hispanic                                                   0.25
  Number of credits earned                       22.57                                    19.75          21.34           24.52
  Share with > 1 year college credit             0.57                                     0.50           0.51            0.70

Black, non-Hispanic                                                   0.22
   Number of credits earned                      15.09                                    17.34          18.66           21.28
   Share with > 1 year college credit            0.27                                     0.36           0.36            0.51

Hispanic                                                              0.25
   Number of credits earned                      18.04                                    17.26          18.76           21.76
   Share with > 1 year college credit            0.38                                     0.38           0.39            0.56

FARM                                                                  0.25
  Number of credits earned                       16.97                                    17.25          18.83           21.98
  Share with > 1 year college credit             0.34                                     0.37           0.37            0.56

Non-FARM                                                              0.24
  Number of credits earned                       23.23                                    20.19          21.72           24.80
  Share with > 1 year college credit             0.60                                     0.52           0.53            0.71

Notes: The sample is restricted to college-goers from the Michigan high school class of 2011 who attended public colleges in
Michigan (N = 54,170). College enrollment is defined over the same time horizon as in Table 7.
The Missing Manual: Using National Student Clearinghouse Data to Track Postsecondary
Outcomes

Appendix Tables

Table A1     NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at All U.S. Title IV Postsecondary
             Institutions Over Time by State and Region

Table A2     NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Public 2-Year U.S. Title IV
             Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

Table A3     NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Private, Non-Profit, 2-Year U.S. Title IV
             Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

Table A4     NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Public 4-Year U.S. Title IV
             Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

Table A5     NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Private, Non-Profit, 4-Year U.S. Title IV
             Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

Table A6     NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Private, For-Profit, U.S. Title IV
             Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

Table A7     Comprehensive NSC Coverage Rates at All U.S. Title IV Postsecondary
             Institutions Over Time by State
Table A1. NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at All U.S. Title IV Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

                                                                                              Weighted by Total Undergraduate Enrollment
State/Region           1995        1996         1997        1998         1999        2000       2001       2002      2003       2004     2005                   2006         2007        2008         2009    2010    2011
United States          0.174       0.354        0.563       0.649        0.719       0.764      0.799      0.823     0.839      0.846    0.853                  0.862        0.877       0.886        0.891   0.901   0.916

Northeast              0.229       0.475        0.702       0.782        0.810       0.835        0.846       0.854        0.859       0.863        0.875       0.883        0.899       0.907        0.906   0.916   0.928
Midwest                0.235       0.395        0.600       0.664        0.716       0.758        0.807       0.831        0.861       0.870        0.867       0.873        0.897       0.896        0.908   0.910   0.923
West                   0.141       0.292        0.502       0.593        0.697       0.767        0.832       0.848        0.854       0.848        0.854       0.863        0.882       0.899        0.900   0.906   0.920
South                  0.122       0.302        0.507       0.607        0.690       0.728        0.743       0.779        0.803       0.819        0.831       0.843        0.850       0.858        0.864   0.884   0.902

AL                     0.015       0.278        0.525       0.633        0.701       0.717        0.716       0.721        0.722       0.727        0.789       0.872        0.868       0.827        0.884   0.877   0.894
AK                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.939        0.930       0.919        0.929       0.950        0.953       0.952        0.949       0.925        0.936       0.928        0.915   0.933   0.910
AZ                     0.000       0.100        0.119       0.177        0.217       0.345        0.383       0.408        0.450       0.478        0.550       0.576        0.705       0.861        0.867   0.855   0.892
AR                     0.000       0.000        0.444       0.637        0.720       0.742        0.773       0.769        0.778       0.859        0.860       0.858        0.852       0.871        0.921   0.921   0.921
CA                     0.181       0.294        0.498       0.591        0.755       0.821        0.885       0.903        0.909       0.899        0.898       0.904        0.914       0.908        0.909   0.922   0.932
CO                     0.044       0.421        0.752       0.816        0.834       0.812        0.801       0.808        0.825       0.808        0.836       0.815        0.791       0.784        0.798   0.798   0.823
CT                     0.569       0.597        0.743       0.807        0.806       0.806        0.801       0.840        0.835       0.835        0.823       0.815        0.840       0.855        0.859   0.847   0.844
DE                     0.000       0.000        0.010       0.538        0.542       0.603        0.614       0.655        0.641       0.644        0.640       0.636        0.618       0.958        0.952   0.939   0.938
DC                     0.055       0.210        0.352       0.344        0.553       0.563        0.814       0.810        0.826       0.831        0.835       0.918        0.926       0.931        0.962   0.955   0.964
FL                     0.003       0.051        0.206       0.406        0.570       0.672        0.701       0.759        0.779       0.824        0.823       0.814        0.825       0.815        0.807   0.794   0.838
GA                     0.246       0.426        0.533       0.609        0.643       0.664        0.658       0.687        0.872       0.845        0.899       0.896        0.909       0.897        0.902   0.902   0.948
HI                     0.008       0.016        0.028       0.074        0.073       0.077        0.791       0.815        0.823       0.827        0.820       0.856        0.864       0.869        0.879   0.890   0.888
ID                     0.151       0.333        0.628       0.629        0.620       0.686        0.933       0.953        0.965       0.966        0.963       0.964        0.965       0.958        0.939   0.943   0.954
IL                     0.252       0.388        0.696       0.764        0.778       0.802        0.910       0.937        0.941       0.934        0.892       0.908        0.919       0.914        0.907   0.916   0.926
IN                     0.000       0.000        0.149       0.294        0.307       0.330        0.372       0.383        0.569       0.581        0.594       0.630        0.822       0.827        0.918   0.922   0.938
IA                     0.000       0.260        0.517       0.538        0.612       0.745        0.872       0.875        0.887       0.879        0.863       0.850        0.833       0.812        0.764   0.778   0.838
KS                     0.000       0.116        0.273       0.317        0.379       0.604        0.656       0.786        0.809       0.827        0.834       0.837        0.842       0.846        0.855   0.856   0.863
KY                     0.004       0.345        0.823       0.829        0.817       0.845        0.814       0.828        0.828       0.877        0.907       0.945        0.948       0.941        0.934   0.933   0.943
LA                     0.294       0.508        0.584       0.676        0.737       0.714        0.701       0.748        0.754       0.760        0.795       0.796        0.800       0.780        0.765   0.815   0.819
ME                     0.000       0.183        0.712       0.723        0.808       0.803        0.826       0.835        0.838       0.917        0.916       0.915        0.931       0.945        0.938   0.937   0.944
MD                     0.027       0.192        0.422       0.642        0.729       0.712        0.757       0.866        0.900       0.899        0.896       0.895        0.904       0.900        0.913   0.926   0.936
MA                     0.116       0.364        0.579       0.698        0.732       0.789        0.827       0.828        0.836       0.832        0.870       0.877        0.933       0.947        0.942   0.940   0.951
MI                     0.093       0.176        0.324       0.488        0.559       0.669        0.701       0.716        0.764       0.807        0.830       0.829        0.844       0.866        0.943   0.942   0.950
MN                     0.127       0.594        0.930       0.921        0.942       0.934        0.933       0.942        0.945       0.948        0.952       0.955        0.952       0.947        0.946   0.945   0.950
MS                     0.079       0.080        0.507       0.679        0.794       0.824        0.805       0.807        0.823       0.826        0.846       0.881        0.929       0.936        0.937   0.932   0.953
MO                     0.514       0.568        0.695       0.735        0.808       0.825        0.860       0.905        0.906       0.904        0.909       0.920        0.922       0.918        0.903   0.905   0.901
MT                     0.000       0.044        0.823       0.821        0.896       0.917        0.908       0.929        0.914       0.913        0.915       0.918        0.919       0.922        0.917   0.922   0.924
NE                     0.356       0.540        0.761       0.847        0.846       0.852        0.935       0.959        0.958       0.955        0.959       0.954        0.959       0.962        0.954   0.962   0.968
NV                     0.000       0.000        0.315       0.674        0.692       0.674        0.877       0.908        0.968       0.949        0.944       0.920        0.933       0.926        0.913   0.902   0.915
NH                     0.459       0.560        0.655       0.736        0.709       0.697        0.680       0.707        0.705       0.743        0.931       0.935        0.937       0.944        0.946   0.957   0.962
NJ                     0.017       0.193        0.509       0.602        0.724       0.789        0.807       0.819        0.840       0.835        0.852       0.864        0.862       0.877        0.878   0.919   0.926
NM                     0.000       0.000        0.103       0.146        0.387       0.626        0.620       0.625        0.626       0.625        0.634       0.835        0.834       0.865        0.913   0.891   0.902
NY                     0.250       0.602        0.784       0.833        0.851       0.858        0.865       0.869        0.862       0.868        0.869       0.877        0.892       0.898        0.902   0.918   0.933
NC                     0.189       0.586        0.825       0.881        0.902       0.903        0.912       0.916        0.919       0.921        0.923       0.960        0.960       0.960        0.964   0.959   0.958
ND                     0.000       0.000        0.956       0.952        0.947       0.965        0.957       0.944        0.936       0.931        0.919       0.922        0.915       0.916        0.902   0.908   0.924
OH                     0.421       0.565        0.695       0.717        0.835       0.838        0.856       0.870        0.884       0.895        0.896       0.897        0.919       0.907        0.906   0.909   0.919
OK                     0.081       0.100        0.331       0.488        0.554       0.595        0.646       0.645        0.639       0.633        0.640       0.621        0.646       0.739        0.742   0.821   0.838
OR                     0.071       0.137        0.603       0.674        0.688       0.777        0.787       0.824        0.843       0.881        0.897       0.895        0.896       0.905        0.901   0.953   0.953
PA                     0.345       0.553        0.792       0.873        0.874       0.889        0.880       0.889        0.895       0.895        0.902       0.903        0.907       0.913        0.903   0.901   0.920
RI                     0.000       0.158        0.302       0.601        0.600       0.721        0.804       0.803        0.905       0.901        0.889       0.955        0.950       0.956        0.954   0.955   0.955
SC                     0.124       0.671        0.803       0.806        0.886       0.933        0.929       0.951        0.950       0.948        0.947       0.958        0.955       0.954        0.955   0.955   0.956
SD                     0.000       0.549        0.807       0.839        0.830       0.826        0.826       0.813        0.809       0.801        0.820       0.822        0.830       0.838        0.826   0.799   0.862
TN                     0.281       0.605        0.828       0.836        0.844       0.843        0.878       0.880        0.873       0.868        0.858       0.853        0.850       0.856        0.850   0.853   0.858
TX                     0.053       0.183        0.411       0.458        0.543       0.604        0.620       0.690        0.711       0.739        0.748       0.758        0.765       0.797        0.810   0.899   0.921
UT                     0.504       0.624        0.757       0.784        0.785       0.946        0.938       0.947        0.935       0.939        0.928       0.913        0.913       0.921        0.919   0.917   0.907
VA                     0.000       0.137        0.866       0.882        0.893       0.904        0.897       0.899        0.900       0.903        0.897       0.971        0.969       0.972        0.970   0.972   0.974
VT                     0.481       0.652        0.741       0.754        0.891       0.902        0.913       0.928        0.926       0.929        0.933       0.941        0.953       0.955        0.950   0.952   0.959
WA                     0.112       0.559        0.727       0.809        0.824       0.845        0.942       0.950        0.949       0.947        0.950       0.957        0.965       0.964        0.955   0.952   0.964
WV                     0.000       0.166        0.288       0.518        0.599       0.693        0.688       0.695        0.710       0.731        0.697       0.746        0.693       0.699        0.722   0.689   0.645
WI                     0.457       0.736        0.862       0.868        0.887       0.897        0.947       0.951        0.967       0.976        0.973       0.969        0.967       0.971        0.964   0.959   0.965
WY                     0.000       0.000        0.622       0.963        0.958       0.950        0.942       0.932        0.931       0.921        0.916       0.942        0.951       0.954        0.958   0.942   0.996
Notes: Year corresponds to the fall semester. Enrollment and college characteristic information is from IPEDS. A school is counted as in the NSC for that year if it joins by October 15th of that year.
Table A2. NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Public 2-Year U.S. Title IV Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

                                                                                              Weighted by Total Undergraduate Enrollment
State/Region           1995        1996         1997        1998         1999        2000       2001       2002      2003       2004     2005                   2006         2007        2008         2009    2010    2011
United States          0.081       0.229        0.477       0.576        0.695       0.759      0.805      0.827     0.855      0.861    0.874                  0.888        0.902       0.922        0.929   0.955   0.960

Northeast              0.213       0.446        0.766       0.880        0.876       0.914        0.933       0.935        0.934       0.944        0.979       0.980        0.989       0.992        0.992   0.993   0.993
Midwest                0.112       0.282        0.569       0.650        0.750       0.793        0.871       0.904        0.943       0.949        0.954       0.956        0.966       0.970        0.974   0.975   0.976
West                   0.030       0.182        0.401       0.519        0.682       0.769        0.837       0.850        0.854       0.844        0.852       0.869        0.892       0.924        0.936   0.956   0.962
South                  0.062       0.163        0.394       0.477        0.604       0.670        0.681       0.715        0.770       0.791        0.807       0.830        0.839       0.864        0.870   0.928   0.934

AL                     0.000       0.000        0.232       0.316        0.341       0.374        0.405       0.415        0.419       0.417        0.506       0.730        0.729       0.831        0.832   0.846   0.907
AK                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.727        0.553       0.613        0.610       0.627        0.538       0.619        0.564       0.386        0.466       0.423        0.362   0.335   0.473
AZ                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.039       0.044        0.053       0.051        0.084       0.077        0.124       0.153        0.369       0.750        0.752   0.763   0.835
AR                     0.000       0.000        0.239       0.479        0.494       0.549        0.635       0.634        0.671       0.742        0.747       0.746        0.735       0.789        0.925   0.924   0.925
CA                     0.041       0.161        0.368       0.491        0.742       0.840        0.927       0.944        0.949       0.938        0.941       0.946        0.949       0.941        0.956   0.982   0.982
CO                     0.000       0.167        0.757       0.910        0.909       0.872        0.836       0.838        0.896       0.911        0.927       0.938        0.924       0.943        0.960   0.957   0.953
CT                     1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   0.999   0.999
DE                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
DC                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
FL                     0.000       0.000        0.161       0.317        0.543       0.689        0.729       0.832        0.877       0.899        0.900       0.886        0.875       0.886        0.842   0.785   0.712
GA                     0.222       0.201        0.226       0.284        0.319       0.315        0.300       0.342        0.895       0.873        0.918       0.914        0.934       0.932        0.972   0.989   0.999
HI                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.952       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
ID                     0.000       0.000        0.532       0.536        0.545       0.941        0.945       0.939        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
IL                     0.093       0.233        0.622       0.712        0.730       0.761        0.958       0.987        1.000       0.999        0.999       0.999        1.000       1.000        0.999   0.999   0.999
IN                     0.000       0.000        0.208       0.983        0.986       0.996        0.998       0.998        0.997       0.998        0.998       0.998        0.998       0.998        0.998   0.999   0.999
IA                     0.000       0.345        0.674       0.684        0.843       0.927        0.926       0.932        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
KS                     0.000       0.000        0.197       0.215        0.213       0.301        0.424       0.700        0.736       0.781        0.787       0.793        0.808       0.821        0.871   0.869   0.865
KY                     0.000       0.000        0.752       0.730        0.676       0.719        0.662       0.697        0.697       0.830        0.902       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
LA                     0.434       0.419        0.561       0.525        0.577       0.537        0.499       0.572        0.487       0.496        0.293       0.428        0.488       0.478        0.471   0.646   0.665
ME                     0.000       0.000        0.722       0.702        0.697       0.696        0.691       0.695        0.704       0.890        0.898       0.891        0.973       0.978        0.977   0.967   0.972
MD                     0.026       0.028        0.387       0.664        0.736       0.680        0.681       0.894        0.969       0.969        0.969       0.969        0.969       0.969        1.000   1.000   1.000
MA                     0.000       0.211        0.439       0.734        0.731       0.884        0.911       0.912        0.911       0.905        0.995       0.996        0.997       0.998        0.998   0.998   0.998
MI                     0.064       0.211        0.382       0.467        0.562       0.702        0.745       0.776        0.900       0.899        0.902       0.901        0.924       0.944        0.949   0.950   0.951
MN                     0.000       0.271        0.976       0.974        0.977       0.967        0.966       0.974        0.976       0.990        0.992       0.998        0.998       0.998        0.998   0.998   1.000
MS                     0.000       0.000        0.495       0.619        0.771       0.833        0.796       0.804        0.795       0.796        0.791       0.862        0.925       0.922        0.928   0.924   0.959
MO                     0.421       0.503        0.640       0.693        0.867       0.916        0.910       0.934        0.933       0.937        0.950       0.985        0.986       0.985        0.986   0.987   0.987
MT                     0.000       0.275        0.605       0.600        0.684       0.775        0.848       0.834        0.778       0.795        0.810       0.811        0.819       0.828        0.832   0.829   0.809
NE                     0.007       0.387        0.703       0.935        0.936       0.930        0.933       0.993        0.990       0.990        0.997       0.997        0.998       0.998        0.997   0.996   0.997
NV                     0.000       0.000        0.287       0.889        0.896       0.886        0.890       0.898        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
NH                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.172        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
NJ                     0.000       0.189        0.706       0.838        0.839       0.917        0.939       0.939        0.939       0.937        0.981       0.981        0.981       0.994        0.994   0.996   0.995
NM                     0.000       0.000        0.067       0.141        0.260       0.477        0.460       0.455        0.457       0.463        0.483       0.845        0.843       0.891        0.949   0.946   0.959
NY                     0.200       0.603        0.898       0.909        0.909       0.922        0.955       0.965        0.960       0.968        0.966       0.969        0.985       0.985        0.984   0.986   0.987
NC                     0.000       0.467        0.875       0.879        0.908       0.909        0.912       0.914        0.916       0.915        0.914       0.997        0.997       0.997        0.997   0.998   0.998
ND                     0.000       0.000        0.863       0.852        0.850       0.906        0.877       0.930        0.919       0.949        0.952       0.954        0.955       0.942        0.913   0.938   0.970
OH                     0.160       0.297        0.446       0.480        0.822       0.830        0.856       0.846        0.889       0.884        0.910       0.903        0.947       0.938        0.942   0.946   0.949
OK                     0.000       0.000        0.213       0.415        0.475       0.537        0.544       0.544        0.554       0.517        0.521       0.485        0.500       0.744        0.755   0.757   0.755
OR                     0.000       0.118        0.659       0.734        0.742       0.746        0.766       0.838        0.853       0.882        0.909       0.907        0.906       0.916        0.917   1.000   0.989
PA                     0.418       0.498        0.841       0.975        0.977       0.971        0.969       0.976        0.980       0.982        0.986       0.988        0.997       0.997        0.997   0.997   0.998
RI                     0.000       0.000        0.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
SC                     0.017       0.548        0.776       0.772        0.926       0.981        0.979       0.980        0.981       0.982        0.982       0.983        0.981       0.974        0.989   0.990   0.984
SD                     0.000       0.000        0.368       0.771        0.768       0.768        0.784       0.788        0.794       0.795        0.801       0.800        0.812       0.813        0.799   0.787   0.958
TN                     0.000       0.496        0.809       0.799        0.797       0.783        0.880       0.884        0.887       0.894        0.881       0.889        0.888       0.890        0.876   0.891   0.897
TX                     0.000       0.052        0.275       0.309        0.453       0.576        0.593       0.585        0.635       0.686        0.713       0.728        0.743       0.756        0.760   0.941   0.946
UT                     0.138       0.141        0.195       0.227        0.245       0.931        0.891       0.901        0.875       0.866        0.823       0.788        0.761       0.786        0.807   0.798   0.777
VA                     0.000       0.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       0.997        0.995       0.999        0.999       0.999        0.999   0.999   0.999
VT                     0.523       0.619        0.662       0.677        0.949       0.950        0.949       0.950        0.952       0.951        0.972       0.983        0.983       0.988        0.989   0.997   0.998
WA                     0.011       0.649        0.870       0.996        0.997       0.997        0.997       0.996        0.997       0.997        0.997       0.997        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
WV                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.280        0.289       0.283        0.331       0.306        0.470       0.548        0.400       0.447        0.555       0.573        0.755   0.770   0.781
WI                     0.288       0.672        0.841       0.788        0.833       0.859        0.926       0.932        0.973       0.996        0.996       0.995        0.994       0.995        0.995   1.000   1.000
WY                     0.000       0.000        0.475       1.000        1.000       0.999        0.999       0.999        1.000       1.000        0.999       0.999        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000

Notes: Year corresponds to the fall semester. Enrollment and college characteristic information is from IPEDS. A school is counted as in the NSC for that year if it joins by October 15th of that year.
Table A3. NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Private, Non-Profit, 2-Year U.S. Title IV Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

                                                                                              Weighted by Total Undergraduate Enrollment
State/Region           1995        1996         1997        1998         1999        2000       2001       2002      2003       2004     2005                   2006         2007        2008         2009    2010    2011
United States          0.122       0.180        0.253       0.276        0.343       0.380      0.265      0.292     0.285      0.292    0.308                  0.319        0.260       0.276        0.265   0.275   0.253

Northeast              0.068       0.111        0.230       0.255        0.224       0.202        0.221       0.243        0.254       0.298        0.304       0.299        0.315       0.325        0.353   0.334   0.380
Midwest                0.000       0.029        0.115       0.093        0.209       0.228        0.137       0.153        0.145       0.114        0.203       0.158        0.063       0.136        0.096   0.204   0.151
West                   0.388       0.405        0.409       0.458        0.521       0.592        0.412       0.494        0.551       0.517        0.476       0.471        0.262       0.233        0.208   0.164   0.154
South                  0.000       0.048        0.093       0.090        0.226       0.291        0.249       0.210        0.169       0.208        0.214       0.315        0.329       0.332        0.258   0.336   0.199

AL                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.577       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
AK                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
AZ                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
AR                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.943   0.665
CA                     0.177       0.223        0.211       0.267        0.355       0.467        0.398       0.480        0.535       0.484        0.441       0.430        0.133       0.102        0.078   0.000   0.000
CO                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
CT                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.501       0.511        0.454       0.261        0.305       0.221        0.192       0.208        0.186       0.179        0.174   0.649   0.811
DE                     0.000       0.000        1.000       0.206        0.203       0.206        0.365       0.149        0.206       0.225        0.225       0.242        0.163       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
DC                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
FL                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
GA                     0.000       0.000        0.177       0.186        0.814       0.814        0.790       0.748        0.529       0.802        0.639       0.818        0.859       0.868        0.508   0.488   0.559
HI                     0.000       0.766        0.729       0.796        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       0.967        0.966       0.985        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
ID                     1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
IL                     0.000       0.000        0.228       0.317        0.365       0.299        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
IN                     0.000       0.000        0.207       0.204        0.576       0.895        0.898       0.867        0.849       0.719        0.717       0.682        0.705       0.725        0.703   0.704   0.682
IA                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.878       0.868        0.865       0.850        0.826       0.817        0.805       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
KS                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
KY                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
LA                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
ME                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
MD                     0.000       0.041        0.036       0.031        0.329       0.240        0.061       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
MA                     0.000       0.031        0.029       0.275        0.305       0.282        0.358       0.376        0.487       0.406        0.544       0.515        0.519       0.547        0.406   0.395   0.404
MI                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
MN                     0.000       0.000        0.183       0.174        0.194       0.220        0.000       0.000        0.034       0.000        0.773       0.681        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
MS                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
MO                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.023        0.043       0.098        0.076       0.091        0.115       0.112        0.077       0.070        0.077   0.254   0.237
MT                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
NE                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.050        0.017       0.002        0.019       0.090        0.056       0.053        0.076       0.078        0.064       0.060        0.047   0.050   0.040
NV                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
NH                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
NJ                     0.000       0.000        0.079       0.084        0.083       0.122        0.024       0.023        0.020       0.018        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
NM                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
NY                     0.086       0.080        0.211       0.082        0.080       0.075        0.108       0.103        0.099       0.211        0.178       0.173        0.176       0.182        0.197   0.038   0.040
NC                     0.000       0.512        0.484       0.510        0.392       0.664        0.502       0.471        0.541       0.734        0.801       0.776        0.773       0.646        0.642   0.670   0.689
ND                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
OH                     0.000       0.124        0.115       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.146   0.128
OK                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
OR                     0.000       0.000        0.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
PA                     0.140       0.229        0.451       0.480        0.366       0.371        0.339       0.380        0.397       0.451        0.465       0.454        0.481       0.490        0.611   0.620   0.731
RI                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
SC                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.949       0.894        0.884       0.898        0.858       0.878        0.896       0.858        0.845   0.847   0.586
SD                     0.000       0.000        0.041       0.039        0.042       0.090        0.074       0.037        0.031       0.028        0.023       0.022        0.026       0.879        0.889   0.903   0.883
TN                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
TX                     0.000       0.127        0.153       0.099        0.054       0.092        0.156       0.152        0.152       0.173        0.114       0.134        0.170       0.166        0.154   0.118   0.056
UT                     0.000       0.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
VA                     0.000       0.000        0.426       0.607        0.654       0.981        0.951       0.974        0.963       0.944        0.981       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
VT                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.481        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.340        0.290       0.232        0.235   0.000   0.000
WA                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
WV                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
WI                     0.000       0.000        0.348       0.375        0.192       0.070        0.049       0.054        0.043       0.049        0.034       0.030        0.043       0.677        0.086   0.620   0.079
WY                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000

Notes: Year corresponds to the fall semester. Enrollment and college characteristic information is from IPEDS. A school is counted as in the NSC for that year if it joins by October 15th of that year.
Table A4. NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Public 4-Year U.S. Title IV Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

                                                                                              Weighted by Total Undergraduate Enrollment
State/Region           1995        1996         1997        1998         1999        2000       2001       2002      2003       2004     2005                   2006         2007        2008         2009    2010    2011
United States          0.301       0.554        0.709       0.783        0.818       0.857      0.890      0.906     0.925      0.941    0.948                  0.952        0.962       0.971        0.983   0.993   0.995

Northeast              0.314       0.674        0.844       0.859        0.909       0.921        0.921       0.921        0.935       0.935        0.946       0.948        0.941       0.941        0.943   0.980   0.993
Midwest                0.423       0.600        0.679       0.734        0.749       0.805        0.838       0.844        0.884       0.908        0.918       0.925        0.972       0.975        0.998   0.998   0.998
West                   0.322       0.517        0.720       0.775        0.801       0.886        0.960       0.960        0.981       0.982        0.988       0.990        0.990       0.991        0.993   0.993   0.993
South                  0.195       0.487        0.662       0.788        0.835       0.849        0.872       0.912        0.915       0.943        0.945       0.948        0.948       0.969        0.984   0.995   0.995

AL                     0.028       0.501        0.715       0.850        0.959       0.961        0.960       0.960        0.957       0.955        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
AK                     0.000       0.000        0.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
AZ                     0.000       0.342        0.331       0.515        0.509       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
AR                     0.000       0.000        0.619       0.751        0.896       0.900        0.896       0.890        0.890       0.988        0.988       0.988        0.988       0.988        0.988   0.988   0.988
CA                     0.585       0.707        0.907       0.933        0.931       0.956        0.956       0.956        0.999       0.998        0.993       1.000        0.997       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
CO                     0.091       0.729        0.840       0.835        0.882       0.885        0.885       0.886        0.888       0.882        0.964       0.964        0.964       0.964        0.965   0.966   0.969
CT                     0.622       0.617        1.000       0.968        0.967       0.968        0.950       0.949        0.948       0.951        0.943       0.948        0.951       0.945        0.982   0.982   0.981
DE                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.863        0.861       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
DC                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
FL                     0.000       0.180        0.276       0.618        0.749       0.805        0.836       0.849        0.867       0.977        0.973       0.973        0.973       0.994        0.995   0.996   0.996
GA                     0.284       0.637        0.814       0.921        0.940       0.953        1.000       1.000        0.976       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
HI                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
ID                     0.000       0.291        0.615       0.615        0.603       0.600        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
IL                     0.710       0.820        0.979       0.979        0.979       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
IN                     0.000       0.000        0.051       0.051        0.053       0.054        0.055       0.055        0.390       0.393        0.430       0.483        0.825       0.822        1.000   1.000   1.000
IA                     0.000       0.394        0.403       0.403        0.405       0.641        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
KS                     0.000       0.281        0.353       0.420        0.554       0.980        0.980       0.982        0.982       0.982        0.982       0.988        0.988       0.987        0.986   0.988   0.990
KY                     0.000       0.604        0.974       0.974        0.973       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
LA                     0.256       0.587        0.646       0.792        0.857       0.855        0.861       0.866        0.920       0.917        1.000       0.986        0.982       0.978        0.979   0.979   0.977
ME                     0.000       0.335        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
MD                     0.000       0.274        0.391       0.623        0.742       0.748        0.888       0.890        0.891       0.891        0.895       0.898        0.903       0.908        0.909   0.962   0.963
MA                     0.231       0.565        0.914       0.941        0.944       0.945        0.946       0.942        0.953       0.951        0.995       0.995        0.994       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
MI                     0.161       0.166        0.285       0.591        0.624       0.746        0.792       0.792        0.785       0.915        0.975       0.975        0.974       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
MN                     0.131       0.928        0.953       0.956        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
MS                     0.184       0.185        0.603       0.839        0.888       0.890        0.889       0.885        0.945       0.944        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
MO                     0.842       0.918        0.915       0.943        0.943       0.943        0.942       1.000        0.995       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
MT                     0.000       0.000        0.948       0.948        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
NE                     0.679       0.768        0.801       0.804        0.803       0.812        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
NV                     0.000       0.000        0.370       0.353        0.409       0.431        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       0.974        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
NH                     0.922       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
NJ                     0.047       0.248        0.437       0.435        0.779       0.863        0.867       0.862        0.908       0.901        0.899       0.887        0.865       0.870        0.872   1.000   1.000
NM                     0.000       0.000        0.131       0.129        0.576       0.908        0.913       0.905        0.902       0.862        0.861       0.865        0.866       0.866        0.923   0.923   0.909
NY                     0.241       0.775        0.851       0.893        0.894       0.896        0.897       0.899        0.895       0.897        0.896       0.905        0.895       0.896        0.895   0.945   0.983
NC                     0.429       0.879        0.932       0.994        0.994       0.995        0.995       0.995        0.995       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
ND                     0.000       0.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       0.969        0.968       0.990        0.990       0.990        0.990       0.991        0.990   0.991   0.986
OH                     0.836       0.973        0.995       0.995        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        0.986       0.987        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
OK                     0.194       0.197        0.416       0.567        0.648       0.648        0.737       0.737        0.737       0.743        0.755       0.759        0.759       0.755        0.762   0.966   0.966
OR                     0.218       0.225        0.571       0.658        0.651       0.894        0.892       0.894        0.945       0.991        0.990       0.991        0.991       0.992        0.990   1.000   1.000
PA                     0.561       0.896        0.970       0.970        0.970       0.971        0.969       0.970        0.969       0.969        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
RI                     0.000       0.586        0.600       0.604        0.611       0.606        0.600       0.603        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
SC                     0.261       0.961        0.961       0.963        0.963       0.963        0.963       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
SD                     0.000       0.795        0.923       0.924        0.920       0.917        0.900       0.927        0.927       0.925        0.957       0.949        0.952       0.949        0.943   0.945   0.949
TN                     0.542       0.862        0.997       0.997        0.997       0.998        0.999       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
TX                     0.139       0.368        0.590       0.645        0.650       0.655        0.682       0.872        0.871       0.895        0.863       0.859        0.859       0.935        1.000   1.000   1.000
UT                     0.538       0.795        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
VA                     0.000       0.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
VT                     0.566       0.826        0.974       0.974        0.973       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
WA                     0.228       0.371        0.462       0.469        0.522       0.623        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        0.995       0.996        0.996   0.996   0.995
WV                     0.000       0.194        0.311       0.574        0.686       0.784        0.786       0.793        0.788       0.821        0.821       0.871        0.873       0.955        1.000   1.000   1.000
WI                     0.721       0.922        0.959       0.960        0.957       0.958        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
WY                     0.000       0.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
Notes: Year corresponds to the fall semester. Enrollment and college characteristic information is from IPEDS. A school is counted as in the NSC for that year if it joins by October 15th of that year.
Table A5. NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Private, Non-Profit, 4-Year U.S. Title IV Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

                                                                                              Weighted by Total Undergraduate Enrollment
State/Region           1995        1996         1997        1998         1999        2000       2001       2002      2003       2004     2005                   2006         2007        2008         2009    2010    2011
United States          0.167       0.307        0.581       0.682        0.726       0.758      0.793      0.818     0.828      0.838    0.846                  0.862        0.888       0.901        0.931   0.934   0.931

Northeast              0.182       0.368        0.608       0.742        0.785       0.817        0.843       0.860        0.871       0.876        0.882       0.901        0.938       0.959        0.965   0.965   0.965
Midwest                0.130       0.254        0.592       0.659        0.691       0.714        0.757       0.784        0.800       0.811        0.826       0.841        0.853       0.863        0.938   0.944   0.944
West                   0.324       0.387        0.625       0.698        0.741       0.740        0.780       0.802        0.809       0.833        0.840       0.861        0.894       0.906        0.921   0.925   0.928
South                  0.115       0.239        0.512       0.612        0.673       0.730        0.769       0.806        0.809       0.819        0.821       0.835        0.858       0.862        0.883   0.888   0.876

AL                     0.000       0.193        0.707       0.728        0.707       0.801        0.860       0.863        0.876       0.876        0.893       0.892        0.915       0.795        0.914   0.890   0.887
AK                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.741        0.759       0.800        0.807       0.816        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   0.906
AZ                     0.000       0.000        0.008       0.320        0.701       0.904        0.902       0.865        0.660       0.600        0.619       0.670        0.865       0.844        0.837   0.830   0.790
AR                     0.000       0.000        0.486       0.705        0.719       0.721        0.789       0.791        0.774       0.827        0.808       0.796        0.785       0.783        0.777   0.751   0.763
CA                     0.272       0.376        0.639       0.712        0.745       0.744        0.790       0.796        0.821       0.838        0.842       0.850        0.901       0.920        0.934   0.938   0.943
CO                     0.000       0.000        0.686       0.777        0.820       0.731        0.830       0.837        0.840       0.840        0.846       0.826        0.808       0.818        0.934   0.942   0.943
CT                     0.142       0.252        0.333       0.585        0.572       0.574        0.574       0.711        0.715       0.710        0.732       0.728        0.812       0.917        0.918   0.863   0.858
DE                     0.000       0.000        0.058       0.595        0.583       0.606        0.568       0.856        0.862       0.918        0.880       0.883        0.889       0.910        0.922   0.924   0.927
DC                     0.076       0.279        0.439       0.442        0.632       0.643        0.914       0.902        0.903       0.905        0.907       0.902        0.908       0.912        0.946   0.982   0.989
FL                     0.032       0.031        0.360       0.527        0.548       0.667        0.706       0.710        0.710       0.713        0.712       0.713        0.746       0.775        0.804   0.816   0.708
GA                     0.255       0.408        0.485       0.552        0.592       0.811        0.810       0.868        0.861       0.889        0.910       0.920        0.931       0.933        0.938   0.938   0.934
HI                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.195        0.203       0.220        0.207       0.217        0.232       0.222        0.216       0.399        0.397       0.382        0.394   0.413   0.408
ID                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.823       0.924        0.930       0.933        0.936       0.940        0.938       0.934        0.933   0.930   0.941
IL                     0.204       0.392        0.711       0.817        0.811       0.839        0.867       0.904        0.910       0.908        0.912       0.956        0.969       0.968        0.974   0.972   0.950
IN                     0.000       0.000        0.411       0.507        0.529       0.546        0.588       0.682        0.686       0.704        0.757       0.761        0.803       0.829        0.884   0.905   0.939
IA                     0.000       0.000        0.474       0.542        0.554       0.652        0.703       0.748        0.817       0.821        0.930       0.934        0.933       0.951        0.950   0.987   0.985
KS                     0.000       0.000        0.382       0.451        0.478       0.485        0.491       0.487        0.566       0.566        0.606       0.582        0.578       0.612        0.600   0.669   0.715
KY                     0.034       0.098        0.556       0.650        0.649       0.703        0.682       0.683        0.730       0.704        0.701       0.736        0.795       0.798        0.798   0.851   0.873
LA                     0.347       0.359        0.384       0.436        0.520       0.520        0.548       0.735        0.741       0.740        0.585       0.876        0.930       0.940        0.993   0.993   0.996
ME                     0.000       0.000        0.248       0.295        0.575       0.540        0.653       0.702        0.705       0.893        0.888       0.915        0.920       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
MD                     0.144       0.462        0.752       0.801        0.819       0.814        0.780       0.867        0.870       0.894        0.891       0.906        0.913       0.910        0.893   0.892   0.906
MA                     0.119       0.353        0.511       0.595        0.671       0.703        0.775       0.778        0.796       0.799        0.808       0.822        0.935       0.976        0.986   0.986   0.986
MI                     0.000       0.122        0.301       0.308        0.435       0.447        0.433       0.432        0.464       0.437        0.432       0.424        0.442       0.477        0.978   0.970   0.960
MN                     0.405       0.691        0.956       0.954        0.948       0.945        0.928       0.966        0.967       0.969        0.971       0.973        0.975       0.979        0.979   0.979   0.980
MS                     0.000       0.000        0.136       0.282        0.554       0.554        0.569       0.608        0.601       0.599        0.629       0.626        0.879       0.889        0.885   0.908   0.912
MO                     0.226       0.219        0.570       0.632        0.703       0.726        0.881       0.883        0.886       0.885        0.906       0.913        0.917       0.922        0.916   0.927   0.928
MT                     0.000       0.000        0.502       0.505        0.721       0.735        0.616       0.721        0.732       0.730        0.729       0.720        0.734       0.732        0.717   0.739   0.754
NE                     0.241       0.334        0.867       0.887        0.882       0.928        0.936       0.932        0.922       0.922        0.918       0.923        0.928       0.925        0.928   0.973   0.972
NV                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        0.733       0.713        0.724   0.702   0.663
NH                     0.226       0.436        0.573       0.726        0.739       0.763        0.739       0.922        0.918       0.919        0.922       0.916        0.917       0.915        0.955   0.955   0.963
NJ                     0.000       0.157        0.343       0.608        0.603       0.658        0.694       0.689        0.734       0.730        0.731       0.845        0.842       0.931        0.926   0.923   0.926
NM                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.502        0.639       0.637        0.628       0.693        0.807       0.798        0.566   0.582   0.539
NY                     0.321       0.506        0.719       0.828        0.880       0.887        0.888       0.891        0.894       0.898        0.905       0.909        0.931       0.936        0.946   0.954   0.954
NC                     0.155       0.268        0.512       0.696        0.741       0.742        0.791       0.810        0.833       0.847        0.859       0.855        0.851       0.848        0.886   0.882   0.876
ND                     0.000       0.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       0.824        0.855       0.816        0.789       0.786        0.768   0.793   0.733
OH                     0.071       0.256        0.602       0.649        0.683       0.700        0.762       0.791        0.811       0.907        0.901       0.941        0.958       0.956        0.963   0.963   0.958
OK                     0.000       0.147        0.585       0.607        0.600       0.720        0.699       0.702        0.645       0.701        0.696       0.678        0.820       0.810        0.797   0.771   0.836
OR                     0.000       0.000        0.566       0.585        0.699       0.760        0.764       0.765        0.763       0.913        0.914       0.915        0.914       0.957        0.954   0.953   0.955
PA                     0.125       0.322        0.724       0.895        0.908       0.948        0.950       0.966        0.981       0.980        0.980       0.980        0.992       0.992        0.992   0.991   0.990
RI                     0.000       0.000        0.305       0.440        0.435       0.696        0.864       0.866        0.869       0.870        0.868       0.992        0.992       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
SC                     0.022       0.219        0.502       0.538        0.660       0.823        0.787       0.835        0.834       0.825        0.815       0.889        0.893       0.908        0.906   0.905   0.913
SD                     0.000       0.000        0.897       0.892        0.902       0.906        0.883       0.759        0.757       0.730        0.741       0.746        0.746       0.749        0.761   0.615   0.881
TN                     0.334       0.346        0.652       0.713        0.758       0.788        0.809       0.808        0.800       0.801        0.794       0.777        0.774       0.789        0.784   0.773   0.768
TX                     0.000       0.202        0.589       0.696        0.838       0.836        0.833       0.848        0.854       0.863        0.864       0.890        0.894       0.897        0.926   0.933   0.975
UT                     0.947       0.951        1.000       1.000        1.000       0.998        0.998       0.996        0.975       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000       1.000        1.000   1.000   1.000
VA                     0.000       0.360        0.702       0.741        0.764       0.777        0.767       0.755        0.752       0.763        0.755       0.968        0.971       0.978        0.977   0.976   0.977
VT                     0.239       0.411        0.514       0.571        0.576       0.582        0.726       0.869        0.874       0.898        0.898       0.907        0.946       0.949        0.964   0.959   0.961
WA                     0.534       0.624        0.702       0.786        0.787       0.755        0.778       0.831        0.825       0.826        0.858       0.922        0.955       0.958        0.955   0.954   0.948
WV                     0.000       0.203        0.502       0.568        0.570       0.708        0.721       0.722        0.797       0.797        0.837       0.922        0.921       0.922        0.930   0.931   0.924
WI                     0.187       0.423        0.684       0.860        0.860       0.868        0.915       0.931        0.930       0.930        0.921       0.922        0.921       0.939        0.942   0.939   0.937
WY                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000

Notes: Year corresponds to the fall semester. Enrollment and college characteristic information is from IPEDS. A school is counted as in the NSC for that year if it joins by October 15th of that year.
Table A6. NSC Coverage Rates of Enrollments at Private, For-Profit, U.S. Title IV Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State and Region

                                                                                              Weighted by Total Undergraduate Enrollment
State/Region           1995        1996         1997        1998         1999        2000       2001       2002      2003       2004     2005                   2006         2007        2008         2009    2010    2011
United States          0.027       0.034        0.112       0.133        0.174       0.164      0.193      0.296     0.294      0.314    0.332                  0.337        0.379       0.403        0.421   0.395   0.479

Northeast              0.078       0.075        0.129       0.136        0.140       0.165        0.165       0.216        0.196       0.201        0.196       0.206        0.229       0.248        0.271   0.283   0.319
Midwest                0.006       0.007        0.040       0.045        0.086       0.075        0.097       0.259        0.251       0.258        0.215       0.237        0.281       0.323        0.337   0.384   0.439
West                   0.004       0.000        0.187       0.236        0.254       0.210        0.283       0.407        0.413       0.451        0.492       0.487        0.547       0.593        0.609   0.569   0.644
South                  0.018       0.049        0.064       0.076        0.163       0.161        0.170       0.255        0.251       0.258        0.288       0.292        0.301       0.286        0.300   0.248   0.363

AL                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.067        0.070       0.099        0.111       0.120        0.113       0.238        0.466   0.427   0.381
AK                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
AZ                     0.000       0.000        0.252       0.258        0.385       0.353        0.547       0.672        0.718       0.765        0.820       0.819        0.859       0.893        0.897   0.871   0.895
AR                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.171        0.166       0.250        0.279       0.293        0.330       0.390        0.461   0.385   0.365
CA                     0.000       0.000        0.187       0.259        0.246       0.182        0.224       0.339        0.299       0.301        0.284       0.278        0.305       0.339        0.343   0.351   0.491
CO                     0.000       0.000        0.166       0.187        0.173       0.127        0.144       0.202        0.199       0.168        0.139       0.105        0.081       0.081        0.088   0.089   0.121
CT                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.002        0.007       0.005        0.004   0.001   0.002
DE                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
DC                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.612       0.619        0.872       0.880        0.910       0.906        0.911       0.926        0.939       0.942        0.974   0.568   0.561
FL                     0.000       0.000        0.035       0.072        0.090       0.067        0.095       0.151        0.151       0.163        0.187       0.182        0.193       0.138        0.145   0.149   0.421
GA                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.200        0.180       0.139        0.218       0.212        0.237       0.241        0.222   0.214   0.377
HI                     0.381       0.000        0.377       0.383        0.318       0.287        0.275       0.341        0.371       0.411        0.398       0.357        0.588       0.693        0.682   0.872   0.892
ID                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.303       0.288        0.362       0.431        0.402       0.375        0.381       0.336        0.232   0.250   0.266
IL                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.164       0.150        0.140       0.317        0.303       0.298        0.166       0.196        0.251       0.310        0.315   0.405   0.450
IN                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.143        0.160       0.200        0.217       0.232        0.247       0.258        0.276   0.304   0.343
IA                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.031       0.112        0.220       0.343        0.374   0.436   0.565
KS                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.034       0.068        0.098       0.084        0.098       0.086        0.079   0.030   0.093
KY                     0.000       0.435        0.423       0.448        0.607       0.612        0.635       0.662        0.624       0.642        0.697       0.651        0.617       0.537        0.551   0.468   0.482
LA                     0.000       0.000        0.118       0.163        0.173       0.119        0.143       0.191        0.203       0.241        0.240       0.259        0.249       0.230        0.232   0.163   0.172
ME                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
MD                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.150       0.335        0.107       0.143        0.158       0.156        0.152       0.146        0.162       0.146        0.160   0.244   0.325
MA                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.006       0.089        0.080       0.161        0.150       0.155        0.140       0.130        0.105   0.067   0.179
MI                     0.000       0.000        0.142       0.192        0.191       0.141        0.207       0.337        0.307       0.302        0.286       0.306        0.324       0.307        0.290   0.254   0.412
MN                     0.000       0.000        0.199       0.174        0.165       0.135        0.261       0.302        0.373       0.404        0.452       0.496        0.502       0.527        0.579   0.632   0.635
MS                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.366        0.381   0.244   0.245
MO                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.013       0.259        0.291       0.280        0.280       0.279        0.298       0.331        0.307   0.343   0.212
MT                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
NE                     0.000       0.027        0.017       0.008        0.019       0.101        0.102       0.198        0.239       0.236        0.258       0.218        0.249       0.288        0.221   0.267   0.271
NV                     0.000       0.000        0.287       0.272        0.301       0.233        0.217       0.441        0.507       0.426        0.421       0.366        0.339       0.327        0.300   0.254   0.345
NH                     0.000       0.000        0.679       0.711        0.717       0.638        0.609       0.633        0.603       0.603        0.603       0.664        0.627       0.714        0.670   0.755   0.748
NJ                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.143        0.112       0.093        0.079       0.078        0.078       0.066        0.193   0.195   0.235
NM                     0.000       0.000        0.522       0.535        0.520       0.512        0.533       0.651        0.630       0.687        0.646       0.607        0.558       0.593        0.574   0.378   0.457
NY                     0.207       0.204        0.232       0.227        0.234       0.316        0.311       0.330        0.278       0.274        0.281       0.308        0.391       0.417        0.465   0.459   0.480
NC                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.011       0.077        0.146       0.186        0.216       0.262        0.281   0.269   0.272
ND                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
OH                     0.026       0.028        0.028       0.028        0.024       0.022        0.030       0.283        0.260       0.258        0.237       0.227        0.261       0.247        0.252   0.260   0.305
OK                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.118       0.156        0.423       0.429        0.365       0.344        0.337       0.341        0.376       0.390        0.365   0.219   0.323
OR                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.110        0.151       0.140        0.153       0.222        0.201       0.201        0.221       0.201        0.206       0.198        0.201   0.260   0.318
PA                     0.000       0.000        0.068       0.083        0.092       0.104        0.108       0.151        0.173       0.183        0.178       0.184        0.178       0.229        0.219   0.268   0.314
RI                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
SC                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.112        0.118       0.127        0.134       0.171        0.191       0.315        0.380   0.545   0.537
SD                     0.000       0.000        0.026       0.041        0.039       0.039        0.046       0.040        0.039       0.038        0.044       0.050        0.066       0.053        0.125   0.128   0.100
TN                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.057        0.012       0.173        0.182       0.217        0.213       0.206        0.212       0.266        0.305   0.352   0.366
TX                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.012       0.190        0.186       0.177        0.187       0.192        0.179       0.175        0.154   0.162   0.253
UT                     0.000       0.000        0.181       0.170        0.186       0.134        0.207       0.305        0.303       0.351        0.328       0.294        0.311       0.361        0.340   0.319   0.269
VA                     0.000       0.000        0.386       0.411        0.432       0.347        0.383       0.383        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000   0.000   0.000
VT                     0.155       0.191        0.202       0.215        0.631       0.614        0.407       0.411        0.417       0.516        0.499       0.531        0.606       0.606        0.605   0.636   0.673
WA                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.054        0.092       0.089        0.103       0.257        0.267       0.294        0.275       0.268        0.254       0.216        0.184   0.199   0.408
WV                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.008   0.000   0.017
WI                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.018       0.355        0.410       0.458        0.452       0.387        0.441       0.442        0.424   0.366   0.383
WY                     0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.030       0.026        0.023       0.006        0.000   0.000   0.924
Notes: Year corresponds to the fall semester. Enrollment and college characteristic information is from IPEDS. A school is counted as in the NSC for that year if it joins by October 15th of that year.
Table A7. Comprehensive NSC Coverage Rates at All U.S. Title IV Postsecondary Institutions Over Time by State

                                                                                                            Private, Non-Profit 2-Year                                                     Private, Non-Profit 4-Year                For-Profit Institutions
                        All Postsecondary Institutions               Public 2-Year Institutions                                                     Public 4-Year Institutions
                                                                                                                    Institutions                                                                    Institutions                          (all levels)
State/Region           2006          2008          2010             2006        2008        2010            2006       2008       2010             2006        2008        2010            2006        2008      2010             2006       2008         2010
United States          0.821         0.843         0.861            0.833       0.862       0.901           0.304      0.262      0.261            0.916       0.938       0.959           0.822       0.860     0.892            0.332      0.391        0.387

AL                     0.859         0.762         0.818            0.729       0.784       0.794          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.982       0.985       0.982           0.880       0.778       0.868          0.076       0.040       0.175
AK                     0.843         0.900         0.926            0.386       0.423       0.335          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.910       0.969       0.993           0.812       1.000       1.000          0.000       0.000       0.000
AZ                     0.548         0.783         0.786            0.133       0.529       0.567          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.794       0.917       0.957           0.498       0.583       0.519          0.818       0.892       0.869
AR                     0.842         0.855         0.908            0.741       0.780       0.914          0.000       0.000       0.943           0.961       0.964       0.970           0.788       0.776       0.745          0.289       0.390       0.385
CA                     0.785         0.796         0.817            0.776       0.779       0.823          0.323       0.071       0.000           0.970       0.980       0.968           0.789       0.873       0.894          0.270       0.328       0.343
CO                     0.812         0.782         0.796            0.937       0.943       0.957          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.959       0.960       0.962           0.824       0.817       0.940          0.105       0.081       0.087
CT                     0.812         0.853         0.846            0.999       0.999       0.998          0.176       0.179       0.649           0.946       0.943       0.981           0.725       0.915       0.862          0.002       0.005       0.001
DE                     0.571         0.873         0.862            0.000       0.872       0.850          0.242       1.000       0.997           0.901       0.920       0.948           0.786       0.854       0.878          0.000       0.000       0.000
DC                     0.910         0.922         0.946            0.000       0.000       0.000          0.000       0.000       0.000           1.000       1.000       1.000           0.894       0.897       0.962          0.917       0.938       0.567
FL                     0.797         0.801         0.779            0.877       0.879       0.781          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.961       0.980       0.982           0.698       0.757       0.769          0.120       0.118       0.145
GA                     0.877         0.877         0.883            0.902       0.920       0.975          0.818       0.868       0.487           0.972       0.972       0.976           0.903       0.914       0.921          0.204       0.226       0.194
HI                     0.849         0.861         0.885            0.998       0.998       0.998          0.985       0.000       0.000           0.991       0.994       0.996           0.390       0.364       0.402          0.355       0.683       0.866
ID                     0.936         0.930         0.933            0.978       0.986       0.992          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.957       0.951       0.982           0.939       0.933       0.930          0.375       0.336       0.250
IL                     0.897         0.904         0.907            0.996       0.998       0.998          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.992       0.990       0.992           0.917       0.934       0.942          0.194       0.307       0.401
IN                     0.611         0.802         0.900            0.994       0.990       0.995          0.678       0.725       0.704           0.479       0.817       0.995           0.671       0.713       0.777          0.232       0.258       0.304
IA                     0.831         0.790         0.758            0.997       0.997       0.998          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.950       0.929       0.923           0.915       0.938       0.976          0.103       0.336       0.435
KS                     0.819         0.829         0.835            0.777       0.806       0.847          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.966       0.980       0.983           0.568       0.546       0.596          0.084       0.086       0.030
KY                     0.936         0.934         0.928            0.999       1.000       0.999          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.988       0.991       0.995           0.710       0.773       0.829          0.648       0.537       0.468
LA                     0.790         0.775         0.805            0.424       0.473       0.625          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.982       0.975       0.977           0.861       0.924       0.979          0.249       0.228       0.153
ME                     0.898         0.926         0.922            0.868       0.956       0.952          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.979       0.981       0.981           0.905       0.981       0.987          0.000       0.000       0.000
MD                     0.863         0.863         0.889            0.969       0.969       1.000          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.887       0.903       0.957           0.705       0.624       0.609          0.146       0.146       0.244
MA                     0.843         0.918         0.915            0.975       0.983       0.989          0.488       0.487       0.357           0.982       0.991       0.993           0.771       0.930       0.945          0.154       0.130       0.067
MI                     0.802         0.842         0.927            0.899       0.943       0.946          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.909       0.939       0.965           0.420       0.474       0.966          0.303       0.307       0.254
MN                     0.898         0.893         0.902            0.978       0.975       0.973          0.681       0.000       0.000           0.869       0.864       0.888           0.915       0.930       0.928          0.492       0.522       0.628
MS                     0.867         0.907         0.908            0.861       0.921       0.923          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.966       0.959       0.953           0.625       0.888       0.907          0.000       0.025       0.095
MO                     0.909         0.903         0.892            0.984       0.984       0.986          0.112       0.070       0.244           0.980       0.982       0.984           0.901       0.895       0.903          0.279       0.330       0.342
MT                     0.878         0.887         0.896            0.789       0.816       0.820          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.951       0.956       0.970           0.704       0.707       0.696          0.000       0.000       0.000
NE                     0.926         0.940         0.946            0.997       0.998       0.996          0.078       0.060       0.050           0.923       0.939       0.954           0.917       0.921       0.969          0.218       0.288       0.267
NV                     0.909         0.915         0.887            0.988       0.989       0.987          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.962       0.988       0.984           0.996       0.712       0.701          0.366       0.327       0.254
NH                     0.912         0.920         0.936            0.954       0.975       0.991          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.990       0.986       0.984           0.891       0.875       0.916          0.664       0.714       0.755
NJ                     0.749         0.764         0.799            0.981       0.994       0.996          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.572       0.570       0.674           0.839       0.922       0.914          0.075       0.066       0.193
NM                     0.824         0.857         0.877            0.840       0.885       0.938          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.845       0.854       0.899           0.687       0.796       0.581          0.607       0.593       0.378
NY                     0.851         0.872         0.893            0.968       0.984       0.986          0.141       0.148       0.031           0.898       0.890       0.939           0.848       0.875       0.893          0.278       0.390       0.434
NC                     0.916         0.910         0.900            0.995       0.996       0.997          0.776       0.645       0.669           0.963       0.935       0.900           0.666       0.672       0.708          0.186       0.262       0.269
ND                     0.880         0.867         0.845            0.950       0.941       0.938          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.986       0.988       0.990           0.409       0.350       0.256          0.000       0.000       0.000
OH                     0.843         0.865         0.875            0.799       0.874       0.901          0.000       0.000       0.145           0.946       0.961       0.964           0.916       0.925       0.938          0.227       0.247       0.259
OK                     0.602         0.719         0.800            0.484       0.742       0.755          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.725       0.719       0.927           0.660       0.789       0.750          0.340       0.390       0.219
OR                     0.886         0.895         0.944            0.894       0.902       0.985          1.000       0.000       0.000           0.988       0.989       0.998           0.903       0.947       0.945          0.200       0.197       0.259
PA                     0.892         0.902         0.892            0.987       0.996       0.996          0.432       0.464       0.609           0.994       0.991       0.991           0.954       0.972       0.977          0.184       0.229       0.262
RI                     0.944         0.940         0.939            1.000       1.000       1.000          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.965       0.946       0.948           0.989       0.997       0.998          0.000       0.000       0.000
SC                     0.937         0.930         0.930            0.978       0.966       0.986          0.877       0.858       0.847           0.986       0.988       0.986           0.793       0.827       0.833          0.171       0.212       0.350
SD                     0.820         0.834         0.794            0.800       0.813       0.787          0.019       0.689       0.761           0.946       0.947       0.943           0.744       0.749       0.614          0.049       0.049       0.106
TN                     0.831         0.829         0.828            0.887       0.887       0.889          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.986       0.987       0.989           0.699       0.702       0.685          0.206       0.234       0.310
TX                     0.708         0.747         0.845            0.670       0.708       0.889          0.134       0.166       0.118           0.807       0.870       0.924           0.872       0.877       0.917          0.189       0.152       0.149
UT                     0.894         0.905         0.902            0.761       0.757       0.765          0.996       0.997       0.997           0.977       0.984       0.986           0.999       1.000       1.000          0.274       0.343       0.312
VA                     0.962         0.965         0.964            0.992       0.992       0.993          1.000       1.000       1.000           0.986       0.992       0.993           0.961       0.972       0.970          0.000       0.000       0.000
VT                     0.932         0.948         0.938            0.980       0.985       0.996          0.336       0.230       0.000           0.991       0.993       0.992           0.896       0.939       0.933          0.531       0.606       0.636
WA                     0.920         0.929         0.923            0.996       0.999       0.999          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.924       0.924       0.931           0.900       0.937       0.938          0.267       0.215       0.198
WV                     0.731         0.686         0.672            0.447       0.573       0.738          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.847       0.930       0.975           0.921       0.922       0.931          0.000       0.000       0.000
WI                     0.960         0.961         0.948            0.992       0.992       0.997          0.030       0.677       0.620           0.992       0.989       0.988           0.896       0.911       0.910          0.387       0.437       0.364
WY                     0.759         0.826         0.848            0.677       0.783       0.836          0.000       0.000       0.000           0.993       0.996       0.997           0.000       0.000       0.000          0.026       0.006       0.000
Notes: Year corresponds to the fall semester. Comprehensive coverage rate is equal to the enrollment coverage rate (at all Title IV institutions weighted by undergraduate enrollment) multiplied by 1 minus the FERPA block rate as reported in NSC Research
Center (2012). For example, the comprehensive coverage rate of undergraduates at all Title IV institutions nationwide in 2010-11 equals 0.901 (the enrollment coverage rate) multiplied by 1 - 0.044 (the fraction of records not FERPA-blocked) = 0.901 x 0.956 =
0.861.
