                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                                    SHADOW INSURANCE

                                        Ralph S.J. Koijen
                                         Motohiro Yogo

                                       Working Paper 19568
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19568


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2013


A.M. Best Company owns the copyright to Best’s Statement File and Best’s Schedule S, which we
use with permission through their license agreement with the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Koijen acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (grant 338082). For
comments and discussions, we thank Tobias Adrian, Daniel Bergstresser, Bruno Biais, Randolph
Cohen, Liran Einav, Andrew Ellul, Francisco Gomes, Scott Harrington, Victoria Ivashina,
Chotibhak Jotikasthira, Robert McDonald, Andrew Metrick, Alexander Michaelides, Alan
Morrison, Adair Morse, Gregory Niehaus, Radek Paluszynski, and Harald Uhlig. We also thank
seminar participants at Arizona State University; Bank of England; Cass Business School; CKGSB;
Columbia University; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis;
Federal Reserve Board; Financial Stability Board; Harvard University; INSEAD; IIES; London
Business School; Nederlandsche Bank; Office of Financial Research; Stockholm School of
Economics; Toulouse School of Economics; University of Alberta, British Columbia, California
Berkeley, Illinois at Chicago, Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Lausanne, Melbourne, Minnesota, and
South Carolina; UCSD; Uppsala University; Vienna Graduate School of Finance; Yale University; the
2013 FRIC Conference on Financial Frictions; the 2014 NBER Insurance Working Group Meeting;
the 2014 Adam Smith Asset Pricing Workshop; the 2014 NBER Asset Pricing Program Meeting;
the 2014 Workshop on Safety, Risk, and Incentives: The Role of the Insurance Industry in the
Modern Financial System; the 2014 FMA Asian Conference; the 2014 Annual Conference of the
Paul Woolley Centre; the 2014 North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society; the
2014 WEAI Annual Conference; the 2014 NBER Summer Institute Corporate Finance Workshop; the
2014 Workshop on Insurance and Systemic Risks; the 2014 Wharton Conference on Liquidity and
Financial Crises; and the 2015 AFA Annual Meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Shadow Insurance
Ralph S.J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 19568
October 2013, Revised May 2016
JEL No. G22,G28

                                        ABSTRACT

Life insurers use reinsurance to move liabilities from regulated and rated companies that sell
policies to shadow reinsurers, which are less regulated and unrated off-balance-sheet entities
within the same insurance group. U.S. life insurance and annuity liabilities ceded to shadow
reinsurers grew from $11 billion in 2002 to $364 billion in 2012. Life insurers using shadow
insurance, which capture half of the market share, ceded 25 cents of every dollar insured to
shadow reinsurers in 2012, up from 2 cents in 2002. By relaxing capital requirements, shadow
insurance could reduce the marginal cost of issuing policies and thereby improve retail market
efficiency. However, shadow insurance could also reduce risk-based capital and increase
expected loss for the industry. We model and quantify these effects based on publicly available
data and plausible assumptions.


Ralph S.J. Koijen
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
rkoijen@london.edu

Motohiro Yogo
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
myogo@princeton.edu
                                         1.    Introduction
    Life insurance and annuity liabilities of U.S. life insurers were $4,068 billion in 2012, which
is substantial even when compared with $6,979 billion in savings deposits at U.S. depository
institutions (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013)). However, little
research exists on life insurer liabilities, especially in comparison with the large banking
literature. The reason, perhaps, is the traditional view that life insurance and annuity
liabilities are safe because they are more predictable, have a longer maturity, and are less
vulnerable to runs. Thus, the conventional wisdom is that all of the interesting action is on
the asset side of the balance sheet, where life insurers take on some investment risk.
   Developments in the life insurance industry over the last decade challenge this traditional
view. As a consequence of changes in regulation (see Section 2), life insurers are using
reinsurance to move liabilities from operating companies (i.e., regulated and rated companies
that sell policies) to less regulated and unrated oﬀ-balance-sheet entities within the same
insurance group. These “shadow reinsurers” are captives or special purpose vehicles in
states (e.g., South Carolina and Vermont) or oﬀshore domiciles (e.g., Bermuda, Barbados,
and Cayman Islands) with more favorable capital regulation or tax laws. In contrast to
traditional reinsurance with unaﬃliated reinsurers, these transactions do not transfer risk
because the liabilities stay within the same insurance group.
    Using U.S. data on reinsurance agreements (see Section 3), we document new facts about
life insurance and annuity liabilities in Section 4, with a special emphasis on the shadow
insurance sector. We ﬁnd that liabilities ceded to shadow reinsurers grew signiﬁcantly from
$11 billion in 2002 to $364 billion in 2012. This activity now exceeds total unaﬃliated
reinsurance in the life insurance industry, which was $270 billion in 2012. Life insurers
using shadow insurance tend to be larger and capture 48% of the market share for both life
insurance and annuities. These companies ceded 25 cents of every dollar insured to shadow
reinsurers in 2012, up from 2 cents in 2002.
    By relaxing capital requirements, shadow insurance could reduce the marginal cost of
issuing policies and thereby improve retail market eﬃciency. However, shadow insurance
could also reduce risk-based capital because it allows life insurers to issue more policies for
a given amount of equity. We develop a simple model in Section 5 to illustrate these eﬀects.
In our model, a holding company consists of an operating company that sells policies and
an aﬃliated reinsurer whose only role is to assume reinsurance from the operating company.
The key friction is that required capital in the two companies is regulated, and the operating
company faces tighter capital regulation than the aﬃliated reinsurer.1 Aﬃliated reinsurance
   1
   We take as given that life insurers are regulated, which breaks the Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem.
The deeper economic frictions that justify regulation include informational frictions and agency problems,


                                                     2
allows the holding company to reallocate liabilities between the two companies to reduce the
overall cost of regulatory frictions.
    The model predicts that aﬃliated reinsurance reduces the operating company’s marginal
cost of issuing policies and increases the equilibrium supply in the retail market. To quan-
tify this eﬀect, we estimate a diﬀerentiated product demand system for the life insurance
market, assuming oligopolistic price setting (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995)). Our iden-
tifying assumption is that shadow insurance reduces the operating company’s marginal cost,
but it does not aﬀect demand directly. Our structural estimates imply that shadow insur-
ance reduces life insurance prices by 10% for the average company and increases annual life
insurance issued by $6.8 billion for the industry, which is 7% of the current market size.
    If rating agencies and retail customers already have full knowledge of shadow insurance,
life insurers and regulators should be indiﬀerent to disclosing the ﬁnancial statements of
captives, or they may even prefer full disclosure to avoid any chance of misinterpretation.
Yet, the ﬁnancial statements of captives are not publicly available, except for those recently
released by the Iowa Insurance Division (2014). This leaves open the possibility that shadow
insurance reduces risk-based capital and increases expected loss for the industry. In Section 6,
we discuss the evidence from Lawsky (2013) and the ﬁnancial statements of Iowa captives,
which suggest that captives have signiﬁcantly less equity than operating companies. We
also quantify the potential risk of shadow insurance by adjusting measures of risk based
on publicly available data and plausible assumptions. Our adjustment reduces risk-based
capital by 53 percentage points (or 3 rating notches) and increases the 10-year cumulative
default probability by a factor of 3.5 for the average company using shadow insurance.
   Our work on life and annuity reinsurance is related to the literature on property and
casualty reinsurance. This literature ﬁnds that property and casualty reinsurance is used for
various reasons, including risk transfer as well as capital and tax management (Mayers and
Smith (1990), Adiel (1996)). For life insurers, risk transfer has always been a less important
motive because of the more predictable nature of their business, which explains why there
is relatively little unaﬃliated reinsurance. All of the growth in life and annuity reinsurance
over the last decade is within the same insurance group, which points to capital and tax
management as the primary motive for this activity.
   Our work is also related to the literature on ﬁnancial and regulatory frictions on the
supply side of insurance markets. In particular, some recent papers show that capital reg-
ulation and accounting rules, when they interact with ﬁnancial frictions, aﬀect investment
behavior on the asset side of the balance sheet (Merrill, Nadauld, Stulz, and Sherlund (2012),
Becker and Opp (2013), Becker and Ivashina (2015), Ellul, Jotikasthira, Lundblad, and Wang
such as moral hazard in the presence of state guaranty funds (Lee, Mayers, and Smith (1997)).


                                                   3
(2015)). Our work complements this literature by showing that a set of capital regulation
and accounting rules on the liability side has a profound impact on reinsurance activity and
pricing behavior in the retail market (Koijen and Yogo (2015)).

         2.   Changes in Regulation That Preceded Shadow Insurance
    The four basic motives of life and annuity reinsurance are risk transfer, underwriting
assistance, capital management, and tax management (Tiller and Tiller (2009, Chapter 1)).
Over the last decade, the latter two motives have become increasingly important relative to
the former two because of two related developments. On the one hand, changes in regulation
after 2000 forced life insurers to hold more capital against life insurance liabilities. On the
other hand, new state laws after 2002 allowed life insurers to establish captives to circumvent
the new capital requirements. In this section, we summarize these developments and related
institutional background that is relevant to this paper.

                        2.1. Changes in Life Insurance Regulation
   In January 2000, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted
Model Regulation 830, commonly referred to as Regulation XXX. This was followed by
Actuarial Guideline 38 in January 2003, commonly referred to as Regulation AXXX. These
changes in regulation forced life insurers to hold much higher statutory reserves on newly
issued term life insurance and universal life insurance with secondary guarantees.
    These changes in regulation are a matter of statutory accounting principles and do not
apply to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The reserve requirements under
GAAP are much lower and closer to actuarial value. Therefore, an operating company that
reports under statutory accounting principles can cede reinsurance to either an aﬃliated or
an unaﬃliated reinsurer that reports under GAAP to reduce overall reserves. In practice,
unaﬃliated reinsurance can be expensive because of capital market frictions and market
power (Gron (1994), Froot (2001)).

                                  2.2. New Captive Laws
   South Carolina introduced new laws in 2002 that allow life insurers to establish captives,
whose primary function is to assume reinsurance from aﬃliated companies for the purpose
of reducing overall reserves. States compete for captive business in order to increase employ-
ment and tax revenue (Cole and McCullough (2008)). Furthermore, the captive’s state of
domicile does not directly bear risk because the liabilities go back to the operating company
(and ultimately the guaranty associations of states in which the policies were sold) when a
captive fails. A captive structure that has proven especially successful is the special purpose


                                              4
ﬁnancial captive, which is a type of special purpose vehicle that was introduced by South
Carolina in 2004 and by Vermont in 2007. Twenty-six states have now adopted a version
of the captive laws, eight of which have deﬁned special purpose ﬁnancial captives (Captives
and Special Purpose Vehicle Use Subgroup (2013)).
   Captives diﬀer from traditional reinsurers in several important ways. First, captive rein-
surance can be less expensive than unaﬃliated reinsurance, especially after the ﬁxed costs
of entry have been paid. Second, captives can operate with less equity because they report
under GAAP and are not subject to risk-based capital regulation. For example, captives
in Vermont are required to have only $250,000 in equity and are allowed to count letters
of credit as admitted assets (Captives and Special Purpose Vehicle Use Subgroup (2013)).
Third, captives have a more ﬂexible ﬁnancial structure that allows them to fund reinsurance
transactions through letters of credit or securitization. Finally, their ﬁnancial statements are
conﬁdential to the public, rating agencies, and even regulators outside their state of domi-
cile. Appendix A contains balance sheet examples that highlight these aspects of captive
reinsurance.
    U.S. tax laws disallow reinsurance for the primary purpose of reducing tax liabilities.
However, it can be an important side beneﬁt of captive reinsurance that motivates where
a life insurer establishes its captives. Life insurance premiums are taxable at the state
level, and the tax rates on premiums vary across states (Cole and McCullough (2008)). In
addition, proﬁts are taxable at the federal level, so an operating company can reduce overall
tax liabilities by ceding reinsurance to an oﬀshore captive. Bermuda, Barbados, and the
Cayman Islands are important captive domiciles for this purpose.
   Operating companies are ultimately responsible for all liabilities that they issue, even
those that they cede to reinsurers. Moreover, captives typically do not transfer risk to
outside investors through securitization (Stern, Rosenblatt, Nadell, and Andruschak (2007)).
These facts together imply that captives do not transfer risk outside the insurance group
and exist solely for the purpose of capital and tax management. Thus, captives have a
function similar to asset-backed commercial paper conduits with explicit guarantees from
the sponsoring bank (Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2013)), prior to the recent regulatory
reform of shadow banking (Adrian and Ashcraft (2012)).

                    3.   Data on Life and Annuity Reinsurance
                                   3.1. Data Construction
   We construct our sample of life and annuity reinsurance agreements for U.S. life insurers
from the Schedule S ﬁlings for ﬁscal years 2002 to 2012 (A.M. Best Company (2003–2013)).
These ﬁnancial statements are reported annually to the NAIC according to statutory ac-

                                               5
counting principles, which are conveniently organized along with ratings information by A.M.
Best Company. The relevant parts of Schedule S for our analysis are Part 1.1 (Reinsurance
Assumed), Part 3.1 (Reinsurance Ceded), and Part 4 (Reinsurance Ceded to Unauthorized
Companies).
  The data contain all reinsurance agreements (both ceded and assumed) at each ﬁscal year-
end for any operating company or authorized reinsurer. An authorized reinsurer is subject to
the same reporting and capital requirements as an operating company in its state of domicile,
whereas an unauthorized reinsurer is not. In particular, the data contain reinsurance ceded
by an operating company to an unauthorized reinsurer, such as a domestic captive or a
foreign reinsurer. However, we do not observe reinsurance ceded by unauthorized reinsurers
that do not report to the NAIC.
    For each reinsurance agreement, we observe the identity of the reinsurer, the type of
reinsurance, the eﬀective date, reserve credit taken (or reserves held), and modiﬁed coinsur-
ance reserve. The sum of reserve credit taken and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve is essentially
the dollar amount of reinsurance ceded (see Appendix A). We know the identity of the
reinsurer up to its name, domicile, whether it is aﬃliated with the ceding company, whether
it is authorized in the ceding company’s domicile, and whether it is rated by A.M. Best
Company. We deﬁne shadow reinsurers as aﬃliated and unauthorized reinsurers without
an A.M. Best rating. Our deﬁnition is stricter than “captives” because some captives are
actually authorized.

                                       3.2. Summary Statistics
  Table I reports summary statistics for our sample of life and annuity reinsurance agree-
ments, by whether they were ceded to unaﬃliated or aﬃliated reinsurers. The table also
reports the same statistics for shadow reinsurers. Although there are fewer aﬃliated than
unaﬃliated reinsurance agreements, the typical amount ceded is signiﬁcantly higher for af-
ﬁliated than unaﬃliated reinsurance. For example, 456 unaﬃliated reinsurance agreements
originated in 2009. In comparison, only 120 aﬃliated reinsurance agreements originated in
2009, 67 of which were ceded to shadow reinsurers. Average unaﬃliated reinsurance ceded
was $37 million in 2009, which is much lower than $1,199 million for aﬃliated reinsurance
and $2,003 million for shadow insurance. The average shadow insurance agreement grew
from $60 million in 2002 to $502 million in 2012.
   Table II summarizes the characteristics of the life insurers in our sample, by whether they
were using shadow insurance.2 Although most life insurers do not use shadow insurance,
the ones that do tend to be larger, by either market share or total liabilities. In 2012,
  2
      See Appendix B for a description of the data on company characteristics.


                                                     6
78 companies used shadow insurance, whereas 443 companies did not. However, the life
insurers using shadow insurance captured 48% of the market share for both life insurance and
annuities. Furthermore, the average liabilities of life insurers using shadow insurance were
317% higher than those of the other companies. The life insurers using shadow insurance are
mostly stock instead of mutual companies. They also tend to have lower risk-based capital,
higher leverage, assets with lower liquidity, and higher proﬁtability.

                        4.    New Facts about Shadow Insurance
   We now document the rapid growth of shadow insurance over the last decade, as a
consequence of changes in regulation summarized in Section 2. We start with a case study of
the MetLife group, which is the largest insurance group in the United States by total assets.
We then show that the rapid growth of aﬃliated reinsurance, especially with unrated and
unauthorized reinsurers, stands in sharp contrast to the behavior of unaﬃliated reinsurance
over the same period.

                             4.1. A Case Study of the MetLife Group
    Table III lists the U.S. operating companies of the MetLife group and their aﬃliated
reinsurers in 2012. The operating companies all have an A.M. Best rating of A+ and cede
reinsurance to the rest of the group. The reinsurers are all unrated and assume reinsur-
ance from the rest of the group. The reinsurers are also unauthorized, except for MetLife
Reinsurance of Delaware and MetLife Reinsurance of Charleston since 2009. The liabilities
consistently disappear from the balance sheets of operating companies that sell policies and
end up in less regulated and unrated reinsurers.
   Net reinsurance ceded by Metropolitan Life Insurance (the ﬂagship operating company
in New York) was $39.1 billion, which was nearly three times their capital and surplus. In
the same year, net reinsurance assumed by Missouri Reinsurance (a captive in Barbados)
was $28.4 billion. The sum of net reinsurance ceded across all companies in Table III, which
is total reinsurance ceded outside the MetLife group, was $5.7 billion. Thus, most of the
reinsurance activity is within the MetLife group, rather than with unaﬃliated reinsurers.

                              4.2. Growth of Aﬃliated Reinsurance
    Figure 1 reports total reinsurance ceded by U.S. life insurers to aﬃliated and unaﬃliated
reinsurers. Aﬃliated reinsurance grew from $90 billion in 2002 to $572 billion in 2012.
In contrast, unaﬃliated reinsurance peaked at $287 billion in 2006 and is nearly constant
thereafter. Aﬃliated reinsurance has exceeded unaﬃliated reinsurance since 2007.
   Figure 2 breaks down Figure 1 into life versus annuity reinsurance. Aﬃliated life rein-
surance grew from $36 billion in 2002 to $375 billion in 2012. This trend coincides with

                                               7
the changes in life insurance regulation and new captive laws. In contrast, aﬃliated annuity
reinsurance was nearly constant until 2007, then grew from $91 billion in 2007 to $197 billion
in 2012. This growth is curious because Regulation (A)XXX does not apply to annuities,
and its timing coincides with the ﬁnancial crisis.
   The use of aﬃliated annuity reinsurance during the ﬁnancial crisis could be explained by
a motive to smooth reserves, including that which arises from capital constraints (Koijen and
Yogo (2015)). Under Actuarial Guideline 43, the reserve value of variable annuity liabilities
under statutory accounting principles increases relative to that under GAAP after a period of
high volatility (Credit Suisse (2012)). Therefore, a life insurer could smooth overall reserves
by moving liabilities from an operating company that reports under statutory accounting
principles to an aﬃliated reinsurer that reports under GAAP.

                      4.3. Geographic Concentration of Reinsurance
   Figure 3 decomposes life and annuity reinsurance ceded by the reinsurer’s domicile, sep-
arately for aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurance. The geography of aﬃliated reinsurance is
characterized by increasing concentration, which is not present in unaﬃliated reinsurance.
As we discussed in Section 2, South Carolina and Vermont are the most important domiciles
for domestic captives because of their capital regulation. The share of aﬃliated reinsurance
ceded to these two states grew from virtually none in 2002 to 19% in 2012. In contrast, the
share of unaﬃliated reinsurance ceded to these two states remained low throughout the same
period. Bermuda, Barbados, and the Cayman Islands are the most important domiciles for
oﬀshore captives because of their capital regulation and tax laws. The share of aﬃliated
reinsurance ceded to these oﬀshore domiciles grew from 9% in 2002 to 46% in 2012. In
contrast, the share of unaﬃliated reinsurance ceded to these oﬀshore domiciles fell slightly
over the same period.

               4.4. Reinsurance with Unrated and Unauthorized Reinsurers
   Figure 4 decomposes life and annuity reinsurance ceded by the A.M. Best rating of
the reinsurer, separately for aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurance. The share of aﬃliated
reinsurance ceded to unrated reinsurers grew from 21% in 2002 to 76% in 2012. In contrast,
the share of unaﬃliated reinsurance ceded to unrated reinsurers fell slightly over the same
period.
   Figure 5 decomposes life and annuity reinsurance ceded by whether the reinsurer is autho-
rized in the ceding company’s domicile, separately for aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurance.
The share of aﬃliated reinsurance ceded to unauthorized reinsurers grew from 19% in 2002
to 70% in 2012. In contrast, the share of unaﬃliated reinsurance ceded to unauthorized
reinsurers is nearly constant over the same period and is 23% in 2012.

                                              8
                             4.5. Growth of Shadow Insurance
   Figure 6 reports total reinsurance ceded by U.S. life insurers to shadow reinsurers.
Shadow insurance grew signiﬁcantly from $11 billion in 2002 to $364 billion in 2012. In
particular, growth accelerated during the ﬁnancial crisis from 2006 to 2009. As a share of
the capital and surplus of the ceding companies, shadow insurance grew from 0.22 in 2002
to 2.49 in 2012. As a share of gross life and annuity reserves for companies using shadow
insurance, shadow insurance grew from 2 cents of every dollar insured in 2002 to 25 cents
in 2012. This represents a signiﬁcant accumulation of liabilities in a less regulated and
nontransparent part of the insurance industry.

               5.   A Model of Insurance Pricing and Reinsurance
   We now develop a simple model that illustrates the impact of shadow insurance on the
retail market and risk-based capital. We make several simplifying assumptions to highlight
the key economic mechanisms. First, we tailor the model to the life insurance market to
match our empirical application, but the key economic insights would carry over to the
annuity market. Second, we do not model equity issuance under the assumption that it
is a more expensive way to raise statutory capital than aﬃliated reinsurance (Myers and
Majluf (1984)), consistent with the evidence in Section 4. For a similar reason, we leave out
unaﬃliated reinsurance, which we modeled in an earlier version of this paper (Koijen and
Yogo (2013)). Finally, we do not model taxes because it is diﬃcult to do so realistically, and
the tax beneﬁts of reinsurance are not separately identiﬁed from a reduced cost of regulatory
frictions based on publicly available data.

                    5.1. A Holding Company’s Maximization Problem
     A holding company consists of an operating company and an aﬃliated reinsurer (i.e., a
captive or a special purpose vehicle). In period t, the operating company oﬀers long-term
life insurance at a per-period premium of Pt per unit. As long as the policyholder pays Pt
in each period t + s for s ≥ 0, the operating company promises to pay a dollar if the insured
dies in period t + s + 1, which occurs with probability 1 − π. Let RL be a constant gross
discount rate on liabilities in period t. Then the actuarial value is V = (1 − π)/RL per unit,
which is the present value of the death beneﬁt in period t + 1. A share 1 − λ of policies sold
in period t are lapsed in each period t + s for s ≥ 1. Alternatively, λ determines the eﬀective
maturity of life insurance. For example, one-period coverage is a special case when λ = 0,
and lifetime coverage is a special case when λ = 1.
   The operating company optimally prices insurance in an oligopolistic market, where
we assume the existence of a Nash equilibrium in prices. The operating company faces a

                                              9
demand function that is continuous, continuously diﬀerentiable, and strictly decreasing in
its own price. Let Qt be the quantity of policies sold in period t. After the sale of policies,
the operating company can cede reinsurance to the aﬃliated reinsurer. Let Bt ≥ 0 be the
quantity of aﬃliated reinsurance ceded in period t.
   The holding company’s proﬁt in period t is

                                            
                                            ∞
(1)                                  Yt =         δ s (Pt−s − V )Qt−s ,
                                            s=0


where δ = πλ. Total proﬁt is the sum of proﬁts across all policies sold that remain in eﬀect.
Only a share δ of policies sold in period t − 1 remain in eﬀect in period t because of attrition
through death and lapsation. Aﬃliated reinsurance does not aﬀect total proﬁt under the
maintained assumption of no tax eﬀects.
5.1.1. Balance Sheet Dynamics
   We now describe how the sale of policies and aﬃliated reinsurance aﬀect the balance
sheet. The operating company’s liabilities at the end of period t are

                             
                             ∞
(2)                   Lt =         δ s V (Qt−s − Bt−s ) = δLt−1 + V (Qt − Bt ).
                             s=0


Liabilities are the sum of policies net of aﬃliated reinsurance that remain in eﬀect, evaluated
at actuarial value. Let RA,t be the return on assets in period t. The operating company’s
assets at the end of period t are

(3)                            At = RA,t At−1 + V (Qt − Bt ) + Yt .

This equation follows from the ﬂow of funds identity, which says that the change in assets is
the change in liabilities plus total proﬁt.
   We deﬁne the operating company’s statutory capital at the end of period t as

(4)                                     Kt = At − (1 + ρ)Lt ,

where a higher ρ > 0 implies tighter capital regulation. Our formulation of statutory cap-
ital has two interpretations, both of which lead to equation (4). First, as we discussed in
Section 2, operating companies must hold additional reserves under Regulation (A)XXX.
Under this interpretation, 1 + ρ is the ratio of statutory reserve to actuarial value. Second,
operating companies that face risk-based capital regulation must hold additional capital to
buﬀer shocks to their liabilities. Under this interpretation, ρ is the risk charge on liabilities.

                                                     10
   The only role of the aﬃliated reinsurer is to assume reinsurance from the operating
company. The aﬃliated reinsurer’s liabilities at the end of period t are

                                     
                                     ∞
(5)                           t =
                              L                           t−1 + V Bt .
                                           δ s V Bt−s = δ L
                                     s=0


Its assets at the end of period t are

(6)                                  t = RA,t A
                                     A         t−1 + V Bt .

We assume that the aﬃliated reinsurer faces looser capital regulation than the operating
company, which is captured by ρ ∈ (0, ρ). We deﬁne the aﬃliated reinsurer’s statutory
capital at the end of period t as

(7)                                     K    t − (1 + ρ)L
                                        t = A            t .

      We deﬁne the holding company’s excess capital at the end of period t as
                                                           
(8)                                     t − (1 + ρ) Lt + L
                              Wt = At + A                 t .

Excess capital corresponds to the operating company’s statutory capital if its balance sheet
were consolidated with that of the aﬃliated reinsurer. Alternatively, if we interpret ρ as
the risk charge on liabilities, this equation corresponds to risk-based capital in diﬀerences
                                        t − L
instead of as a ratio (i.e., (At − Lt + A    t )/(ρ(Lt + L
                                                          t ))).

5.1.2. Objective Function
   The Insurance Holding Company System Regulatory Act protects the interests of existing
policyholders and the state guaranty funds by restricting the movement of capital within a
holding company, including through aﬃliated reinsurance (National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (2011, Appendix A-440)). Furthermore, increased use of shadow insurance
could draw regulatory scrutiny or intervention (Lawsky (2013)). We model these regulatory
frictions through a cost function:
                                                               
                                                    Kt K  t
                                     Ct = C            ,            .
                                                   Lt−1 Lt−1

We assume that this cost function is continuous, twice continuously diﬀerentiable, strictly
decreasing, and strictly convex. The cost function is decreasing because higher statutory
capital, relative to balance sheet size as captured by lagged liabilities, reduces the likelihood

                                                   11
of regulatory scrutiny or intervention. The cost function is convex because these beneﬁts of
higher statutory capital have diminishing returns.
    In each period t, the holding company chooses the insurance price Pt and aﬃliated
reinsurance Bt to maximize ﬁrm value. The holding company has limited liability and
operates as long as excess capital relative to balance sheet size exceeds a constant default
boundary: Wt /(Lt−1 + Lt−1 ) ≥ τ . We assume the absence of arbitrage, which implies the
existence of a stochastic discount factor Mt+1 that is strictly positive but not necessarily
unique (Cochrane (2001, Chapter 4)). Thus, ﬁrm value is the present value of proﬁts minus
the cost of regulatory frictions:

(9)              Jt =Yt − Ct + Et [Mt+1 Jt+1 ]
                                   
                                      Wt+1                                Wt+1
                    =Yt − Ct + Prt             ≥τ        Et Mt+1 Jt+1            ≥τ ,
                                     Lt + Lt                                 t
                                                                         Lt + L

where the second line follows from the normalization that ﬁrm value conditional on default
is zero.

                        5.2. Optimal Insurance Pricing and Reinsurance
       To simplify notation, we ﬁrst deﬁne the operating company’s shadow cost of capital as3

                                            ∂Ct           ∂Jt+1
                                   ct = −       + Et Mt+1       .
                                            ∂Kt            ∂Kt

The shadow cost of capital quantiﬁes the importance of regulatory frictions in either the
present or the future. Similarly, we deﬁne the aﬃliated reinsurer’s shadow cost of capital as

                                            ∂Ct           ∂Jt+1
                                   
                                   ct = −       + Et Mt+1       .
                                             t
                                            ∂K              t
                                                           ∂K

The following proposition characterizes the optimal insurance price and aﬃliated reinsurance.

       Proposition 1: The optimal insurance price is
                                                          −1
                                                  1
(10)                                     Pt = 1 −               Φt ,
                                                  t
   3
     Our assumptions on the cost function imply that the value function is diﬀerentiable (Stokey, Lucas, and
Prescott (1989, Theorem 4.11)), and the partial derivative with respect to statutory capital can be passed
inside the conditional expectation by Leibniz’s rule.




                                                    12
where t = −∂ log(Qt )/∂ log(Pt ) is the elasticity of demand and

                                           (1 + (1 + ρ)ct )V
                                    Φt =
                                                1 + ct

is the marginal cost of issuing policies. If aﬃliated reinsurance is at an interior optimum, it
satisﬁes

(11)                                       ct ρ = 
                                                  ct ρ.

   We prove Proposition 1 in Appendix C. The ﬁrst term in equation (10) is familiar from
the Bertrand pricing formula. The optimal insurance price is decreasing in the elasticity of
demand. The second term is marginal cost that arises from regulatory frictions. Marginal
cost increases with the shadow cost of capital and tighter capital regulation (i.e., higher ρ).
   Equation (11) says that the holding company equates the shadow cost of capital across the
two companies, appropriately weighted by the tightness of capital regulation. For example,
suppose that the two companies have the same shadow cost of capital prior to aﬃliated
reinsurance. Then the operating company cedes reinsurance to the aﬃliated reinsurer that
faces looser capital regulation (i.e., ρ < ρ). The operating company’s statutory capital rises
relative to the aﬃliated reinsurer’s, so that equation (11) holds with ct < ct after aﬃliated
reinsurance.

   Corollary 1: Aﬃliated reinsurance reduces the marginal cost of issuing policies (i.e.,
∂Φt /∂Bt < 0). Furthermore, aﬃliated reinsurance reduces excess capital if ∂Pt /∂Bt < 0.

   We prove Corollary 1 in Appendix C. Aﬃliated reinsurance reduces the operating com-
pany’s shadow cost of capital and thereby reduces the marginal cost of issuing policies. A
lower marginal cost implies a lower price through equation (10), provided that the demand
elasticity does not decrease to more than oﬀset the lower marginal cost. Thus, aﬃliated
reinsurance could reduce the insurance price and increase the quantity of policies issued.
    If aﬃliated reinsurance reduces the insurance price, it also reduces excess capital accord-
ing to Corollary 1. The reason is that the marginal increase in equity from the additional
business is less than the marginal increase in capital required to support the additional liabil-
ities. Thus, aﬃliated reinsurance could reduce risk-based capital and increase the probability
of default. In practice, we cannot accurately assess these eﬀects because the balance sheets
of captives are not publicly available, which means that we do not directly observe excess
capital (8) or the probability of default (9).



                                                 13
                  5.3. Impact of Shadow Insurance on the Retail Market
    In Appendix D, we quantify the impact of shadow insurance on the retail market by
estimating a diﬀerentiated product demand system for the life insurance market, together
with the optimal pricing equation. Demand is determined by the random coeﬃcients logit
model (Berry et al. (1995)), where product diﬀerentiation is along company characteristics.
We specify marginal cost as an exponential-linear function of shadow insurance and company
characteristics. We then estimate the structural model under an identifying assumption that
shadow insurance reduces marginal cost, but it does not aﬀect demand directly. Finally, we
use the structural model to estimate counterfactual insurance prices and market size in the
absence of shadow insurance.
   We summarize our conservative estimates under the assumption that ratings and risk-
based capital already reﬂect the risk of shadow insurance. In Koijen and Yogo (2013), we also
reported larger eﬀects under an alternative assumption that ratings and risk-based capital do
not adequately reﬂect the risk of shadow insurance. Marginal cost would increase by 13.3%
for the average company using shadow insurance in 2012. In response to higher marginal
cost, the average company would raise prices by 10.4%. The quantity of life insurance issued
annually would fall by $7.2 billion for the operating companies using shadow insurance,
while the other companies would gain $0.4 billion because of substitution eﬀects. Higher
prices mean that some potential customers would stay out of the life insurance market. The
industry as a whole would shrink by $6.8 billion, which is 7% of its current size of $91.5
billion in 2012.

                     6.   Potential Risk of Shadow Insurance
    We now discuss the possibility that shadow insurance reduces risk-based capital and
increases expected loss for the industry. As we discussed in Section 2, captives are not
subject to Regulation (A)XXX or risk-based capital regulation. Therefore, captives would
have to voluntarily hold as much capital as the operating companies in order for shadow
insurance to not aﬀect risk at the holding company level. Two pieces of evidence suggest
that this is not always the case.
    First, Lawsky (2013) has examined non-public ﬁnancial statements of captives that as-
sume reinsurance from operating companies in New York and found widespread use of fragile
sources of funding, such as conditional letters of credit (guaranteed by the parent company)
and naked parental guarantees. These fragile sources of funding erode the eﬀective equity in
captives. Moody’s Investors Service shares a similar view that “because many companies’
captives are capitalized at lower levels compared to ﬂagship companies, the use of captives
tends to weaken capital adequacy” (Robinson and Son (2013, p. 3)).

                                             14
    Second, the Iowa Insurance Division (2014) recently released ﬁnancial statements for
eight captives in their domicile for 2013 and 2014. These ﬁnancial statements report how
much equity these captives have when evaluated under the statutory accounting principles
that apply to operating companies. Six of the eight captives have signiﬁcantly negative
equity under statutory accounting. When aggregated over the eight captives, total equity
under statutory accounting is −$2.7 billion in 2014.
   We do not have suﬃcient data to accurately assess the potential risk of shadow insurance.
Based on publicly available data, we can only explore what plausible assumptions imply
for risk. In Appendix E, we quantify the potential risk of shadow insurance by adjusting
measures of risk based on two assumptions. First, we assume that captives do not have
equity under statutory accounting, consistent with the two pieces of evidence. Second, we
assume that the risk proﬁle of reinsurance ceded is identical to assets and liabilities that
remain on the balance sheet, which is a natural starting point. Under these assumptions,
our adjustment reduces risk-based capital by 53 percentage points (or 3 rating notches)
and increases the 10-year cumulative default probability by a factor of 3.5 for the average
company using shadow insurance. This implies an expected loss of $14.4 billion for the
industry, which is 26% of the total capacity of state guaranty funds.

                                      7.   Conclusion
    We have documented new facts about reinsurance for U.S. life insurers. All of the growth
in life and annuity reinsurance over the last decade is explained by aﬃliated reinsurance
within the same insurance group, rather than unaﬃliated reinsurance across groups. This
growth in aﬃliated reinsurance accelerated during the ﬁnancial crisis, especially for annuity
reinsurance. Aﬃliated reinsurance is geographically concentrated in states (e.g., South Car-
olina and Vermont) and oﬀshore domiciles (e.g., Bermuda, Barbados, and Cayman Islands)
with more favorable capital regulation or tax laws. Shadow insurance is the part of aﬃliated
reinsurance that is with less regulated and unrated reinsurers. The U.S. shadow insurance
sector grew signiﬁcantly from $11 billion in 2002 to $364 billion in 2012. Life insurers using
shadow insurance ceded 25 cents of every dollar insured to shadow reinsurers in 2012, up
from 2 cents in 2002.
   Based on publicly available data, we do not know the amount of equity in captives,
the fragility of their funding arrangements, or the risk proﬁle of their assets and liabilities.
Therefore, we cannot conclusively tell whether shadow insurance simply oﬀsets ineﬃcient
capital requirements and taxes, or whether it increases expected loss for the industry. In
the interest of more transparency, state regulators could release the ﬁnancial statements of
captives, following the lead of the Iowa Insurance Division. More broadly, ﬁnancial disclo-


                                              15
sure should not be limited to the United States because insurance is a global business. In
particular, we do not know the size of the European shadow insurance sector because of
limited disclosure and inconsistent reporting requirements across countries.

                                      References
Acharya, V. V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez (2013): “Securitization without Risk
 Transfer,” Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 515–536.

Adiel, R. (1996): “Reinsurance and the Management of Regulatory Ratios and Taxes in
 the Property-Casualty Insurance Industry,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 22,
  207–240.

Adrian, T. and A. B. Ashcraft (2012): “Shadow Banking Regulation,” Annual Review
 of Financial Economics, 4, 99–140.

A.M. Best Company (1999–2013): Best’s Statement File: Life/Health, United States,
  Oldwick, NJ: A.M. Best Company.

——— (2003–2013): Best’s Schedule S: Life/Health, United States, Oldwick, NJ: A.M. Best
 Company.

——— (2011): “Best’s Credit Rating Methodology: Global Life and Non-Life Insurance
  Edition,” A.M. Best Methodology.

——— (2013a): “Best’s Impairment Rate and Rating Transition Study—1977 to 2012,”
  A.M. Best Special Report.

——— (2013b): “Rating Factors for Organizations Using Life Captive Reinsurers,” A.M.
 Best Special Report.

——— (2013c): “U.S. Life/Health Impairment Review: L/H Impairments Hold at Half-
 Century Low; Accident and Health Remains Trouble Spot,” A.M. Best Special Report.

Becker, B. and V. Ivashina (2015): “Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market,” Journal
 of Finance, 70, 1863–1901.

Becker, B. and M. Opp (2013): “Regulatory Reform and Risk-Taking: Replacing Rat-
 ings,” Working Paper 19257, NBER.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilib-
  rium,” Econometrica, 63, 841–890.


                                           16
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013): Financial Accounts
 of the United States: Historical Annual Tables 2005–2012, no. Z.1 in Federal Reserve
 Statistical Release, Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Captives and Special Purpose Vehicle Use Subgroup (2013): “Captives and Spe-
  cial Purpose Vehicles,” Unpublished Manuscript, National Association of Insurance Com-
  missioners.

Cochrane, J. H. (2001): Asset Pricing, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Cole, C. R. and K. A. McCullough (2008): “Captive Domiciles: Trends and Recent
 Changes,” Journal of Insurance Regulation, 26, 61–90.

Compulife Software (2002–2012): Compulife Historical Data, Harrodsburg, KY: Com-
 pulife Software.

Credit Suisse (2012): “US Variable Annuities,” Credit Suisse Connections Series.

Ellul, A., C. Jotikasthira, C. T. Lundblad, and Y. Wang (2015): “Is Historical
 Cost Accounting a Panacea? Market Stress, Incentive Distortions, and Gains Trading,”
  Journal of Finance, 70, 2489–2538.

Froot, K. A. (2001): “The Market for Catastrophe Risk: A Clinical Examination,” Journal
 of Financial Economics, 60, 529–571.

Gallanis, P. G. (2009): “NOLHGA, the Life and Health Insurance Guaranty System,
 and the Financial Crisis of 2008–2009,” Unpublished Manuscript, National Organization
  of Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Associations.

Gron, A. (1994): “Evidence of Capacity Constraints in Insurance Markets,” Journal of
 Law and Economics, 37, 349–377.

Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and J. H. Wright (2007): “The U.S. Treasury Yield
 Curve: 1961 to the Present,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 2291–2304.

Iowa Insurance Division (2014): “Financial Statements—Single-State Life or Property,”
  http://www.iid.state.ia.us/single state life pc.

Koijen, R. S. J. and M. Yogo (2013): “Shadow Insurance,” Working Paper 19568,
  NBER.

——— (2015): “The Cost of Financial Frictions for Life Insurers,” American Economic
 Review, 105, 445–475.

                                              17
Lawsky, B. M. (2013): “Shining a Light on Shadow Insurance: A Little-Known Loop-
  hole That Puts Insurance Policyholders and Taxpayers at Greater Risk,” Unpublished
  Manuscript, New York State Department of Financial Services.

Lee, S.-J., D. Mayers, and C. W. Smith, Jr. (1997): “Guaranty Funds and Risk-
  Taking: Evidence from the Insurance Industry,” Journal of Financial Economics, 44,
  3–24.

Loring, D. W. and G. M. Higgins (1997): “Introduction to Life Reinsurance 101,”
 Record of the Society of Actuaries, 23, 1–25.

Mayers, D. and C. W. Smith, Jr. (1981): “Contractual Provisions, Organizational
 Structure, and Conﬂict Control in Insurance Markets,” Journal of Business, 54, 407–434.

——— (1990): “On the Corporate Demand for Insurance: Evidence from the Reinsurance
 Market,” Journal of Business, 63, 19–40.

Merrill, C. B., T. D. Nadauld, R. M. Stulz, and S. M. Sherlund (2012): “Did
  Capital Requirements and Fair Value Accounting Spark Fire Sales in Distressed Mortgage-
  Backed Securities?” Working Paper 18270, NBER.

Modigliani, F. and M. H. Miller (1958): “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance
 and the Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review, 48, 261–297.

Myers, S. C. and N. S. Majluf (1984): “Corporate Financing and Investment Deci-
  sions When Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 13, 187–221.

National Association of Insurance Commissioners (2011): Accounting Practices
 and Procedures Manual, Kansas City, MO: National Association of Insurance Commis-
 sioners.

Peterson, P. A. (2013): Insolvency Cost Information Files, Herndon, VA: National Or-
 ganization of Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Associations.

Robinson, S. and M. Son (2013): “The Captive Triangle: Where Life Insurers’ Reserve
 and Capital Requirements Disappear,” Report 156495, Moody’s Investors Service.

Stern, J., W. Rosenblatt, B. Nadell, and K. M. Andruschak (2007): “Insur-
  ance Securitizations: Coping with Excess Reserve Requirements under Regulation XXX,”
  Journal of Taxation and Regulation of Financial Institutions, 20, 30–34.


                                           18
Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2005): “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regres-
  sion,” in Identiﬁcation and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas
  Rothenberg, ed. by D. W. Andrews and J. H. Stock, Cambridge: Cambridge University
  Press, chap. 5, 80–108.

Stokey, N. L., R. E. Lucas, Jr., and E. C. Prescott (1989): Recursive Methods in
  Economic Dynamics, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Tiller, Jr., J. E. and D. F. Tiller (2009): Life, Health and Annuity Reinsurance,
  Winsted, CT: ACTEX Publications, 3rd ed.




                                           19
                                       Table I
                   Summary Statistics for Reinsurance Agreements


               Number of reinsurance agreements                    Mean reinsurance ceded
                           ceded to                                     (million $)
       Year    Unaﬃliated      Aﬃliated        Shadow        Unaﬃliated       Aﬃliated     Shadow
       2002           1,493           157            53                 26           77          60
       2003             960           119            70                 26          116          59
       2004             753           149            89                101          528         502
       2005             824           182           110                 28          211         163
       2006             681           146            85                 54          227         231
       2007             599           114            65                 39          345         451
       2008             566           132            88                 25          613         717
       2009             456           120            67                 37        1,199       2,003
       2010             410           116            56                 10          509         776
       2011             310           110            49                 56          626         640
       2012             328           120            45                 89          392         502

Summary statistics for life and annuity reinsurance agreements are reported, by origination year and whether
they were ceded to unaﬃliated or aﬃliated reinsurers. Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit taken
and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded. Shadow reinsurers are a subset of aﬃliated reinsurers that are
unauthorized and do not have an A.M. Best rating.




                                                    20
                                     Table II
            Characteristics of Life Insurers Using Shadow Insurance


                                                              Using shadow
                                                                insurance
                             Statistic                         No         Yes
                             Number of companies       443                 78
                             Market share (%):
                               Life insurance           52                 48
                               Annuities                52                 48
                             Stock company (%)          91                 99
                             Mean:
                               Log liabilities        0.00               3.17
                               A.M. Best rating       A−                    A
                               Risk-based capital (%) 307                 208
                               Leverage (%)             72                 89
                               Current liquidity (%)   158                 80
                               Return on equity (%)      7                 18

Summary statistics for U.S. life insurers in 2012 are reported, by whether they were using shadow insurance.
The market shares are based on gross reserves held for life insurance and annuities, respectively.




                                                    21
                                      Table III
                  Affiliated Reinsurance within the MetLife Group


                                                                             A.M.      Net reinsur-
                                                                             Best       ance ceded
       Company                                            Domicile           rating      (billion $)
       Metropolitan Life Insurance                        New York           A+                 39.1
       MetLife Investors USA Insurance                    Delaware           A+                 13.3
       General American Life Insurance                    Missouri           A+                  3.9
       MetLife Insurance of Connecticut                   Connecticut        A+                  3.6
       MetLife Investors Insurance                        Missouri           A+                  2.6
       First MetLife Investors Insurance                  New York           A+                  1.6
       New England Life Insurance                         Massachusetts      A+                  1.0
       Metropolitan Tower Life Insurance                  Delaware           A+                  0.8
       MetLife Reinsurance of Delaware                    Delaware                              -0.4
       MetLife Reinsurance of South Carolina              South Carolina                        -3.1
       Exeter Reassurance                                 Bermuda                               -5.6
       MetLife Reinsurance of Vermont                     Vermont                               -9.9
       MetLife Reinsurance of Charleston                  South Carolina                       -12.9
       Missouri Reinsurance                               Barbados                             -28.4
       Total for the MetLife group                                                               5.7

The U.S. operating companies of the MetLife group and their aﬃliated reinsurers, whose net reinsurance
ceded is greater than $0.1 billion in absolute value in 2012, are listed. Net reinsurance ceded is the sum of
reserve credit taken and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded minus the sum of reserves held and modiﬁed
coinsurance reserve assumed.




                                                     22
                                                600
                                                             Affiliated
                                                             Unaffiliated

                                                500
                Reinsurance ceded (billion $)




                                                400



                                                300



                                                200



                                                100

                                                      2002     2004         2006          2008   2010   2012
                                                                                   Year




Figure 1. Reinsurance ceded to aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurers. Life and annuity
reinsurance ceded by U.S. life insurers to aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurers is reported.
Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit taken and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded.




                                                                              23
                                                                           Life reinsurance
                                               400
                                                            Affiliated
               Reinsurance ceded (billion $)                Unaffiliated


                                               300




                                               200




                                               100




                                                0
                                                     2002    2004           2006          2008   2010   2012
                                                                                   Year


                                                                       Annuity reinsurance
                                               400
               Reinsurance ceded (billion $)




                                               300




                                               200




                                               100




                                                0
                                                     2002    2004           2006          2008   2010   2012
                                                                                   Year




Figure 2. Life versus annuity reinsurance ceded to aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurers.
Reinsurance ceded by U.S. life insurers to aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurers is reported,
separately for life and annuity reinsurance. Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit
taken and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded.



                                                                              24
                                                                      Affiliated reinsurance
                                                  1

               Share of total reinsurance ceded
                                                  .8



                                                  .6



                                                  .4



                                                  .2



                                                  0
                                                       2002   2004        2006          2008       2010         2012
                                                                                 Year


                                                                     Unaffiliated reinsurance
                                                  1
               Share of total reinsurance ceded




                                                  .8


                                                                                               Other international
                                                  .6                                           Bermuda, Barbados
                                                                                               & Cayman Islands
                                                                                               Other U.S.
                                                  .4                                           South Carolina &
                                                                                               Vermont


                                                  .2



                                                  0
                                                       2002   2004        2006          2008       2010         2012
                                                                                 Year




Figure 3. Reinsurance ceded by the reinsurer’s domicile. Life and annuity reinsurance
ceded by U.S. life insurers is decomposed by the reinsurer’s domicile, separately for aﬃliated
and unaﬃliated reinsurance. Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit taken and
modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded.



                                                                             25
                                                                           Affiliated reinsurance
                                                  1
                                                              A++ or A+
                                                              A or lower
                                                              Unrated
               Share of total reinsurance ceded
                                                  .8



                                                  .6



                                                  .4



                                                  .2



                                                  0
                                                       2002    2004           2006          2008    2010   2012
                                                                                     Year


                                                                      Unaffiliated reinsurance
                                                  1
               Share of total reinsurance ceded




                                                  .8



                                                  .6



                                                  .4



                                                  .2



                                                  0
                                                       2002    2004           2006          2008    2010   2012
                                                                                     Year




Figure 4. Reinsurance ceded by rating of reinsurer. Life and annuity reinsurance ceded
by U.S. life insurers is decomposed by the A.M. Best rating of the reinsurer, separately for
aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurance. Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit taken
and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded.



                                                                                  26
                                                                       Affiliated reinsurance
                                                  1
                                                              Authorized
               Share of total reinsurance ceded               Unauthorized

                                                  .8



                                                  .6



                                                  .4



                                                  .2



                                                  0
                                                       2002    2004          2006          2008   2010   2012
                                                                                    Year


                                                                      Unaffiliated reinsurance
                                                  1
               Share of total reinsurance ceded




                                                  .8



                                                  .6



                                                  .4



                                                  .2



                                                  0
                                                       2002    2004          2006          2008   2010   2012
                                                                                    Year




Figure 5. Reinsurance ceded to unauthorized reinsurers. Life and annuity reinsurance
ceded by U.S. life insurers is decomposed by whether the reinsurer is authorized in the ceding
company’s domicile, separately for aﬃliated and unaﬃliated reinsurance. Reinsurance ceded
is the sum of reserve credit taken and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded.



                                                                                27
                                                400                                                          3
                                                             Reinsurance ceded (billion $)
                                                             As share of capital & surplus
                                                                                                             2.5
                Reinsurance ceded (billion $)




                                                                                                                   As share of capital & surplus
                                                300
                                                                                                             2


                                                200                                                          1.5


                                                                                                             1
                                                100
                                                                                                             .5


                                                 0                                                           0
                                                      2002     2004       2006          2008   2010   2012
                                                                                 Year




Figure 6. Reinsurance ceded to shadow reinsurers. Life and annuity reinsurance ceded
by U.S. life insurers to shadow reinsurers is reported in total dollars and as a share of the
capital and surplus of the ceding companies. Reinsurance ceded is the sum of reserve credit
taken and modiﬁed coinsurance reserve ceded.




                                                                                 28
              Appendix A.         Stylized Examples of Captive Reinsurance
    We illustrate the balance sheet mechanics of how an operating company can increase
statutory capital by ceding reinsurance to an unauthorized captive. We oﬀer three exam-
ples to illustrate the three main types of reinsurance: coinsurance, coinsurance with funds
withheld, and modiﬁed coinsurance.4 The latter two types diﬀer from coinsurance in that
the ceding company retains control of the assets, so the captive does not need to establish
a trust fund. The examples show that the three types of reinsurance can achieve the same
economic outcomes. We refer the reader to Loring and Higgins (1997) and Tiller and Tiller
(2009, Chapters 4–5) for further details.

                                            A.1.    Coinsurance
       In Figure A.1, the operating company starts with $10 in bonds and no liabilities, so its
equity is $10. For simplicity, the captive is initially a shell company with no assets. In the
ﬁrst step, the operating company sells term life insurance for $100. The operating company
must record a statutory reserve of $110, which is higher than the GAAP reserve of $90
because of Regulation XXX. Consequently, its equity is reduced to $0.
   In the second step, the operating company cedes all liabilities to the captive, paying
a reinsurance premium of $100. Reserve credit on reinsurance ceded to an unauthorized
reinsurer requires collateral through a trust fund established in or an unconditional letter of
credit from a qualiﬁed U.S. ﬁnancial institution (National Association of Insurance Commis-
sioners (2011, Appendix A-785)). Therefore, the captive establishes a trust fund with $90 in
bonds and secures a letter of credit up to $20 to fund the diﬀerence between statutory and
GAAP reserves. For simplicity, our example ignores a small fee that the captive would pay
to secure the letter of credit. On the liability side, the captive records a GAAP reserve of
only $90 because it is not subject to Regulation XXX.5
    As a consequence of captive reinsurance, the operating company’s balance sheet is re-
stored to its original position with $10 in equity. The captive ends up with an additional
$10 in cash that it can use for various purposes, including a commission to the operating
company or a dividend to the parent company.
   4
     The types of life reinsurance in the data are coinsurance, modiﬁed coinsurance, combination coinsurance,
yearly renewable term, and accidental death beneﬁt. The types of annuity reinsurance are coinsurance,
modiﬁed coinsurance, combination coinsurance, and guaranteed minimum death beneﬁt.
   5
     Our example assumes that the operating company’s domicile does not require mirror reserving, and the
captive’s domicile does not count a letter of credit as an admitted asset. If we ﬂip both of these assumptions,
the economics of this example remains the same. The captive records the letter of credit as a $20 asset and
holds a statutory reserve of $110, so its equity remains $10.




                                                      29
                          A.2. Coinsurance with Funds Withheld
   The ﬁrst step in Figure A.2 is the same as in Figure A.1. In the second step, the
operating company cedes all liabilities to the captive, paying a reinsurance premium of $10.
The operating company withholds $90 in the transaction, investing it in bonds. The withheld
assets are recorded as a “funds held” liability for the operating company and as a “funds
deposited” asset for the captive. The captive secures a letter of credit up to $20 to fund the
diﬀerence between statutory and GAAP reserves. On the liability side, the captive records
a GAAP reserve of only $90 because it is not subject to Regulation XXX.

                                A.3. Modiﬁed Coinsurance
   The ﬁrst step in Figure A.3 is the same as in Figure A.1. In the second step, the
operating company cedes all liabilities to the captive, paying a reinsurance premium of $10.
The operating company withholds $90 in the transaction, investing it in bonds. The withheld
assets are recorded as a “modco reserve” liability for the operating company and as a “modco
deposit” asset for the captive. The captive secures a letter of credit up to $20 to fund the
diﬀerence between statutory and GAAP reserves. On the liability side, the captive records
a GAAP reserve of only $90 because it is not subject to Regulation XXX.




                                             30
           Operating company
           (in domicile with tighter capital regulation)

                                               1. Sells insurance for $100              2. Cedes reinsurance.
                                               (with statutory reserve of $110
                                               and GAAP reserve of $90).

                A              L                      A                 L                        A                   L
           Bonds    $10                  =⇒ Bonds           $10                    =⇒ Bonds              $10
                                            Premium        $100 Reserve     $110
                          Equity   $10                          Equity        $0                                Equity   $10

           Captive
           (in domicile with looser capital regulation)




31
                                                                                        2. Assumes reinsurance.
                                                                                        Establishes trust with $90 in bonds.
                                                                                        Secures letter of credit up to $20.

                A              L                                                                 A                   L
                                                                                   =⇒ Trust: Bonds       $90 Reserve     $90
                                                                                      Letter of credit
                                                                                      Cash               $10
                          Equity    $0                                                                          Equity   $10


     Figure A.1. An example of captive reinsurance: Coinsurance. This example illustrates how coinsurance aﬀects the balance
     sheets of an operating company and an unauthorized captive, both of which are part of the same insurance group. The operating
     company must hold a statutory reserve of $110, while the captive can hold a GAAP reserve of $90.
      Operating company
      (in domicile with tighter capital regulation)

                                          1. Sells insurance for $100              2. Cedes reinsurance, paying $10 premium.
                                          (with statutory reserve of $110          Invests $90 in bonds.
                                          and GAAP reserve of $90).

           A              L                      A                 L                          A                          L
      Bonds    $10                  =⇒    Bonds        $10                    =⇒ Bonds                $100 Funds withheld      $90
                                          Premium     $100 Reserve     $110
                     Equity   $10                          Equity        $0                                  Equity            $10

      Captive
      (in domicile with looser capital regulation)




32
                                                                                   2. Assumes reinsurance.
                                                                                   Secures letter of credit up to $20.

           A              L                                                                   A                          L
                                                                              =⇒ Funds deposited       $90 Reserve             $90
                                                                                 Letter of credit
                                                                                 Cash                  $10
                     Equity    $0                                                                            Equity            $10


     Figure A.2. An example of captive reinsurance: Coinsurance with funds withheld. This example illustrates how coinsurance
     with funds withheld aﬀects the balance sheets of an operating company and an unauthorized captive, both of which are part of
     the same insurance group. The operating company must hold a statutory reserve of $110, while the captive can hold a GAAP
     reserve of $90.
       Operating company
       (in domicile with tighter capital regulation)

                                           1. Sells insurance for $100              2. Cedes reinsurance, paying $10 premium.
                                           (with statutory reserve of $110          Invests $90 in bonds.
                                           and GAAP reserve of $90).

            A              L                      A                 L                         A                           L
       Bonds $10                     =⇒ Bonds           $10                    =⇒   Bonds              $100 Modco reserve     $90
                                        Premium        $100 Reserve     $110
                     Equity    $10                          Equity        $0                                 Equity           $10

       Captive
       (in domicile with looser capital regulation)




33
                                                                                    2. Assumes reinsurance.
                                                                                    Secures letter of credit up to $20.

            A              L                                                                  A                           L
                                                                               =⇒   Modco deposit      $90 Reserve            $90
                                                                                    Letter of credit
                                                                                    Cash               $10
                     Equity     $0                                                                           Equity           $10


     Figure A.3. An example of captive reinsurance: Modiﬁed coinsurance. This example illustrates how modiﬁed coinsurance
     aﬀects the balance sheets of an operating company and an unauthorized captive, both of which are part of the same insurance
     group. The operating company must hold a statutory reserve of $110, while the captive can hold a GAAP reserve of $90.
                 Appendix B.       Data on Company Characteristics
    We construct the following company characteristics based on the NAIC annual ﬁnancial
statements (A.M. Best Company (1999–2013)). The relevant parts for our construction are
Liabilities, Surplus and Other Funds; Exhibit 5 (Aggregate Reserve for Life Contracts);
Exhibit of Life Insurance; and Schedule S Part 6 (Restatement of Balance Sheet to Identify
Net Credit for Ceded Reinsurance).

   • Log liabilities: The logarithm of as reported total liabilities.

   • Leverage: The ratio of as reported total liabilities to as reported total assets.

   A.M. Best Company (2011) constructs the following company characteristics as part of
the rating process.

   • A.M. Best rating: We convert the A.M. Best ﬁnancial strength rating (coded from
     A++ to D) to a cardinal measure (coded from 175 to 0%) based on risk-based capital
     guidelines (A.M. Best Company (2011, p. 24)).

   • Risk-based capital: A.M. Best capital adequacy ratio, which is the ratio of adjusted
     capital and surplus to required capital.

   • Current liquidity: A measure of balance sheet liquidity, deﬁned as the ratio of current
      assets (i.e., unencumbered cash and unaﬃliated investments) to total liabilities.

   • Return on equity: A measure of proﬁtability, deﬁned as the ratio of net operating gain
     after taxes to the average capital and surplus over the current and prior year.

   • A.M. Best ﬁnancial size category: A measure of company size (coded from 1 to 15)
     based on the adjusted policyholders’ surplus for the insurance group.

                                   Appendix C.       Proofs
    Proof of Proposition 1: We ﬁrst rewrite total proﬁt and statutory capital in period
                                                     t−1 , Kt−1 , and K
t as functions of the state variables: Yt−1 , Lt−1 , L                  t−1 . Using equations (2)
and (5), we rewrite equation (1) recursively as

                                   Yt = δYt−1 + (Pt − V )Qt .

Substituting equations (2) and (3) in equation (4), we have

        Kt = RA,t Kt−1 + (1 + ρ)(RA,t − δ)Lt−1 + δYt−1 + (Pt − (1 + ρ)V )Qt + ρV Bt .

                                               34
Substituting equations (5) and (6) in equation (7), we have

                       t = RA,t K
                      K                                    t−1 − ρV Bt .
                                  t−1 + (1 + ρ)(RA,t − δ)L


   The ﬁrst-order condition for the insurance price is

              ∂Jt ∂Yt      ∂Kt
                 =    + ct
              ∂Pt ∂Pt      ∂Pt
                                           
                                   ∂Qt                            ∂Qt
                   =Qt + (Pt − V )     + ct Qt + (Pt − (1 + ρ)V )            = 0,
                                   ∂Pt                            ∂Pt

which implies equation (10). The ﬁrst-order condition for aﬃliated reinsurance is

                                   ∂Jt     ∂Kt      t
                                                   ∂K
                                       =ct     +
                                                ct
                                   ∂Bt     ∂Bt     ∂Bt
                                        =(ct ρ − 
                                                 ct ρ)V = 0,

which implies equation (11).                                                        Q.E.D.

    Proof of Corollary 1: The partial derivative of marginal cost with respect to aﬃl-
iated reinsurance is
                                                       2
                                   ∂Φt          ρV          ∂ct
                                       =                        .
                                   ∂Bt         1 + ct       ∂Kt

The sign of this partial derivative is determined by

                          ∂ct    ∂ 2 Ct           ∂ 2 Jt+1
                              =−        + Et Mt+1          < 0,
                          ∂Kt    ∂Kt2              ∂Kt2

which follows from the assumption ∂ 2 Ct /∂Kt2 > 0 and ∂ 2 Jt+1 /∂Kt2 < 0 by Stokey et al.
(1989, Theorem 4.8).
   We rewrite excess capital in period t as

                                            t − (ρ − ρ)L
                                 Wt = Kt + K             t .




                                                35
The partial derivative of excess capital with respect to aﬃliated reinsurance is

                          ∂Wt ∂Kt ∂ K    t               t
                                                         ∂L
                             =     +          − (ρ − ρ)
                          ∂Bt ∂Bt      ∂Bt               ∂Bt
                                   
                               ∂Pt                            ∂Qt
                             =       Qt + (Pt − (1 + ρ)V )
                               ∂Bt                            ∂Pt
                                         
                               ∂Pt         1          (1 + ρ)V
                             =     Qt t      −1+               .
                               ∂Bt         t             Pt

The expression inside the parentheses is positive since
                       
                  Pt       1               1 + (1 + ρ)ct
                        1−      <1+ρ⇔                    < 1 + ρ ⇔ ρ > 0.
                  V        t                 1 + ct


      Appendix D.       A Structural Model of the Life Insurance Market
  We develop a structural model to test the prediction that shadow insurance reduces the
marginal cost of issuing policies and increases the equilibrium supply in the retail market.
We estimate the structural model on the life insurance market, rather than the annuity
market, for two reasons. First, as we discussed in Section 4, life insurance accounts for a
larger share of aﬃliated reinsurance than annuities because of Regulation (A)XXX. Second,
variable annuities account for most of the annuity market, and data on their rider fees are
not readily available.

                            D.1. Data on Life Insurance Prices
    Our sample of life insurance premiums is from Compulife Software (2002–2012), which
is a computer-based quotation system for insurance agents. We focus on 10-year guaranteed
level term life insurance for males aged 30 as representative of the life insurance market.
However, we have also examined 20-year policies and older age groups for robustness. We
pull quotes for all states at the end of June in each year from 2002 to 2012, for the regular
health category and a face amount of $1 million. We merge the life insurance premiums
with the company characteristics in Appendix B by company name. Whenever the premium
is not available for an operating company, we assign the average premium for its insurance
group.
   Our measure of price is the premium divided by actuarial value. Let πn be the one-year
survival probability at age n, and let R(m) be the zero-coupon Treasury (gross) yield at
maturity m. We deﬁne the actuarial value of 10-year term life insurance at age n per dollar



                                             36
of death beneﬁt as
                                               −1                                        
                               
                               9      m−1
                                         πn+l             
                                                          10     m−2
                                                                       πn+l (1 − πn+m−1 )
                                      l=0                        l=0
            V (n) =       1+                                                                    .
                               m=1
                                      R(m)m               m=1
                                                                         R(m)m

We use the appropriate mortality table from the American Society of Actuaries: the 2001
Valuation Basic Table before January 2008 and the 2008 Valuation Basic Table after January
2008. These mortality tables are derived from the actual mortality experience of insured
pools, so they account for potential adverse selection. We smooth the transition between
the two vintages of the mortality tables by geometric averaging.

                                     D.2. Empirical Speciﬁcation
   Operating companies optimally price insurance in an oligopolistic market. Demand is
determined by the random coeﬃcients logit model, which can be derived from a discrete
choice problem. Since all companies sell the same type of policy, product diﬀerentiation is
along company characteristics that capture reputation in the retail market. Life insurance
is a type of intermediated savings, so the natural alternative is all saving vehicles that
are intermediated by ﬁnancial institutions other than insurance companies. Therefore, we
specify the “outside good” as total annual saving by U.S. households in savings deposits,
money market funds, and mutual funds (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(2013, Table F.100)).
   Let Pn,t be the price of insurance sold by company n in year t. Let xn,t be a vector
of observable characteristics of company n in year t, which are determinants of demand.
The probability that retail customers with preference parameters (α, β) buy insurance from
company n in year t is

                                          exp{αPn,t + β xn,t + ξn,t}
                      qn,t (α, β) =      N                                ,
                                      1 + m=1 exp{αPm,t + β xm,t + ξm,t }

where N is the total number of operating companies. The structural error ξn,t captures
company characteristics that are unobservable to the econometrician.
   Let St be the demand for the outside good in year t, and let Qn,t be the demand for
insurance sold by company n in year t. Let F (α, β) denote the distribution of preference
parameters, which is multivariate normal with a diagonal covariance matrix. The market
share for company n in year t is
                                                          
                                         Qn,t
(D.1)                   q n,t =          N           =       qn,t (α, β)dF (α, β).
                                  St +     m=1 Qm,t



                                                  37
The demand elasticity for insurance sold by company n in year t is
                                                   
                          ∂ log(q n,t )    Pn,t
                n,t   =−               =−             αqn,t (α, β)(1 − qn,t (α, β))dF (α, β).
                          ∂ log(Pn,t )     q n,t

       Equation (10) is the optimal pricing equation for each company in Nash equilibrium.
Marginal cost varies across operating companies because of diﬀerences in the shadow cost of
capital. Let SIn,t be a dummy that is 1 if company n uses shadow insurance in year t.6 Let
yn,t be a vector of observable characteristics of company n in year t, which are determinants
of marginal cost. We parameterize marginal cost for company n in year t as
                                  
                                       1
(D.2)                     Φn,t   = 1−        Pn,t = exp{φSIn,t + ψ  yn,t + νn,t },
                                      n,t

where the structural error νn,t represents an unobservable cost shock. Shadow insurance
reduces marginal cost according to Proposition 1, so we expect that φ < 0.

                                      D.3. Identifying Assumption
   Because insurance prices are endogenous to demand, we make the following identifying
assumption.

       Assumption 1: The structural error in demand (D.1) satisﬁes

(D.3)                                     E[ξn,t |SIn,t , xn,t ] = 0.

The structural error in marginal cost (D.2) satisﬁes

(D.4)                                     E[νn,t |SIn,t , yn,t ] = 0.

   We estimate demand (D.1) and marginal cost (D.2) jointly under Assumption 1. Equation
(D.3) says that shadow insurance is uncorrelated with demand, conditional on observable
characteristics. A motivation for this identifying assumption is that retail customers only
care about shadow insurance insofar as it reduces prices under the hypothesis that it does
not increase risk. Another motivation is that retail customers do not bother gathering
information about shadow insurance beyond what is already reﬂected in the A.M. Best
   6
    The dummy for shadow insurance is 1 if gross life and annuity reserves ceded to shadow reinsurers is
positive. We have also considered the share of gross life and annuity reserves ceded to shadow reinsurers,
which is a continuous measure between 0 and 1. Because there are relatively few companies that use shadow
insurance (see Table II), there is little cross-sectional variation in the intensive margin that is useful for
identiﬁcation. Therefore, we report the results based on the dummy for shadow insurance to make clear that
our identiﬁcation is coming from the extensive margin of whether the life insurer uses shadow insurance.


                                                       38
rating. This exclusion restriction is plausible because the negative attention from regulators
and rating agencies came after 2012 (e.g., A.M. Best Company (2013b), Lawsky (2013),
Koijen and Yogo (2013), Robinson and Son (2013), and related media coverage).
   The company characteristics in our speciﬁcation of xn,t are the A.M. Best rating and
the conventional determinants of ratings described in Appendix B: log liabilities, risk-based
capital, leverage, current liquidity, return on equity, and a dummy for stock company. Thus,
the marginal eﬀect of the A.M. Best rating can be interpreted as soft information used
in the rating process that is not captured by these other variables. Given the mean and
standard deviation of (α, β), we invert equation (D.1) to recover the structural errors ξn,t ,
approximating the integral through simulation. We then construct the moments for demand
by interacting the structural error with a vector of instruments, which consists of shadow
insurance, company characteristics, and squared characteristics.
   Equation (D.4) says that shadow insurance is uncorrelated with the cost shock, con-
ditional on observable characteristics. The implicit assumption is that yn,t contains all
determinants of marginal cost that are also related to shadow insurance. The company char-
acteristics in our speciﬁcation of yn,t are the same as those in xn,t , plus year dummies. Given
(φ, ψ), we invert equation (D.2) to recover the structural errors νn,t . We then construct the
moments for marginal cost by interacting the structural error with a vector of instruments,
which consists of shadow insurance, company characteristics, and year dummies.
   We stack the moments for demand and marginal cost and estimate the system by two-
step generalized method of moments. The weighting matrix in the ﬁrst step is block diagonal
in demand and marginal cost, where each block is the inverse of the quadratic matrix of the
instruments. The optimal weighting matrix in the second step is robust to heteroscedasticity
and correlation between the structural errors for demand and marginal cost.

                  D.4. Structural Estimates of the Life Insurance Market
   Columns (1) and (2) of Table D.I report the estimated mean and standard deviation
of the random coeﬃcients in demand (D.1). Our preferred speciﬁcation limits the random
coeﬃcients to log liabilities, the A.M. Best rating, and leverage. The mean coeﬃcient on
price is −1.33 with a standard error of 0.50. This implies a demand elasticity of 2.18 for
the average company in 2012. The mean coeﬃcient on log liabilities is 2.71, and the mean
coeﬃcient on the A.M. Best rating is 0.13. That is, demand is positively related to both
company size and the A.M. Best rating. The standard deviation of the random coeﬃcient
on log liabilities is 0.24 and statistically signiﬁcant. Similarly, the standard deviation of the
random coeﬃcient on leverage is 0.33 and statistically signiﬁcant.
   Column (3) of Table D.I reports the estimated coeﬃcients for marginal cost (D.2).


                                               39
Shadow insurance reduces marginal cost by 13% with a standard error of 3%. Other impor-
tant determinants of marginal cost are the A.M. Best rating and leverage. Marginal cost
decreases by 7% per one standard deviation increase in the A.M. Best rating. Similarly,
marginal cost decreases by 4% per one standard deviation increase in leverage.
  We have attempted to estimate a richer model in which price and risk-based capital also
have random coeﬃcients. However, the standard deviations of the random coeﬃcients on
price and risk-based capital converge to zero, and large standard errors reveal that the richer
model is poorly identiﬁed. Similarly, we were not able to identify a richer model in which
the covariance matrix for the random coeﬃcients is not diagonal. The identiﬁcation problem
arises from the fact that the variation in aggregate market shares can only identify a limited
covariance structure for the random coeﬃcients.

                 D.5. Retail Market in the Absence of Shadow Insurance
   The structural estimates in Table D.I allow us to estimate counterfactual insurance prices
and market size in the absence of shadow insurance. We ﬁrst set SIn,t = 0 in equation (D.2)
to estimate the counterfactual marginal cost for each company in the absence of shadow
insurance. We then solve for the new price vector that satisﬁes the equilibrium conditions
for demand (D.1) and supply (D.2). We summarize our ﬁndings in Section 5.




                                              40
                                    Table D.I
                Structural Estimates of the Life Insurance Market


                                                      Demand
                                                       Standard        Marginal
                                                 Mean deviation            cost
                        Variable                   (1)      (2)             (3)
                        Price                    -1.33
                                                (0.50)
                        Shadow insurance                                    -0.13
                                                                           (0.03)
                        Log liabilities           2.71          0.24         0.02
                                                (0.05)        (0.11)       (0.01)
                        A.M. Best rating          0.13          0.12        -0.07
                                                (0.08)        (0.58)       (0.03)
                        Risk-based capital       -0.07                       0.01
                                                (0.07)                     (0.02)
                        Leverage                  0.11          0.33        -0.04
                                                (0.09)        (0.15)       (0.02)
                        Current liquidity         0.09                       0.00
                                                (0.06)                     (0.01)
                        Return on equity         -0.21                       0.04
                                                (0.03)                     (0.02)
                        Stock company             0.07                       0.01
                                                (0.10)                     (0.03)
                        Observations             1,711

The random coeﬃcients logit model of demand (D.1) and marginal cost (D.2) are estimated jointly by
generalized method of moments. The speciﬁcation for marginal cost includes year dummies, whose coeﬃcients
are not reported for brevity. The instruments for demand are shadow insurance, company characteristics, and
squared characteristics. The instruments for marginal cost are shadow insurance, company characteristics,
and year dummies. The coeﬃcients are standardized, and heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. The sample consists of U.S. life insurers from 2002 to 2012, which are matched to
term life insurance prices from Compulife Software.




                                                    41
Appendix E.          Potential Impact of Shadow Insurance on Risk and Expected
                                               Loss
      We ﬁrst show that ratings are unrelated to shadow insurance. This ﬁnding is consistent
with the hypothesis that ratings correctly reﬂect the absence of risk in shadow insurance.
However, this ﬁnding is also consistent with an alternative hypothesis that ratings do not
adequately reﬂect the presence of risk, which is a potential concern given the evidence in
Section 6. Therefore, we quantify the potential risk of shadow insurance under the alternative
hypothesis based on publicly available data and plausible assumptions.

                      E.1. Relation between Ratings and Shadow Insurance
      According to A.M. Best Company (2013b), ratings and risk-based capital fully reﬂect
the risk of shadow insurance. In Table E.I, we empirically investigate the relation between
ratings and shadow insurance, which reveals the perceived magnitude of risk. Appendix B
describes how we convert the A.M. Best rating to a cardinal measure and also describes the
conventional determinants of ratings that we use as regressors. We standardize ratings and
all regressors that are not dummy variables, so that the coeﬃcients have a straightforward
interpretation.
    In column (1) of Table E.I, we estimate the relation between ratings and a dummy for
shadow insurance by ordinary least squares.7 Our simplest speciﬁcation controls for only
year and A.M. Best ﬁnancial size category, whose coeﬃcients are not reported for brevity. A
coeﬃcient of 0.03 on shadow insurance has the wrong sign if we expect shadow insurance to
increase risk. However, the coeﬃcient is economically small and statistically insigniﬁcant, as
ratings are only 0.03 standard deviations higher for life insurers that use shadow insurance.
In column (2), we show that the coeﬃcient on shadow insurance is robust to controlling for
the conventional determinants of ratings. In Koijen and Yogo (2013), we also showed that
the results are robust to controlling for nonlinearities through squared characteristics.
   Because we do not know the proprietary model used by A.M. Best Company, omitted
variables could explain the absence of a negative relation between ratings and shadow in-
surance. For example, A.M. Best Company could have soft information that is positively
related to both ratings and the use of shadow insurance. We could address this concern
through instrumental variables, but the challenge is that many known characteristics that
correlate with shadow insurance (see Section 3) are also direct determinants of ratings.
  Our instrument is the market share for term life insurance in 1999, interacted with a
dummy for stock company in 1999. For each company, we calculate its market share as
the face amount of term life insurance in force divided by the sum across all companies.
  7
      See footnote 6 for why we use a dummy instead of a continuous measure for shadow insurance.

                                                    42
The motivation for the instrument is that Regulation XXX had a stronger impact on life
insurers with more presence in the term life insurance market. The interaction accounts for
the fact that among those companies aﬀected by Regulation XXX, the stock companies have
a stronger incentive to take advantage of the captives laws after 2002 (Mayers and Smith
(1981)). The market share in 1999 is plausibly exogenous to ratings after 2002, conditional
on the conventional determinants of ratings, because Regulation XXX applies only to new
policies issued after 2000 and does not apply retroactively to existing liabilities.
   We cannot test whether the instrument is exogenous to ratings. However, we can verify
that the instrument is not an obvious direct determinant of ratings in 1999, prior to changes in
regulation that preceded shadow insurance. In Table E.II, we estimate the relation between
ratings and company characteristics in 1999 by ordinary least squares. The coeﬃcient on
the instrument is economically small and statistically insigniﬁcant. Ratings increase by
only 0.02 standard deviations per one standard deviation increase in the instrument. If the
instrument were a direct determinant of ratings, we would have expected the coeﬃcient to
be economically large and statistically signiﬁcant.
    In column (3) of Table E.I, we estimate the relation between ratings and shadow insurance
by instrumental variables.8 The coeﬃcient on shadow insurance again has the wrong sign, as
ratings are 0.25 standard deviations higher for life insurers that use shadow insurance. How-
ever, the coeﬃcient is statistically insigniﬁcant with a standard error of 0.34. Interestingly,
the coeﬃcients on the conventional determinants have the expected signs with higher ratings
awarded to life insurers that are larger and have higher risk-based capital, more liquid assets,
and higher proﬁtability. Overall, the evidence in Table E.I does not suggest an economically
meaningful negative relation between ratings and shadow insurance.
   In addition to ratings, A.M. Best Company (2013b) claims to adjust risk-based capital for
shadow insurance. In column (4) of Table E.I, we investigate the relation between risk-based
capital and shadow insurance by ordinary least squares. Risk-based capital is negatively
related to shadow insurance, but the coeﬃcient is economically small and statistically in-
signiﬁcant. Risk-based capital is only 0.02 standard deviations lower for life insurers that
use shadow insurance.

                      E.2. Potential Impact of Shadow Insurance on Risk
       The evidence in Table E.I is consistent with the hypothesis that ratings and risk-based
capital correctly reﬂect the absence of risk in shadow insurance. However, this evidence is
also consistent with an alternative hypothesis that ratings and risk-based capital do not ad-
equately reﬂect the presence of risk. We now quantify the potential risk of shadow insurance
   8
    In a ﬁrst-stage regression that is not reported, the instrument is a highly relevant predictor of shadow
insurance with an F -statistic of 21 (Stock and Yogo (2005)).

                                                    43
under the alternative hypothesis based on publicly available data and plausible assump-
tions. The fact that accurate risk assessments are diﬃcult highlights the importance of more
transparency.
   We start with accounting identities and a simple rating framework for an operating
company that cedes reinsurance to a shadow reinsurer. Let A and L be the operating
company’s assets and liabilities, so its equity is E = A − L. We deﬁne leverage as L/A
and risk-based capital as RBC = E/(κL), where the risk charge κ > 0 summarizes the risk
                                       and L
proﬁle of assets and liabilities. Let A      be the shadow reinsurer’s assets and liabilities,
                 =A
so its equity is E     − L.
                            Liabilities L
                                          are observable based on reinsurance ceded by the
operating company to the shadow reinsurer. However, we do not observe E        (equivalently
  or the risk proﬁle of A
A)                         or L.
                                 Therefore, we make the following assumption based on the
evidence in Section 6.

                                                              = 0). The risk proﬁle of
   Assumption 2: Shadow reinsurers do not have equity (i.e., E
reinsurance ceded is identical to assets and liabilities that remain on the balance sheet, so the
                is κ.
risk charge on L

   We now ask how the operating company’s balance sheet would change if shadow insurance
were moved back on balance sheet. Assumption 2 yields simple adjustments to risk-based
capital and leverage based on publicly available data.

   Proposition 2: Under Assumption 2, the adjusted risk-based capital is

                                    E+E    RBC × L
(E.1)                                   =         .
                                       
                                   κ L+L     L+L


The adjusted leverage is

                                         
                                       L+L     
                                             L+L
(E.2)                                      =     .
                                          A+L
                                       A+A     

   Our adjustment reduces risk-based capital from 208% to 155%, or by 53 percentage
points, for the average company using shadow insurance in 2012. According to equation
(E.1), risk-based capital falls because equity does not change, but the capital required to
support the additional liabilities (i.e., the denominator of the ratio) rises. The diﬀerence
between reported and adjusted risk-based capital has increased from 10 percentage points in
2002 to 53 percentage points in 2012, as shadow insurance L has grown relative to liabilities
L that remain on balance sheet.


                                               44
   We ultimately do not know how ratings would be adjusted for shadow insurance because
they are based on a proprietary model and soft information that are not publicly available.
However, we could get a sense of the potential magnitude by assuming that ratings are
a direct function of risk-based capital. Under this assumption, we ﬁrst convert the A.M.
Best rating to the equivalent risk-based capital based on the guideline table in A.M. Best
Company (2011, p. 24). For example, a rating of A is equivalent to risk-based capital of
145%. We then apply equation (E.1) to obtain the adjusted risk-based capital, which implies
an adjusted rating by the same guideline table. We ﬁnd that the rating drops by 3 notches
from A to B+ for the average company using shadow insurance in 2012.
   In Appendix F, we estimate the term structure of default probabilities by A.M. Best
rating. These estimates imply default probabilities for each company, corresponding to the
reported rating versus the adjusted rating. The adjusted ratings imply a 10-year cumulative
default probability of 3.0% for the average company using shadow insurance in 2012, which
is 3.5 times higher than that implied by the reported ratings.

               E.3. Potential Impact of Shadow Insurance on Expected Loss
   We can use the A.M. Best rating to estimate expected loss because it reﬂects a life
insurer’s claims-paying ability without support from the state guaranty associations. Let
Pr(m|Rating) be the marginal default probability between years m − 1 and m, conditional
on the rating. Let θ be the loss ratio conditional on default, which we estimate to be
0.25 (see Appendix F). Let R(m) be the zero-coupon Treasury (gross) yield at maturity m
(Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007)). For each company, we estimate the present value of
expected loss as

                                    15
                                        Pr(m|Rating)θL
                                                       .
                                    m=1
                                            R(m)m

To estimate the expected loss adjusted for shadow insurance, we modify this formula by
                                                           
using the adjusted rating instead and replacing L with L + L.
    The expected loss based on reported ratings and liabilities is $4.9 billion for the industry
in 2012. The expected loss increases to $14.4 billion when ratings and liabilities are adjusted
for shadow insurance. The diﬀerence between adjusted and reported expected loss grew
from $0.1 billion in 2002 to $9.5 billion in 2012. Since state guaranty associations ultimately
pay oﬀ all liabilities by assessing the surviving companies, this expected loss represents an
externality to the life insurers not using shadow insurance. State taxpayers also bear a share
of the cost because guaranty association assessments are tax deductible.
   To put these estimates of expected loss into perspective, we estimate the total capacity

                                              45
of state guaranty funds. All states cap annual guaranty association assessments, typically at
2% of recent life insurance and annuity premiums. Following Gallanis (2009), we estimate
the total capacity of state guaranty funds as the maximum annual assessment aggregated
across all states, projected to remain constant over the next 10 years. As a share of the total
capacity of state guaranty funds, the expected loss for the industry grew from 7% in 2002
to 26% in 2012.




                                              46
                                    Table E.I
                  Relation between Ratings and Shadow Insurance


                                               A.M. Best rating           Risk-based
                                                  OLS               IV        capital
                    Variable                    (1)        (2)     (3)            (4)
                    Shadow insurance          0.03   0.00          0.25         -0.02
                                            (0.06) (0.06)        (0.34)        (0.05)
                    Log liabilities                  0.17          0.13          0.15
                                                   (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.05)
                    Risk-based capital               0.13          0.15
                                                   (0.02)        (0.02)
                    Leverage                        -0.01          0.01         -0.46
                                                   (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.06)
                    Current liquidity                0.08          0.06          0.18
                                                   (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.04)
                    Return on equity                 0.03          0.03          0.01
                                                   (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)
                    Stock company                    0.05          0.02          0.12
                                                   (0.06)        (0.07)        (0.06)
                    R2                        0.60   0.62          0.63          0.33
                    Observations             6,641 6,641          6,351         6,641

Columns (1) and (2) estimate the relation between A.M. Best ratings and company characteristics by ordinary
least squares (OLS). Column (3) estimates the same relation by instrumental variables (IV), where the
instrument for shadow insurance is the market share for term life insurance in 1999, interacted with a
dummy for stock company in 1999 (see Appendix B). Column (4) estimates the relation between risk-based
capital and company characteristics by OLS. All speciﬁcations include dummies for year and A.M. Best
ﬁnancial size category, whose coeﬃcients are not reported for brevity. The coeﬃcients are standardized, and
the standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroscedasticity and correlation within insurance group.
The sample consists of U.S. life insurers from 2002 to 2012.




                                                      47
                                 Table E.II
        Relation between Ratings and Company Characteristics in 1999


                                   Variable                Coeﬃcient
                                   Instrument for SI               0.02
                                                                 (0.02)
                                   Log liabilities                 0.20
                                                                 (0.06)
                                   Risk-based capital              0.09
                                                                 (0.03)
                                   Leverage                        0.00
                                                                 (0.05)
                                   Current liquidity               0.06
                                                                 (0.03)
                                   Return on equity               -0.04
                                                                 (0.03)
                                   Stock company                   0.18
                                                                 (0.06)
                                   R2                              0.68
                                   Observations                     826

The relation between A.M. Best ratings and company characteristics is estimated by ordinary least squares.
The speciﬁcation includes dummies for A.M. Best ﬁnancial size, whose coeﬃcients are not reported for
brevity. The coeﬃcients are standardized, and the standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroscedas-
ticity and correlation within insurance group. The sample consists of U.S. life insurers in 1999.




                                                     48
       Appendix F.      Default Probabilities and Loss Conditional on Default
   We describe the term structure of default probabilities and the loss ratio conditional on
default, which we use to estimate expected loss in Appendix E.

                           F.1. Term Structure of Default Probabilities
   We use the term structure of impairment rates from A.M. Best Company (2013a). A.M.
Best Company designates an insurer as ﬁnancially impaired upon the ﬁrst regulatory action
that restricts its activity (i.e., liquidation, supervision, rehabilitation, receivership, conser-
vatorship, a cease-and-desist order, suspension, license revocation, or administrative order).
They estimate the impairment rates by pooled method of moments, using the universe of
A.M. Best rated companies from 1977 to 2012. Their sample covers 5,097 companies that
account for 98% of the U.S. insurance industry by premium volume. A.M. Best Company
(2013a, Exhibit 2) reports the cumulative impairment rates from one to ﬁfteen years by
rating category. We calculate the marginal impairment rate between years m − 1 and m as
the ﬁrst diﬀerence of the cumulative impairment rates, which we denote as ω(m|Rating).
   A.M. Best Company’s impairment rates have three drawbacks for our application. First,
their sample includes property and casualty insurers, and they do not have separate estimates
just for life insurers. Second, their estimates are subject to survivorship bias because insurers
are dropped from the sample when their ratings are withdrawn.9 Third, we do not know
the precision of their estimates because standard errors are not reported. Unfortunately, we
could not obtain the data necessary to replicate their study. Although we have a complete
list of impairments (A.M. Best Company (2013c, pp. 20–34)), we do not have the universe
of A.M. Best rated companies from 1977 to 2012.
   An impaired insurer could subsequently default on policyholder claims. A default occurs
when a state regulator liquidates an insolvent insurer, and guaranty associations provide
coverage to the policyholders in their state. To estimate the probability of default conditional
on impairment, we merge the list of life insurer insolvencies from 1991 to 2012 (Peterson
(2013)) with the list of life insurer impairments (A.M. Best Company (2013c, pp. 20–34)).
Since there are 325 impairments of which 71 led to insolvency, we estimate the probability
of default conditional on impairment to be 0.22.
       We estimate the marginal default probability as the marginal impairment rate times the
   9
    Ratings can be withdrawn for various reasons including voluntary liquidations, mergers and acquisitions,
company request, lack of proper ﬁnancial information for evaluation, and substantial changes that make the
rating process inapplicable.




                                                    49
probability of default conditional on impairment:

                            Pr(m|Rating) = ω(m|Rating) × 0.22.

We use an analogous formula for the cumulative default probability. Our estimates are
consistent but potentially biased because of sampling correlation between the impairment
rate and the probability of default conditional on impairment. We cannot quantify the
magnitude of the bias because we do not know the precision of the impairment rates.

                          F.2. Loss Ratio Conditional on Default
   For each life insurer insolvency from 1991 to 2012, we have the associated costs and
total liabilities from Peterson (2013). The associated costs are the sum of funds necessary
for reinsurance assumed, claims paid by the guaranty associations, and expenses incurred
by the guaranty associations, less assets recovered. We estimate the loss ratio as the sum
of associated costs divided by the sum of total liabilities aggregated across all insolvencies,
which is 0.25.




                                              50
