NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTRAFAMILY
ALLOCATION OF GOODS HOW TO SEPARATE THE
MEN FROM THE BOYS?

Reuben Gronau

Working Paper No. 1956

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1986

The research reported here -is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #1956
June 1986

The Intrafamily Allocation of Goods - How to Separate the Men from the Boys?

ABSTRACT

The paper integrates the basic

principles of consumption theory and the

economics of human resources to generate a powerful method for estimating the

distribution of consumption between parents ap.d

children.

assumption of separability between parents' and children's

Invoking the

consumption and the

corresponding assumption of two—stage budgeting, It is shown that one can

estimate the parents' share in total

consumption by analyzing the effect of

demographic changes on the consumption of adult goods (i.e.,, goods consumed

exclusively by parents).
Using the U.S. 1972/73 Consumption Expenditure Survey it is found that

white married families tend to allocate about three—quarters of their
consumption to parents and one quarter to children. The children's share of
consumption in black families does not fall short of those in white families,

and the share in white families where the father is absent is even higher. The
share increases with the number of children, uut the absolute level of

consumption per child declines. These findings are quite robust to changes in
functional form and data—base.

Reuben Gronau
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mt. Scopus, 91905

Jerusalem ISRAEL

The Intrafamily Allocation of Goods - How to Separate
the Men from the Boys?

I. Introduction

The intrafamily allocation of resources has long intrigued economists of diverse

interests: human—resources economists interested in investment in children,
economic demographers interested in the cost of children, theorists interested
in intergenerational transfers, econometricians measuring the effect of
demographic variables on consumption, and those (macro, development, public
finance and consumption economists) interested in-adult equivalence scales.
Common to them all is the recognition of the important ramifications of the
distribution of resources between parents and children, husband and wife, to
fertility patterns, marital stability, capital accumulation, growth rates,
income distribution and even to the efficacy of macro—economic policy.
If so little is still known about this aspect of household behavior it is

not for lack of trying. Direct and indirect estimates of intrafamily allocation
date back to Engel's estimates of adult equivalence scales (1895). The major
obstacle to empirical research in this field is the lack of direct evidence.
Very few expenditure items are assigned to specific household members, and
consumption is generally reported on a household level with no way of assigning
portions of it to individual household members without additional assumptions.
Disagreement on the nature of these assumptions has prevented empiricists from
reaching a consensus.

Past studies adopted one of two approaches: economic demographers trying
to measure the cost of children were guided by the theory of fertility, while
those interested in adult equivalence scales used the theory of consumption as

—2--

their

point of departure. Cross—fertilization is still quite rare. This paper

enlists the principles of both consumption theory and the economics of human
resources to establish a common ground for the imputation of the intrafamily
allocation of resources.

The present analysis reveals that in the absence of direct infomation the
imputation of the distribution of goods between parents and children requires
the assumption that parents' preferences for their own consumption are
unaffected by the existence of children and by the composition of children's

consumption. The assumption of separability between parents' and children's
consumption (and the corresponding assumption of two—stage budgeting) serves as
a base for estimation, where the observed effect of demographic variables on
goods consumed exclusively by parents (adult goods) is used as an indicator of
their effect on parent's overall consumption.

A preliminary discussion of the nature of the problems faced by the

empirical researcher lays the groundwork for the formal model. Separability
between parents' and children's consumption and the distinction between
preferences and home technology are the cornerstones for the estimation

procedure. Preliminary estimates based on the U.S. 1972 Consumption Expenditure
Survey and allowing for a linear distribution rule indicate that white married
families tend to allocate about three—quarters of their consumption to parents

and one—quarter to children. Further investigation reveals that the finding is
quite robust to changes in population, in functional form, and in data—base.

II. Preliminary Discussion — Master and Slaves

The imputation of the intrafamily allocation of resources implicit in the

—3—

estimation of both adult equivalence scales and the cost of children is beset
with controversy.1

The controversy focuses on two central questions: how to

estimate the distribution within the household and what is actually estimated.

An increase in family size is associated with an increase in household

consumption. The incremental consumption, however, understates the resources
diverted to children as it does not account for cuts in parents' own

consumption. One source of controversy is what feature of consumption (e.g.,
the consumption of which good) can serve as an indicator of these cuts. A
second cause of confusion is the tendency to overemphasize consumption
technology.

Economists are reluctant to distinguish between

and

One

of the few exceptions is the case of adult equivalence scales, which are often

defined as "needs—corrected" deflators of income. These scales purport to
reflect changes in the family's needs as it expands or as its memeber grow

older, as well as returns to scale in consumption. In a different context (the
economics of fertility) a distinction is made between the number of children and

their "quality". The decision whether to have more children or invest more in
every child depends on the fixed costs of children and on the cost of increasing

the child's "quality" (Becker and Lewis, 1973). Given that parents' decisions
are affected by home production technology (i.e. children's needs, fixed costs,
and economies of scales) as well as by preferences, the question arises whether
one can identify and estimate the parameters of home technology.

To clear up the confusion it

is

convenient to move away from the family

context. Borrowing a page from cleometrics, let us assume two kinds of farms:

an owner—run farm and a farm using slave—labor. Comparing the consumption levels
of these two kinds of farms, and noting that consumption levels are about the
same, it

would be hard to conclude that slaves'

are

substantially lower

—4—

than those of the master, or that the consumption function demonstrates sharply

increasing returns to scale. Rather, most observers will interpret the findings
in terms of the "master" caring for his slave. To study the slaves' "needs" and
returns to scale we require separate ledgers for the farmhouse and the mansion.

Given separate information on the slaves' consumption we may be able to deduce
the returns to scale from information on changes in consumption levels as the

number of slaves changes. To study differences in

we have to

compare the consumption levels of slaves of different ages and sexes. There is
no way these findings can be used to compare "slave needs" with those of

"masters." In either case the researchers will be careful to isolate from
the slave's expenses those components which are fixed (e.g., the price paid for
the slave).

Measuring home production technology becomes more complicated when the

plantation does not maintain separate accounts for "slaves" and "masters." A
prerequisite for estimation is the assumption that the master's "tastes" are not

changed by the existence and number of slaves. He may change his consumption
patterns because changes in the number of slaves are associated with a change in
income or relative prices (e.g., the price of home services), but this does not

affect his consumption function. Put differently, one has to assume that the
utility the master derives from his own consumption and from that of his slaves

are separable. The assumption of "separability" is crucial for any imputation
of the distribution of resources on the farm.
To isolate the consumption of farm owners from the consumption of the rest

of the work force, there must be some goods which are consumed exclusively by
the owner. The comparison of consumption patterns of these goods in farms of
different sizes is indicative of the change in prices and budgets facing the

mansion's housekeeper. This comparison should (under certain conditions) allow

—5—

us to decipher the allocation problem: how much of the total farm budget is
consumed by the owners and how much by the slaves.
Returning to the estimation of intrafamily allocation, the most disturbing

part of the analogy is the assumption of separability. Most household

consumption decisions rest with the parents. Their decision how to allocate the
budget between their own consumption and that of their children depends on how

the two kinds of consumption enhance the parents' welfare. Whereas it is easy
for the researcher to accept the assumption of separability when it comes to
masters and slaves, it is somewhat less acceptable in the case of parents and

children. Quoting Samuelson (1956, p. 9), "Where the family is concerned the
phenomenon of altruism inevitalbe raises its head: if we can speak at all of the
indifference curves of any one member, we must admit that his tastes and

marginal rates of substitution are contaminated by the goods that other members

consume. These Veblen—Duesenberry external consumption effects are the essence
of family life".

The natural excuse for adopting the assumption of separability in the
family context is provided by Samuelson himself —

it

is a prerequisite for

defining a family demand structure endowed with all "the nice properties of

modern consumption theory." This becomes especially important when one compares
the consumption pattern of childless families with those of families with
children, where it is assumed that both have the same "tastes".
Nonetheless, it is worth investigating the assumption of separability to

learn how unacceptable it really is. Separability does not rule out altruism.
It does not even rule out parents' care for what their children consume. What
it does rule out is parents' preferences for their own consumption being

affected by their children's consumption composition. Thus, it rules out the

case where parents enjoyment from TV, music or travel is affected by the

—6—

attendance of their children. It also rules out the case that parents change
their consumption habits to set a personal example for their children.
The link between the composition of parents' and children's consumption may

not be a direct one. Family goods (i.e., family "public good") may serve as a
link between parents' and children's private goods. Thus even if the utilities
parents derive from their own and from their children's consumption are

separable, parents' and children's consumption of private goods are not, if they
are affected by the composition of family goods.

An alternative indirect link is indivisibilities and returns to scale in

home production. Parents may adapt their consumption habits to those of their
children not because of interacting preferences but because of "economies of

scale due to sharing" in home production. Thus, a family that is observed
ordering five different menues at a restaurant will share the same meal at home.
Mothers and their teenage daughters are often observed to share the same
wardrobe.

Children may affect the shadow prices facing their parents in other ways.

They are known to raise their mothers' shadow price of time, and thus raise the

price of time—intensive activities. Somethimes they even increase the pecuniary
costs of some activities (e.g., the cost of out—of—home entertainment is
increased when one has to pay for babysitting).2
Granting the existence of interaction between parents' and children's
consumption it is not clear how important this interaction is empirically (one
test of the assumption of separability is provided in section VI).

It seems,

however, that ignoring this interaction and its sources is standard procedure in

consumption and demand analysis. The assumption of separability of private and
public goods is implicit in most studies of the demand for private goods.

—7—

Indivisibilities

and excess capacity in housing or home appliances have not

impared the study of demand for these durable goods. Increasing returns to
scale can often be construed as declining incremental fixed costs of children

and incorporated in the analysis. The shadow price of time and its effect on
the allocation of goods is usually ignored in consumption studies. By assuming
separability this study does not set a precedent and is in line with standard
procedure.

Bearing these resevations in mind, we stick with the analogy of the farm

and the family. The separation of parents' consumption from that of their
children is a necessary condition for the study of consumption technology
(returns to scale and children's "needs"), and there is no way of comparing
children's needs with those of parents (i.e., adults) unless we assume that
parents love their children as much as they love themselves (i.e., that
children's consumption yields the same utility as their own consumption).
Finally, the key to the distribution problem lies in the comparison of
consumption patterns of "adult goods" between families with and without
children.

III. The Model — Separating the Men from the Boys
The framework of the analysis is a one—period model. The parents' utility
function has two components —

the

utility derived from their own consumption

(UA) and the utility derived from their children's consumption (Us). The
utility function is (weakly) separable in the two components

(1)

U = U(UA, UB)

—8--

In turn,

depends on the quantity of goods consumed by parents, qA,

A A

A

U

(2)

A

U (q1, ...,

q)

A
where q denotes adult goods — goods consumed exclusively by parents.3 The

utility generated by the children's consumption depends on the specific basket
B

consumed (q1) and on what parents regard as children needs (p1)
=

(3)

where

UB[(q/p1),.

-

K denotes the number of children. The coefficients

p1 < 1

if parents

regard children's needs to be lower than their own (e.g., if children's

nutritional requirements are lower than those of adults, the same amount of food

will produce higher nutritional values for children than for adults).
The utility function (1) is maximized subject to the budget constraint

n
(4)
i=1

A

where q. = q. +

P1l

= X —

C(K)

B

X denotes income, and children involve fixed costs of C

q1,

These costs may be associated with the birth of the child, or, more often, with
some minimum subsistence expenditures which assure the children's survival.5

The difference between "needs" (p1) and minimum requirements, often blurred in

the existing literature, is an important feature of the model. The budget
constraint implicitly assumes a fixed supply of labor and constant returns to
scale in consumption.6

The conditions for an optimum look familiar

(5)

A
u1 =

B
=
Ui

Xpipi

—9—

where u

=

aU/aq1 and . denotes

the marginal utility of income. The

optimum conditions underline two important points:

a. In this formulation, differences in children's "needs" (p1) play a role
similar to variability in prices.

b. The optimum allocation is affected by children's "needs," but no less impor-.
tant is the weight placed by parents on their own consumption relative to that

of their children (uA and uB, respectively).
Whereas the first point may remind one of Gorman's and Barten's analysis,
suggesting that one can derive the values of

p1

and

compare them with adult

"needs,"7 the second point comes to forewarn that there is no way to infer
relative "needs" by comparing parents' and children's consumption (i.e.,

comparing across equations) unless one is ready to assume that the weights given

to them in the parents' welfare function are the same (u =

uB).

To derive the comparative statics properties of the model one has to invoke
the separability assumption and the corresponding assumption of two—stage

budgeting (Deaton & Muellbauer, 1980, Ch. 5).° By that assumption the
allocation decision is made in two stages: in the first stage the parents decide
how to allocate total consumption between their own (X') and their children's

where

(6)

+

= x - C(K)

In the second stage they decide how to allocate each budget X between
different goods, where

ni
(7)

pq1 =

i1

The Study of intrafamily allocation focuses primarily on the first stage, trying
to estimate the distribution rule

—10—

=

(8)

h(X,p,p,C;K)

Parents' consumption

is expected to increase with total family

consumption, and, consequently, to decline when the cost of children increases.
The effect of a change in one of the prices

p1 depends on the share of the good

in parents' and children's consumption, and on the price elasticity of xA. For
example, an increase in food prices may increase the relative price of
children's consumption if food constitutes a greater share in the consumption of

children than in that of parents'. This price increase raises children's
consumption if it is price inelastic. An increase in children's needs
(p1) plays a role similar to a price increase, and will result in an increase of
children's consumption at the expense of parents' only if the price elasticity
of

is less than unity. Returns to scale in consumption involve an income

effect, but may also involve a price effect if the scale economies have a
different effect on different consumption acitivities and if the compositions of
XA

and X B differ.

IV. Estimation

The family's demand for any specific good depends on the separate demand
of parents and children for that good, and on the distribution of resources

within the family. Two—stage budgeting implies

(9)

A
A A
q1 = g1(X ,p)

and

B
B B
q. = g1(X ,pp).

Hence,

(10)

=

A
q1

B

+ q1

=

A

g1fh(

), pJ

+

B

g.[x

—

h(

),

ppl,

—11--

where h( ) is the distribution rule. In general, therefore, there is no way of
separating the specific elements of demand g3( )

from the distribution rule.

Separability allows the estimation of the parents' demand g( ) from a sample
of childless families (i.e., where

=

B
equation (10) requires that g.( ) =

0.

X).

The identification of h( ) from

In this case, the case of the adult

goods, the demand of families with children can be rewritten

(11)

q =

g[h(

), 1

and one can identify h( ) as long as g is a rnonotonic function of XA.9

For example, let g and h be linear
(12)

and

(13)

XA 0 +

+ 2(X — C) +

3p

where S is a set of environmental variables (e.g., age, race, schooling), and
where prices (p) are omitted in cross section estimates.1° The demand for adult
goods by families with children therefore equals

(14)

q —

[c +

—

B2J

+ (cx1 + c21)S +

+ cc2B3p

The parameters a. can be estimated from a sample of families without
children. Comparing these estimates with the estimates derived from a sample
of families with children [i.e., comparing equations (12) and (14)], one can
generate the estimates of

—

the

parameters of the distribution rule

[equation <13)). Specifically, comparing the marginal propensities to consume

adult goods (a2 and a22) generates the estimate of the marginal propensity

—12—

of adult consumption 2• Given
the environmental variables () on

and a2 one can estimate the effect of
xA. There is, however, no way of

separating the fixed costs (C) from the fixed component in the distribution

equation ().

To estimate the fixed costs one has to make additional assump-

tions about the fixed component (e.g., that

=

0, or that it does not change

with the number of children).

Children's needs (p) are supposed to change with their age. The change in
needs affects parents' consumption if its price elasticity differs from unity.

Unfortunately, one cannot tell from observing the effect of children's age on
the demand for adult goods by how much children's needs change with their age,
without independent information on the price elasticity of

cannot separate

(i.e., one

from p).

Similar methods can be used to identify the parameters

A

if g and h

A
are of a higher polynomial order, as long as g is confined to the range where

> 0. It is worth noting, however, that if the distribution rule h is
linear, the demand for adult goods in families with and without children will be
of the same polynomial order.

V. Preliminary Results: Three to One

Our data consist of a subsample of the U.S. 1972/73 Consumer Expenditure

Survey.'1 The household's decision process may change with the number of adults
in the household.12 To isolate this factor I focused on families with husband
and wife present. The sample consists of white families with less than four
children. Since the key identifying variable is defined as clothing of adults
age sixteen or older, I excluded from the sample families with children older

—13—

than fifteen. The sample contains 7,793 observations, and the sample means are
presented in Table 1.

The identifying variables in this scheme are the group of adult goods.

Traditionally, this group consists of three goods: adult clothing, tobacco, and
alcoholic beverages. The analysis of the demand of the last two goods has
always been regarded as problematic (because of response errors and a low MPC)

(Alkinson, Gomulka, Stern, 1984a,b). We therefore used two versions of

q:

adult clothing, and adult goods, where the latter measurese expenditures on

all three goods combined.3

The list of environmental variables contains the

husband's education, his age (and the square of this term), his employment
status and that of his wife (or alternatively, the number of weeks they worked),
region of residence (North—Central, South, and West), and whether the family
lives in a rural area.

Running the regression for adult clothing separately in each of the samples
defined by the number of children (Table Al in the appendix) confirms our

expectations —

there

is a substantial decline in the marginal propensity to

consume adult clothing as the number of children increases.
Since most of the environmental variables proved to be statistically

insignificant they were omitted from the following regressions. The only
variables kept are the husband's schooling (which is shown to have a positive
effect) and the number of weeks the wife worked (employed women spend more on

clothing), Of special interest among the omitted variables is the age
composition of children (i.e., the number of children in the age group 2—15),
which proves insignificant, regardless of the number of children.
The regressions with the reduced set of variables were reestimated in the
combined sample, with a dummy variable (K). denoting the existence of children,

—14—

to

allow for differences in slopes and intercepts between the samples. The

estimating equation is

(15)

q =

a0 + a1S + a2X + a3K + a4KS + a5KX

where S denotes the control variables. Comparing (15) with (12)

a0 = est(a0),

a1 =

est(x1),

est(cc21),

a5 =

est(a2(2

a4 =

est(2)
(16)

=

est(1) =
est(2C —

1

a2 =
—

1))

est(2),

a3 =

est[a2(0

—

and

(14)

2C)]

Hence

+ (a5/a2)

a4/a2

,

and

) = —a3/a2

The regressions presented in Table 2 are most illuminating. The existence
of children reduces the marginal propensity to consume adult clothing by a

quarter. Put differently, on average, the marginal propensity of parents'

consumption is 0.76, while that of children is 0.24. The distribution of
family consumption between parents' consumption and that of children is not
affected by the husband's education, but is affected by the wife's employment

status. The more the wife works (consumption held constant) the more
pecuniary resources are diverted from parents' to children's consumption. This
may be indicative either of the increased fixed costs of children
associated with the mother's work (e.g., childcare services), or of an attempt to
compensate children for smaller time inputs of working mothers.
Art increase in the number of children may increase both the fixed costs

associated with children and the children's share in consumption. Assuming that

the fixed component in the distribution rule ()

is

unaffected by the number

of children, an increase in fixed costs is expected to reduce the constant term

—15—

in the consumption function for adult goods, whereas an increase in the
children's share will reduce the marginal propensity to consume.
The separate regressions presented in Table Al indicate that as the number
of children increases the marginal propensity to consume declines slightly but

the constant term increases (in algebraic value). To test the significance of
this result I added two variables to equation (15) denoting the existence of 2 and

3 children (K2 and K3, respectively), and their interaction with consump—
tion.'5 The expanded regression [equation (2) in Table 3] confirms the earlier
findings —

the

MPC of adult clothing declines with the number of children. The

implied marginal propensities of children's consumption are 0.20, 0.22, and
0.27 for families of 1, 2, and 3 children, respectively. Additional children
are also accompanied by a decline in the constant term, but whereas the
difference in the MPC adult clothing between families with no children and
families with one child is highly significant, all the new variables are not.

A comparison of the explanatory power (R2) of the new regression with that
of the earlier ones [equation (4) in Table 2] indicates that although each of the

new variables is not statistically significant, the four as a group are. These
seemingly contradictory results are traced to the high correlation between

K1

and the interaction term K1X (the correlation coefficient for both K1 is

0.9). Reestimating the equation with K1, leaving out the interaction terms
[equation (3) in Table 3], and estimating it with the interaction terms but

without K1 [equation (4)], shows that there is no advantage to one form over the

other. By the first equation, the fixed cost per child (beyond the first) seems
to be constant, while the second equation indIcates that the incremental share
in consumption is fixed (about 7 percent per additional child).

Thus,

additional children do increase the resources diverted to children, but

multicollinearity prevents us from telling whether this is due to an increase in

—16—

fixed costs or in the marginal propensity of children's consumption.

The environmental variables exhibit a similar pattern. For example, the
family of a working wife sharply reduces its expenditures on adult clothing when
it has a child (working mothers do not spend more on clothing than non—working
mothers), but their expenditures are only slightly reduced when it has
additional children.

Additional support for our conclusions is gained by estimating the
regressions for adult goods (i.e., the expenditures on tobacco, alcoholic

beverages, and adult clothing combined).16 The separate regressions (presented
in Table A2 of the appendix) again demonstrate the negative relationship between
the marginal propensity to consume adult goods and the number of children, and
the fact that the children's age composition has no effect on these expenditures.

Since children's age and the regional variables did not seem to affect the
consumption of adult goods they were omitted from the following regressions.
Reestimating the equations in the pooled sample (with dummy variables for

children) sheds some new light on the role of the environmental variables on the
allocation of resources between parents and children (Table 4).

Families where the mother is employed reduce expenditures on adult goods

when they have children, as do the more educated and the older. The share of
children's consumption seems to increase not only with the mother's employment

but also with the husband's age and education. The decline in the MPC is,
however, identical to that reported in Table 2 (24 percent). For every
three additional dollars parents spend on themselves, they spend one on their
children.

—17--

VI. Robustness

Though the similarity of the results for adult clothing and adult goods is
encouraging, it may still seem an odd feature of the demand for clothing that

has nothing to do with intrafamily allocation. To dispel these doubts, the
findings are subjected to a battery of tests:

a. The findings reported in the last section relate to white married families.
The regression are reestimated for blacks.
b.

If married families divert 25 percent of their resources to children, the

not—married should divert a higher share. Thus, comparing the marginal
propensities to consume adult goods between childless families and families
with children, the decline should be sharper in the case of the not—married.

c. Naturally there is a substantial difference in the age structure of families

with and without children (see Table 1). To isolate the age effect
I reestimated the results in a sample where the husband's age is under 50.

d. How crucial is the assumption of linearity for the estimates? To answer
this question I estimated the regression using higher polynomial orders.

e. To ascertain that the findings do not merely reflect some oddity in clothing
habits of the early 1970s, the regressions are reestimated for the 1960/61
Consumer Expenditure Survey.
f

Separability of adult and child consumption implies that the marginal
propensity to consume should be affected by the existence of children in the

same way for all adult goods. The similarity of the results for adult
clothing and adult goods is consistent with this prediction. An additional
test is the comparison of consumption patterns of male and female clothing,
tobacco, and alcoholic beverages.'7

Table 5 incorporates the results of the first four tests. Comparing the
results of Table 2 with the first column in Table 5, there are hardly any

—18—

differences in the consumption patterns of adult clothing between white and
black married families.. The decline in the marginal propensity to consume

associated with children is almost identical (27 percent for blacks vs. 24
percent for whites). The only observable difference is the effect of the wife's
labor force participation. Families of black working women tend to cut their
expenditures on clothing when they have children (presumably because they divert
more resources to their children), but this cut is not statistically significant.

There is a sharp difference in the age structure of not—married white women
who have children and those families with no children in the household (the

average ages are 33 and 60, respectively). To control for the age effect the
sample of the not—married was confined to those under 50 years of age. The
results confirm the expectations that the not—married divert a larger fraction

of their resources to children. The decline in the marginal propensity to
consume exceeds 60 percent.

If husband and wife share their consumption equally, and if there are no
returns to scale in consumption, a 75:25 distribution of resources in married
families would imply a distribution of 37.5:25 in families where the mother is

not married. In this case the decline in the marginal propensity to consume is
expected to be about 40 percent (

25/62.5).

The observed sharper decline

(though it is not clear whether it is statistically significant) implies either
that wives' share is less than one half, or that the not—married tend to cut their

own share in favor of children. Note that when an additional dummy variable
denoting the existence of two or more children is added to the regression, the
marginal propensity to consume declines by about 40 percent when the mother has
one child and by another 20 percent when she has two or more children.18

Confining the sample of white married families to those in which the head is

less than 50 years old does not change the results considerably. The decline in

—19—

the marginal propensity to consume adult clothing associated with children is
somewhat lower than our earlier results, but the differences do not seem to be
statistically significant.

The last two columns in Table 5 report the findings of a quadratic

expenditure function. Let the demand for adult goods be a quadratic function of
adult consumption
A +

q =

(17)

+ cX

A2
)

a2(X

and the distribution rule be linear
=

(18)

Bo÷ 1(x - C)

then the demand of families with children equals

(19)

q

=

+

— 1C) +

2O

—

+ [c+ 2a21(0 — 1C)]x

+

a2x2

where the effects of the environmental variables and of chidren's "needs" are
incorporated, for simplicity of presentation, in the constant terms (cz0

and

To estimate the marginal propensity of adult consumption one has to
compare the coefficients of the quadratic term (X2) in families with and

without children.tS The results reported in Table S imply a marginal propensity
that is almost identical to the one reported earlier

( 0.73).

We assume throughout this empirical section that the distribution rule h

is linear in consumption (X). If h is of a higher polynomial order, the
consumption function of adult goods in families with children are of a higher

polynomial order than that of families without children. The examination of
higher polynomial regressions does not support this prediction.

—20—

The results for adult goods are almost identical to those of adult clothing
and hence are not reported here.2°

Our 1960/61 sample contained close to 5,500 observations. The white
families included in the 1960/61 sample are somewhat older than those in the

1972/73 sample. Given the high age of husbands in families without children,
the sample was confined to families whose head was less than 65 years old.21 As
in 1972/73, the sample consists of white families, husband and wife present,

with less than four children. Since in this sample adult clothing refers to
those age 18 years or more I excluded from the sample families with children or

other relatives over 18. The sample means are reported in Table 6.22
Repeating the earlier procedures and running the regression for adult

clothing separately in each of the samples defined by the number of children
(Table A3 in the appendix), the result almost replicates those of the earlier

experiment. Rerunning the regression in the pooled sample (Table 7) and
comparing the results with those of 1972/73 (Table 2) indicates that though
clothing consumption patterns may have changed over the decade (the effect of
the environmental variables differs, and the marginal propensity to consume is
significantly higher) one feature remains constant —

the marginal propensity to

consume adult clothing declines by 25 percent when the family has children.23

The addition of K2 and K3 and their interactions does not help in
dispelling the ambiguity concerning the effect of the number of children on the

intrafamily allocation of resources. The results reported in Table 7 are
contradictory: whereas a second child increases the marginal propensity of
childrens consumption by 14 percent (from 16 to 30 percent), three children
(compared to one) contribute only to fixed costs but do not affect the marginal

propensity to consume. This irregularity is hard to accept and should be
attributed to the vagaries of multicollinearity (the correlation coefficients

between K.1 and their interaction terms are 0.9).

—21--

The findings relating to the black married and to white not—married families
(Table 7), and the regression for adult goods (Tables 8 and A4 in the appendix)

all contribute to consolidate the earlier evidence: the reduction in the MPG of
blacks associated with children is 12-20 percent2' and the not—married cut their

MPC by more than the married (by 37 percent). The results for adult goods
almost replicate those for adult clothing (though clothing constitutes less than
two thirds of adult goods).

Finally, to test the assumption of separability I estimated in the 1972/73
sample the consumption functions of male clothing, female clothing, tobacco, and

alcoholic beverages separately. To test the hypothesis that the MPG of these
goods declines by 25 percent when the family has childen I introduced a variable

for "parents' consumption" into the regression. This variable is defined to
equal family consumption in childless families and to equal 75 percent of

consumption in families with children. If the assumption of separability holds,
the coefficients of the interaction term "consumption x

should turn

statistically insignificant. As Table 9 indicates, all four adult goods pass

this test successfully. In spite of the inherent differences in the consumption
behavior (and specifically in the MPC) between these goods, in none of the cases
can we reject the assumption that parents relate, in their decisions concerning
their own consumption, to a budget that is 75 percent of the total consumption
budget.

VII. Selectivity Bias

The discussion in the preceding sections follows traditional demand analysis in
assuming that children are exogenously given. This assumption naturally raises
cries of "selectivity bias" —

families

with children may differ inherently from

—22—

familes without children, thus giving rise to a self—selection bias.

How dangerous is such a bias? To answer this question one has to answer two
separate questions: (a) does havjng children" necessarily imply a greater
tendency to spend on children?, (b) if such a tendency exists, does it affect our

estimation procedure? In answering the first of these questions, the
distinction has to be made between ex-ante and ex-post. A family with children,
of course, spends ex—post less on parents than a family without children. But
the relevant question is whether ex—ante a greater tendency to have children is
associated with a distribution rule that favors children.

A greater tendency toward having children may result either from increased

"tastes" for children or from a lower "price" of children. An increase in the
weight parents assign to the welfare they derive from children (aU/aUB) leads,
in general, to an increase in the children's budget

at the expense of

parents. But this is not necessarily true in the case of a lower "price". The
paefltg tendency to have children increases the lower their fixed costs. But
lower fixed costs of children are associated with an increase in the parents'

budget. The tendency may also increase with the "efficiency" of home production
in that sector —

i.e.,

the lower the value of p. But a lower value of p results

in an increase in the children's budget only if the elasticity of substitution
between parents' and children's utilities exceeds unity.
Thus, ex-ante it is not clear that a greater tendency to have children

implies a greater tendency to spend on children. Furthermore, even if such an
association exists, it should not disturb the study of the intrafamily allocation

of resources. What should disturb such a study is an association between the
"taste" for children and the "taste" for adult goods —

e.g.,

if adults who dislike

children are fond of clothes. More specifically, our procedure is subject to
selectivity biases only if adults who like children have a lower MPC of adult

—23—

goods. Finally one has to recall that our procedure is based on the comparison
of families with children and families without children at home. The latter are
much older than the former, and most of them have grown—up offsprings who have
already left home. Thus, the danger of a selectivity bias seems minimal.
To test for the existence of a selectivity bias we have to examine the

effect of the "taste" for children on the MPC of adult goods. Conducting this
test in the sample of families without children should indicate whether the bias

exists. Conducting it in the sample of families with children should indicate
the extent to which the "taste" for children is associated with increased
spending on children.

A detailed test is beyond the scope of this paper. The test suggested here
is, therefore, admittedly crude. To obtain a measure of the "taste" for

children I estimate the probability that the family has children. The greater
the deviation from this estimate (in algebraic value) the greater the "taste" for
children. Thus, if the family has a child, the lower the predicted probability,
the greater the importance of unobserved variables (i.e., "taste") in explaining

the existence of children. Similarly, if the family has no children, the greater
the predicted probability of children (the smaller the residual) the smaller the

taste for children (the greater the "distaste"). Thus, the residual from this
regression can be used to trace the existence of selectivity biases in our
estimates of the demand for adult goods.

For obvious reasons I confined the sample to white married families where

the wife is no older than 40. To estimate the probability of having children I
used a logit function. The dependent variable is K - the existence of children
at home, and the explanatory variables consist of the wife's age (AGE), the
husband's schooling (SCL), the family's income (wife's earnings excluded — INCOME),
and the regional variables.25

—24—

The logit estimates are

(20)

ln[k/(1—k)] = —0.5844 + 0.0777 AGE — 0.1008 SCL + 0.4048 INCOME
(30.33) (17.14)
(12.86)
(10.64)
+ 0.1169 RURAL — 0.0112 NC + 0.0311 WEST — 0.0108 SOUTH
(2.09)

(0.19)

(0.51)

(0.19)

where the values in parentheses are "t—values".
Defining the residual e = K — K, the residual was incorporated in the
regression of adult clothing (e is used as an independent variable and

interacting with consumption). The results for the sample of families without
children are reported in Table 10, and those for families with children in
Table 11.

The results are quite conclusive. Whereas e has no significant effect on
the demand for adult clothing when the family has no children, it has a
significant negative effect on the MPC of adult clothing when the family has

children. Thus, a greater "taste" for children (a greater value of e) is not
reflected in a smaller taste for adult clothing. It leads, however, to a
greater tendency by parents to cut their own budget in favor of their children.
In spite of its crudeness the test confirms our expectation that if a
selectivity bias exists the effect is quite small.26

—25--

VIII. The "Cost" of Children

The "cost" of children has recently been the focus of much attention of both
economists and demographers (Espenshade, 1984; Lazear and Michael, 1985; Turchi,

1983). In a way, as some of these researchers recognize, the "cost" of children
in a misnomer. Parents spend more on their children (i.e., invest more in their
children) in the hope of improving the children's (and their own) present and

future welfare. The recognition that higher expenditures lead to a higher

"quality" of children is an integral part of the economics of fertility. Given
this variation in quality, it is expenditures on children, or children's
consumption, in which we are interested.
The estimates of children's consumption can be derived directly from the

estimates of the distribution h(X, S). The parameters are reported in Table 12.
The table contains three estimates of the distribution rule of married white
families based on the 1972/73 regressions of adult clothing and adult goods, and

on the 1960/61 estimate of the adult clothing regression. All three estimates
are identical: the marginal propensity of parents' consumption is 0.75 and the
constant term

+

(estimated

at the point of means) is negligible.

Consequently, the marginal and the average propensities are very close —

the

parents' share in total consumption is 0.77—0.80.
based on the 1972/73 findings, the marginal propensity of parents' consumption in black families does not differ much from that of whites, and the MPC of

white not—married women is substantially lower. The total consumption of white
married families exceeds that of black families, which in turn exceeds that of

not—married white women. The same order is maintained when one compares the
estimates of parents' consumption at the point of means. There are, however,
only slight differences in the estimates of children's consumption in the three

—26—

groups. (These differences are smaller still when one compares consumption per
child, given the difference in the average number of children of the three
groups).

This result may come as a surprise since it is often assumed that whites
invest more in their children than blacks, and that the married invest more

than do the not—married. It should, of course, be treated with caution,

given the important role of the constant term ( +

in

the determination

of the children's average consumption, where many of the estimates used
to derive this term for blacks and the not—married are not statistically

significant.27 It may, however, also be argued that the differences in parents'
pecuniary investment in their children are indeed very small, and that the major

difference lies in the investment of non—pecuniary resources. Thus, mothers in
white families reported working an average of 15 weeks in 1972/73, whereas the
corresponding figures for blacks and the not—married are 26 and 28,respectively.

The difference in the time inputs invested in children (and the quality of these
inputs) may be a major contributor to the difference in the quality of children.

How does the number of children affect the distribution rule? Given the high

multicollinearity between K. and the interaction term "consumption x K" I
could not separate in Section V the effect of fixed costs of children from that

of a change in the marginal propensity to consume. Table 3 therefore contains
three estimates of the consumption function of adult clothing of white families
— an unrestricted one, one that assumes that the numer of children does not

affect the MPC, and one that assumes that children do not involve fixed costs

[equations (2),(3) and (4) in Table 3]. Correspondingly, I estimated three
distribution rules (columns 1-3 in Table 13). In spite of the difference in parameters, the estimates of pareflt5 and children's consumption are unanimous. The
parents' share in total consumption is, on average, 85 percent when the family

—27—

has one child, drops to 76 percent when the family has two children, and to 68

percent when it has three. Additional children, however, are associated, with
increased consumption.28 Consequently, the decline in parents' share involves
only a miniscule decline in their absolute consumption.
Children's consumption increases with their number as a result of both the

increase in their share and in total family consumption. The increase is,
however, less than proportionate, and consequently the expenditure per child
declines as the number of children increases (the expenditure per child in a
family with three children is 80 percent of those in a family with one child).
there is no way of telling whether the negative correlation between the number of
children and the expenditures per child reflects returns to scale in home production or substitution between the number of children and their "quality."

The constant term in the distribution rule h reflects the difference between

the fixed costs of parents and children. Given the estimate of h for families
with one child, one cannot isolate the fixed costs of the first child without

knowledge of the fixed costs of parents. Assuming, however, that the latter are
unaffected by the number of children, one can derive the fixed costs

associated with additional children by comparing the constant terms in h for
families of different size. By equation (13), the constant term is an estimate of
—

$2C(k)1.

Hence, dividing the differential in the constant terms by 2

should yield an estimate of the incremental fixed costs.
Table 13 contains the estimates of the differential between the fixed costs

of 2 and 3 children and those of one child. Unfortunately, the variance between
the estimates is too large to allow definite conclusions on the division of
children's consumption between fixed and variable costs.29

The patterns revealed by the 1960/61 data are almost identical to those of

1972/73. The only noticeable difference is that total family consumption does

—28—

not increase with the number of children as sharply as in the later data.

Consequently, the decline in parents' consumption and in the expenditure per
child as the number of children increases is slightly greater.

IX. Concluding Comments

This paper demonstrates again the power of combining theory and empirical

estimation. Building on the most elementary principles of the theory of
consumption and the economics of human resources it is shown that the assumption
of separability of utilities generated by parents' and children's consumption
provides the researcher with a powerful tool for empirically separating these

two components of consumption. It saves the researcher from the need for ad hoc
theorizing to justify the use of a specific procedure of estimation (for
example, it obviates the need for explaining why the share of food in total
consumption should be used as a measure of welfare).
In principle there is nothing novel either in the argument that separability
is essential for identifying the intrafamily allocation of resources or in the
claim that the consumption patterns of adult goods are the key to identification.
In their Study of the allocation of income within the household Lazear and

Michael (1985) emphasize the importance of the separability assumption, but they
do not follow the ramifications of this assumption in their empirical work.
Rothbarth (1943) was the first to suggest that consumption patterns of adult
goods can reveal the effect of demographic variables on parents' consumption.

This suggestion was followed by Nicholson (1949) and many others. Unfortunately,
lacking sound theoretical groundwork, most of these estimates suffer from a
misspecification of the estimation function.

—29—

Most studies of the effect of demographic variables on demand assume that
this effect is additive, ignoring its effect on the MPC (i.e., implicitly

assuming that the redistribution of income does not affect the MPC). Imposing
on families, both with and without children, the same marginal propensity to
consume, traditional estimates understate the MPC of childless families and
overstate that of families with children [Figure 1, and Table 2, equation (2)].
Since the slope of the regression and its intercept are negatively correlated,
this misspecificatjon leads to an upward bias in the intercept of families
without children and to a downward bias in the intercept of families with

children [compare equation (2) and (3) in Table 2 and equations (1) and (2) in

table 41. Thus, it overstates the "fixed costs" effect of children. The covariance
between slope and intercept increases with X. Since total consumption and the
number of children are positively correlated, the upward bias in the "fixed
costs" effect (i.e., the downward bias of the intercept) is more pronounced the

larger family size (in Figure 1 a0 > a > a1 > a2 > a3 ).
The theoretical analysis also implies that given standard utility analysis,
the modified Rothbarth method is the only one that allows the separation of
factors that are goods—specific from those determining the distribution rule.

The identification of the distribution rule is a prerequisite for the estimation
of the specific demand of children and parents in families with children, rather
than vice versa (as implied by the Engel, Barten, and other methods).
Our estimates indicate that married families with 1—3 children spend on
the margin one quarter, and on average 20—30 percent of their total consumption

on children. There is no observable difference between whites and blacks, and
the share is higher for not—married women. These estimates are extremely robust
to variations in the definition of adult goods, functional form, and sources of
data.

—30—

Public policy aimed at encouraging population growth or increasing

horizontal equity often tries to compensate families for the cost of children

(through child allowances, tax credit, and in other ways).° For a compensation
scheme such as this, it is important to distinguish between the fixed costs of

children and other expenditures imposed on the family by the children's "needs,"
and those expenditure items that are discretionary and intended to improve the

children's quality. The theoretical analysis implies that this is often
impossible, and if possible — a very difficult task. The empirical analysis

indicates that the allocation of resources within the family is not affected by

the children's age structure. Thus, in as much as children's "needs" change
with age, these changing needs do not affect children's consumption.
It is impossible to estimate the fixed costs associated with the first child

without knowledge of the fixed costs of adults (i.e., parents). Our attempts to
estimate the incremental fixed costs (those associated with a second or a third

child) were hampered by multicollinearity. Thus, it is impossible to tell
whether children's consumption increases with their number because of fixed
costs, or because parents prefer to spend a larger fraction of their resources
on children.

Finally, in spite of the ever increasing number of empirical studies, most

economists still seem to be wary of imputations of the intrafamily allocation of

resources. Hopefully, the robustness of our estimates will disperse some of
these suspicions. Still, this is only a first step in an an extensive research
agenda:

a. The treatment of self selection in this paper has necessarily been
brief. A more detailed analysis is required allowing for the endogeneity of
family size, to examine the substitution between "quantity" and "quality" of
children, a central theme in the economics of fertility.

—31—

b.

A major component of the cost of children is the value of the parents

time. Our scheme should allow the incorporation of parents' time (and more
specifically, mothers' time) in the analysis, and the joint estimation of the
intrafamily of time and goods.31
c.

Channels of intergenerational transfers have been shown to be most

important in a wide range of contexts, from intergenerational mobility and the

distribution of income to the efficacy of fiscal and monetary policy. Our model
ignored these issues, confining itself to a one—period framework. Its expansion
to the multiperiod case should enrich our knowledge of the oft—discussed but
rarely studied subject of the effect of children on consumption and saving.

Judging the richness of this further research agenda, this paper seems to be
only a small first step.

—32—
Notes

*1 benefited from the comments of Gary Becker, Angus Deaton, Zvi
Grilliches, Edward Lazear, Kevin Murphy, Robert Michael, Eytan Sheshinski,
Menachem Yaari, Shlomo Yitzhaki and participants in workshops at the National

Bureau of Economic Research, the University of Chicago, the University of
Wisconsin at Madison, Columbia University and the Hebrew University. This study
would not have been possible without the devoted work of my research assistant
Tamir Hay.

1. For a most recent manifestation see Deaton and Muellbauer (1986). For an
earlier discussion of the state of the art, see Deaton and Muellbauer (1980,
Ch. 8).

2. It is often claimed that demographic changes affect the relative prices
confronting the family. By this argument the price of goods that are more
sensitive to demographic factors (e.g., changes in family size) change

relatively to those goods which are less sensitive. I have shown elsewhere
(Gronau, 1986) that these changes in the Barten prices are endogenous, and an
outcome of family decision, rather than determining family decisions.

3. I ignore throughout the analysis "family goods". The formulation of the
model is very similar to that of Samuelson's seminal paper (1956).

4. A different way of formulating the difference in the utility function is in
terms of Becker's home production analysis, where U3 = U3(Z3), and the

commodities Z3 are in the case of children

5.

=

In the framework of a linear expenditure system (i.e., when UB is a

Stone—Geary function) C stands for the cost of the minimum requirements.
These minimum requirements can be incorporated directly in the utility function
by writing

uB =

u[(q3

—

c.)/p.]

,

where

p.c1 = C

6. Alternatively, one can assume that the utility function is separable in
goods and leisure (as it is in current and future consumption). To introduce

—33—

returns to scale one has to reformulate the utility functions in terms of

commodities Z, which in turn are a function of goods and family size. We do
not intend to exploit this approach in this paper.

7. A method often suggested (and much debated) in the literature is to derive
the scales from information on price elasticities.

8. For further discussion of the implications of two-stage budgeting see
Strotz (1957, 1959) and Gorman (1959).

9. Our purpose is not served by goods consumed exclusively by children since
we do not usually observe "parentless" families (i.e., families consisting only

of children). Even if they exist, they should be removed from the sample
because decisions in them are not made by parents.

10. Barnes and Gillingham (1984) have recently employed inter—city variation in
prices and changes in prices over the sampling period to derive the price

effects from the 1972—73 Consumer Expenditure Survey. I ignore this variation.
More importantly, I assume that the existence of children does not affect the
price of goods (e.g., the price of a visit to the theatre may include, for a

family with children, the cost of a babysitter). This assumption can be more
easily defended as long as we do not incorporate the cost of time in the
analysis.

11. These data have been used extensively for the estimation of adult

equivalence scales (Barnes and Gillingham, 1984; Espenshade, 1984; Lazear and
Michael, 1985; Turchi, 1983; Van der Gaag and Smolensky, 1982).

12. Changes in housing arrangements (and other consumption patterns) following
marriage are indicative of this change (and the underlying utility function) as
much as of changes in needs or returns to scale.

13. Running separate regressions for tobacco and alcoholic beverages yields
results which are consistent with the theory but inconclusive in a statistical
sense.

—34—

14. Women did not report their education in 1972. Using the 1973 subsample
shows that replacing the husband's education with that of the wife does not
change the results.

15. Note that since K denotes the existence of children, the coefficient of

K2 measures the incremental effect of a second child and that of K3 the
incremental effect of three children compared to having only one.

16. On the average adult goods exceed adult clothing by 50 percent.

17. Deaton has called this a test for "demographic separability" (Deaton, RuizCastillo, Thomas, 1985).

18. The coefficients of "consumption," "consumption x K," and "consumption x K2+"

are 0.1664, —0.0724, and —0.0343 (with t values of 23.38, 4.45, and 1.83),
respectively, where K2+ is the dummy variable denoting the existence of two
children or more.

19. Estimating a quadratic function with a dummy variable K denoting

children, let a1 denote the coefficient x2 and

est () = [1 + (a2/a1)]''2

.

In

a2 that of K x x2

then

principle it is also possible to derive

from the coefficients of X and the constant terms, but this procedure becomes
very complicated when one allows for the existence of environmental variables.

20. The only exception is the case of the quadratic function where the
implied marginal propensity of parents' consumption is 0.6.

21. Applying the same restriction to the 1972/73 sample does not affect the
results. Another difference between the two samples is the high percentage of
rural families in the 1960/61 sample (44 vs. 19 in 1972/73). Restricting the
1960/61 sample to urban families does not affect the results.

22. In the absence of data on number of weeks worked by the wife I used a dummy
variable denoting the women's labor force participation, and instead of "number

—35—

of children 0—5," I used a variable denoting that the youngest child is 5 years
old or younger.

23. Removing the age restriction, the MPC declines by 17—20 percent.
Restricting the sample to those under 50, the decline in the MPC of adult
clothing is much lower, but the decline in the MPC of adult goods is 20
percent.

24. The estimate for adult clothing is not statistically significant.

25. I would prefer to use the wife's schooling but this information was
available only for part of the sample (see n. 14). I subtracted the wife's
earnings from income because they depend heavily on the wife's labor supply

which, in turn, depends on the existence of children. Income is measured in
units of $10,000. The 1972/73 sample consisted of 4,240 families of whom 75
percent had children.

26. An additional qualification should be added. The variables CONSUMPTION and
e.CONSUMPTION are highly correlated in the sample without children (r =
and not correlated in the sample with children (r =

0.20).

0.88)

The results reported

in Table 10 may therefore be affected by multicollinearity. The results,
however, are replicated in a sample where the husband's age does not exceed 50.

27. This is particularly true for the 1960/61 estimates for these two groups.
28. The direction of causality is, of course, not clear.
29. Another source of difficulty is the interpretation of the effect women's
market work has on the distribution rule. The estimates are based on the implicit assumption that working mothers cut their own consumption in favor of their

children to compensate them for smaller time inputs devoted to childcare. Had I
assumed that the negative coefficient reflects increased fixed costs of

children, the estimates of the fixed costs should have beer considerably lower
(because the wife's weeks of work decline as number of her children increases).

—36—

30. The welfare implications of such compensation schemes are discussed in
Gronau (1985).

31. Two studies that discuss the joint decision of consumption and labor supply
are Abbot and Ashenfelter (1976) and Atkinson and Stern (1979). The value of
mothers' time is often incorporated in estimates of the cost of children, but
is consistently ignored in estimates of adult equivalence scales.

—37—

References

Abbot, M. and Ashenfelter, 0. (1976). "Labor Supply, Commodity Demand, and the
Allocation of Time," Review of Economic Studies, 43: 389—412.

Atkinson, A.B. and Stern, N.H. (1979). "On Labor Supply and Commodity Demands",
SSRC Programme Taxation, Incentives and Distribution of Income, No. 1.

Atkinson, A.B., Gomulka, J. and Stern, N.H. (1984a). "Household Expenditures
on Tobacco 1970—1980: Evidence from the Family Expenditure Survey," ESRC
Programme on Taxation Incentives and the Distribution of Income,
Discussion Paper 37.

(1984b).

_______________

"Expenditure on Alcoholic Drink by Households:

Evidence from the Family Expenditure Survey," ESRC Programme on Taxation
Incentives and the Distribution of Income, Discussion Paper 60.

Barnes, R. and Gillingham, R. (1984). "Demographic Effects in Demand Analysis:
Estimation of'

the

Quadratic Expenditure System Using Microdata," Review of

Economics and Statistics, 66(4): 591—601.

Barten, A.P. (1964). "Family Composition, Prices and Expenditure Patterns," in
P.E. Hart et al., eds., Econometric Analysis for National Planning, London:
Butterworth.

Becker, G.S. and Lewis, H.G. (1973). "Interaction Between Quantity and Quality
of Children," Journal of Political Economy, 81(2), Part 2.

Deaton, A. and Muellbauer, J. (1980). Economics and Consumer Behavior.

New York: Cambridge University Press.

______________

(1986).

"On Measuring Child Costs with Applications to Poor

Countries," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

—38—

Deaton, A., Ruiz—Castillo, Z. and Thomas, D. (1985).
Household Expenditure

"The Influence of

Research Program in Development Studies,

Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University, Discussion Paper 122.

Engel, E. (1895). "Die Lebenskosten Belgischer Arbeiter -

Familien Fruher und

Jetzt," Inst. Stat. Inst. Bull, no. 9.

Espenshade, T.J. (1984). Investing in Children. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

Gorman, W.M. (1959). "Separable Utility and Aggregation," Econometrica, 27(3):
469—481.

Gronau, R. (1986). "Consumption Technology and the Intrafamily Distribution of
Resources —

Adult Equivalence Scales Reexamined,"Jerusalem: The Maurice Falk

Institute for Economic Research in Israel,, Discussion Paper No. 85.11.

Lazear, E.P. and Michael, R.T. (1985). "Allocation of Income Within the
Household," mimeo (January).

Nicholson, J.L. (1949). "Variations in Working Class Family Expenditures,"
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society A, 112: 359—411.

Rothbarth, E. (1943). "Note on a Method of Determining Equivalent Incomes for
Families of Different Composition," Appendix IV in C. Madge, War—Time
Patterns of Saving and Spending, Occasional Paper No. 4, National Inst. of
Econ. and Soc. Res., London: Macmillan.

Samuelson, PA. (1956). "Social Indifference Curves," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 70 (1): 1—22.

Strotz, R.H. (1957). "The Empirical Implications of a Utility Tree,"
Econometrica, 25(2): 269—280.

—39—

___________

(1959).

"The Utility Tree —

a Correction and Further Appraisal,"

Econometrica, 27(3): 482—488.

Turchi, B.A. (1983). Estimating the Costs of Children in the United States.
Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina.

Van der Gaag, J. and Smolensky, E. (1982). "True Household Equivalence Scales
and Characteristics of the Poor in the United States," Review of Income
and Wealth, 28(1): 17—28.

—40—

Table 1: White Married Families (1972/73)
Sample Means

Number of children
Total
sample

0

1

2

3

1—3

Husband's educ.

12.0

11.4

12.6

13.0

12.6

12.8

Husband's age

44.7

53.9

33.7

33.9

35.5

34.2

Husband employed

0.84

0.72

0.97

0.98

0.98

0.98

Wife employed

0.48

0.48

0.55

0.45

0.40

0.48

Husband's weeks
of work

39

32

46

48

48

47

Wife's weeks
of work

17

19

18

14

13

15

Number of children
0—5 years

0.40

0

0.63

0.98

0.99

0.85

North central

0.29

0.29

0.28

0.27

0.29

0.28

West

0.20

0.20

0.22

0.22

0.19

0.21

South

0.29

0.30

0.31

0.28

0.28

0.29

Rural

0.19

0.20

0.16

0.17

0.20

0.17

12,556

11,483

12,483

14,141

15,301

13,779

8,487

7,527

8,829

9,779

10,492

9,582

647

628
431
167

264

675
440
193
247

672
437
190
247

653
413
184
230

669
433
190
243

4,153

1,339

1,520

781

3,640

Family income ($)
Total consumption ($)

Expenditures ($)

Adult

goods
Adult clothing
Male clothing
Female clothing

432
178
254

Number of observations 7,793
Percent

100

53

17

20

10

47

—41—

Table 2: The Effect of Children on the Consumption of Adult Clothing
White Married Families 1972/1973

(1)

b

Constant

(2)
t

—260.312 15.72

K
Husband's
education

b

(3)
t

—250.456 15.40
—150.259 17.17

10.264

7.15

13.608

9.57

b

(4)
t

—313.506 18.12 —316.762

1.607

8.17

1.156

5.93

0.0637 60.15

0.0670 63.37

Consumption

37.881

1.10

12.759

9.01

12.504

6.79

—0.456

0.16

1.583

6.17

—1.309

3.32

1.031

5.32

Adjusted R2

0.0770 53.64
—0.0198 10.21

xK

0.396

0.418

15.72

1.04

Wife's weeks
of work x K
Consumption

t

19.486

Husband's
educ. x K

Wife's weeks
of work

b

0.426

0.0764 51.49
—0.0186

8.86

0.426

Constant
K
1(2

K3

Table

—42—

b

18.12

t

75.328

—311.934

b

4.60

3.72

18.09

t

21.836

—313.499

b

1.14

18.19

t

31.377

10.189

21.614

—316.761

b

0.42

0.16

0.43

15.78

t

3:

The Effect of the Number of Children on Adult Clothing
White Married Families 1972/1973

t

—312.507
2.17

—63.356

7.49

(5)

b

15.52

57.814
1.52

—125.061

(4)

—251.584
8.15
—50.267

1.87

8.44

(3)

—95.196
4.94
—73.400

11.958

(2)

—68.217
8.03

8.48

(1)

—133.744
12.023

6.24

1.583

—10.245

—5.497

3.176

12.504

6.19

1.68

1.09

0.78

6.82

8.57

9.35

1.590

12.135

13.258

K

6.25

Husband's education
Husband's educ.

2
1.594

Wife's weeks of work

x

x

Husband's educ. x
K3

6.25

2.86

Husband's educ.

1.592

—1.548

5.26

4.04

1.024

—1.594

K

53.19

—0.0157

0.0764

5.33

51.67

0.15

4.05

x

K2

0.0765

5.32

—0.103

—1.595

Wife's weeks
x

53.23

—0.0117

0.09

K3
0.0766

8.67

—0.0003

0.15

4.08

Wife's weeks
x

53.22

—0.0171

4.50

—0.125

—1.609

Wife's weeks

0.0765

5.41

—0.0061

64.15

—0.0150

0.47

0.0680

Consumption x K

—0.0015

0.66

Consumption

Consumption x K2

—0.0026

0.430

7.44

0.430

—0.0115
0.430

1.44
0.430

—0.0052
0.423

Consumption x K3
Adjusted R2

—43—

Table 4: The Effect of Children on the Consumption of Adult Goods

(1)

b

63.387

(2)
t

Constant

—

K

—201.508

15.59

2.072

1.14

Husband's
education

b

1.34 —175.666

(3)
t

6.700

3.58

—351.803

5.61

49.510

1.98

478.729

4.28

1.918

1.06

6.144

2.55

—8.327

2.27

10.576

4.69

—14.726

2.74

—0.124

5.49

0.145

2.21

—45.364

2.57

—15.754

0.59

1.554

4.62

—1.329

2.70

5.994

3.23

Husband' s

age x K
(Age)2

—0.101

5.21

—0.087

4.50

(Age)2 x K
Rural

—55.162

4.15

—52.719

4.00

Rural x K
Wife's weeks
of work

0.923

3.83

0.884

3.62

Wife's weeks
of work x K
Con sumpt ion

0.0835

63.11

Consumption x K

Adjusted R2

0.428

t

3.67

Husband's
educ. x K
Husband's
age

b

0.0975

54.83

—0.0276

11.66

0.438

0.0958

51.75

0.439

Table
5:

Constant

—44—

The Effect of Children on the Consumption of Adult Clothing 1972/73 Tests of Robustness

t

—362.892

b

1.29

7.27

t

15.664

—201.608

b

0.41

9.08

t

White married

b

2.11

76.022

8.52

Black

t

—193.048

1.14

15.630

Married
age < 50

b

3.99
172.361

4.68

Not—married
women

—365.582
0.59

17.207

83.849

1.56

K

—10.424

0.63

2.35

—1.827

22.939

1.25

Head's
educ.

—5.517

0.714

0.06

0.30

x K

—4.085

educ.

Head's

8.16

0.32

2.095

—0.348

5.25

2.35

2.592

2.925

4.03

Wife's weeks
of work

—1.582

7.47

0.0707 27.18

—0.0041

0.0406

0.81

11.88
—0.0126

4.14

—2.225

3.77

1.24

0.01

—0.0932

0.1479 20.54

—0.444

2.013

9.93

1.08

0.0826

2.05

—1.794

Children 0—5
Consumption

—0.0221

Wife's weeks
of work x K

K

11.57

x

0.1460.l0

3.86

Consumption

(Consumption)2

—0.0688.10

Adjusted R2

540

0.376

828

0.403

4,764

0.371

7,841

0.438

xK

(Consumption)2

Sample size

—45—

Table 6: White Married Families 1960/1961
Samle Means

Number of children
Total
sample

0

1

2

3

1—3

Husband's education

11.2

10.4

11.3

11.6

11.8

11.6

Husband's age

40.8

49.6

37.4

36.4

36.2

36.7

Wife employed (dummy)

0.39

0.47

0.43

0.32

0.29

0.35

0.49

0.56

0.70

0.57

Youngest child (dummy) 0.39
North central

0.32

0.32

0.31

0.32

0.34

0.32

West

0.28

0.30

0.32

0.26

0.22

0.27

South

0.17

0.17

0.15

0.16

0.19

0.17

Rural

0.44

0.45

0.44

0.41

0.47

0.44

Family consumption ($)

5,663

4,952

5,627

6,099

6,309

5,993

540
342

582
367

534
349

519
330

508

521
331

153

152
215

155

189

194

154
176

Number of observations 5,452

1,731

1,267

1,478

Expenditures ($)

Adult

goods
Adult clothing
Male clothing
Female clothing

Percent

100

32

23

27

309
149
160

153
178

976

3,721

18

68

—46--

Table 7: The Effect of Children on the Consumption of Adult Clothing

1960/61: White, Black, Not—Married

White married families
b

Constant

t

b

Black married
t

b

t

b

t

—14.930

6.76

—84.492

1.87

260.528

1.64

359.772

5.28

28.467

1.73

11.373

0.57

—96.265

1.61

—60.237

2.31

K2

28.721

1.36

K3

—57.534

2.44

K

Head's
education

—0.377

0.35

—0.531

0.50

1.957

0.53

1.568

0.87

Head's
age

—5.586

7.55

—1.529

0.71

—11.741

1.57

—13.703

4.31

(Age)2

0.064

2.57

—0.016

0.62

0.093

1.07

0.099

2.70

24.336

3.73

19.085

2.93

12.157

0.52

38.277

2.63

—28.183

3.13

—13.021

1.42

13.275

0.36

—63.730

2.72

—1.743

0.21

—1.880

0.23

—71.182

2.02

19.634

1.38

5.153

0.59

2.791

0.32

—29.345

0.87

37.979

2.64

South

—38.936

3.96

—38.029

3.90

—133.082

2.68

24.639

1.58

Rural

17.981

2.73

21.277

3.25

30.689

1.02

—12.676

1.08

Wife employed
Youngest
child < 5

N. central
West

Consumption
Consurnp. x K

0.0973 44.30
—0.0239

9.56

0.0972 44.55
—0.0 160

5.07

Consump. x K2

—0.0133

4.08

Consump. x K3

—0.0048

1.35

•

2

0.1112 11.64

—0.0133

1.15

0. 0867

18.76

—0.0321

5.24

Adjusted R

0.476

0.484

0.474

0.527

Number of
observations

5,452

5,452

417

889

—47—

Table 8: The Effect of Children on the Consumption of Adult Goods

1960/61: White, Black, Not Married

White married families
b

Constant

t

b

Black married
t

b

t

White not—married
b

t

—118.749

1.97

—212.577

3.47

166.185

0.78

361.820

4.51

16.484

0.76

16.539

0.63

—81.696

1.01

—74.342

2.43

K2

4.286

0.49

K3

—109.846

3.52

K

— 6.430

4.54

—6.593

4.69

0.696

0.14

6.512

2.32

11.836

4.13

—1.966

0.19

—9.446

2.52

(Age)2

—0.088

2.66

—0.151

4.48

—0.031

0.26

0.031

0.73

Wife employed

33. 912

3.93

27. 520

3.20

64. 799

2.07

43.887

2. 56

—13. 367

1.12

5.703

0.47

18. 539

0.37

—78.429

2.85

N. Central

—20. 616

1.86

—20. 709

1.88

—114.851

2.41

2.301

0.14

West

—39. 875

3.43

—43. 502

3.76

—86.873

1.92

14. 618

0.87

South

—49. 729

3.83

—49. 063

3.80

—182.636

2.73

26.543

1.45

Rural

1.585

0.18

5.418

0.62

24.909

0.61

—18. 545

1.35

Consumption

0.1379 47.46

Head' S

education
Head' S

—1.719

0.81

age

Youngest
child

5

Consump. x K

—0. 03 70

11.21

0.1377 47.71
—0. 0305

7.33

Consump. x K2

—0. 0123

2.83

Consump. x K3

—0. 0004

0.09

0.1499 11.61

0.1133

20.83

1.89

—0. 0417

5.71

—0. 02 96

Adjusted R2

0.510

0.516

0.482

Number of
observations

5,452

5,452

417

0.566

889

-'48-

Table 9: Tests for Separability: The Consumption of Male and Female Clothing,
Tobacco and Alcoholic Beverages 1972/73

Male clothing
b

t

Female clothing
b

t

Tobacco

Alcoholic beverages

b

t

b

t

—43.374

1.77

—221.544

5.90

—6.126

0.27

—73.636

3.39

65.636

1.48

161.088

2.41

190.783

4.63

42.279

1.09

Husband's
education

3.850

4.03

8.062

5.58

—6.000

6.75

0.145

0.17

Husband's
educ. x K

2.121

1.46

—2.616

1.19

—7.968

5.91

—0.261

0.21

Husband's
age

— 1.993

2.12

—0.508

0.38

9.314

11.22

2.871

3.68

Husband's
age x K

—

5.008

2.30

—5.289

1.64

—3.209

1.62

—1.087

0.58

(Age)2

0.013

1.39

0.012

0.92

—0.107

12.87

—0.032

4.14

(Age)2 x K

0.059

2.20

0.053

1.36

0.024

1.00

0.008

0.37

Weeks of work

0.476

3.22

1.344

6.68

—0.194

1.57

0.173

1.48

Weeks of work

0.017

0.06

—0.630

2.14

—0.029

0.16

—0.117

0.69

Rural

—6.901

0.99

—8.102

0.77

—13.633

2.10

—17.645

2.89

Rural x K

—1.003

0.10

—10.767

0.68

—1.415

0.14

—2.679

0.29

Constant
K

xK

Parent's
Consumption

0.0289 39.00

0. 0473 42.73

0.0065

9.57

0.0128

19.91

Consuinp. x K

0.0012

0.0002

0.15

—0.0003

0.35

—0.0008

1.04

2

Adjusted R

1.28

0.332

0.352

0.077

0.108

—49—

Table 10: Tests for Selectivity Bias: The Consumption of Adult Clothing
White Married Families with No Children 1972/73

(1)
b

Constant

(2)
t

b

(3)
t

b

t

—768.835

2.91

—739.964

2.80

—676.272

2.51

Husband's
education

13.349

2.46

20.496

2.80

20.214

2.76

Husband's

28.376

1.56

16.402

0.82

18.954

0.95

—0.427

1.47

—0.290

0.95

—0.329

1.15

2.418

3.45

2.313

3.28

2.405

3.39

N. central

—27.298

0.68

—26.519

0.66

—25.452

0.64

West

—14.075

0.33

—13.307

0.31

—13.195

0.31

South

77.761

1.95

80.672

2.03

80.633

2.03

Rural

—39.872

1.00

—48.518

1.20

—48.205

1.19

0.0740

20.35

age

(Age)2

Wife's weeks
of work

Consumption

"Taste" for
chjldren—e

0.0719

—185.761

18.51

0.0592

1.45

—28.136

e x consumption

Adjusted R2

Number of
o b s e r vat i. on s

5.16

—0.0188 1.18

0.357

1072

0.358

1072

0.358

1072

—50—

Table 11: The Effect of the "Taste" for Children
On Children's Consumption: The Consumption of Adult Clothing
White Married Families with Children 1972/73

(2)

(1)
b

Constant

t

(3)

b

t

b

t

210.512

1.60

428.846

2.61

270.750

1.55

12.373

5.25

15.508

5.65

15.077

5.49

—28.721

3.50

—40.244

4.15

—33.236

3.32

3.11

0.526

3.78

0.428

2.98

0.359

1.14

0.431

1.36

0.502

1 .

—6.476

0.74

—5.263

0.60

—3.401

0.39

4.146

0.24

4.242

0.24

3.732

0.21

0.626

0.03

—1.129

0.60

—2.292

0.12

South

36.935

2.10

38. 919

2.21

38. 086

2.16

Rural

—35. 348

2.10

—39. 763

2.35

—38. 608

2.28

s

education
Husband' s

age
(Age)2

Wife's weeks
of work
Children,
5
age
N.

central

West

Con sumpt ion

0.0597 37.93

"Taste" for
children—e

0.0582 35.38

—150.725

2.21

e x consumption

Adjusted R2

Number of
observations

58

0.0626 28.21

93.633 0.84
—0.0268 2.75

0.382

3168

0.383

3168

0.384

3168

—51—

Table 12: The Effect of Children on the Distribution Rule
and the [ntrafamily Allocation of Resources

1972/73
White

married

(1)

(2)

1960/61

Black
NotWhite
Black
Not—
married married married married married

The distribution rule:

Constant

496*

Husband's
education

_597*

4997

—86.92

Husband's age
2

293

_866*

—695

.4946* 4.83*

1.54

Rural

Consumption

1165*

-153.72

(Age)

Wife's weeks of
work

1015*

_164.45*

—17.13

—13.87

0.757

_21.72* 13.61*

0.755

0.732

0.370

0.754 0.880

0.630

The Intrafamily Distribution:

+

156

284

—110

1605

293

—866

695

Family Consumption 9582

9582

8271

5702

5993

4610

3637

Parent's
Consumption

7409

7519

5944

3715

4812 3190

1596

Children's
Consumption

2173

2063

2327

1987

1181 1420

2041

Parent's share

0.77

0.78

0.72

0.65

0.80 0.69

0.44

Source: Table:

2(eq.4)

4(eq.3)

5

5

*Based on estimates which are statistically not significant.

7

7

7

—52—

Table 13: The Effect of the Number of Children on the Distribution Rule and
the Intrafamily Distribution of Resources —

Number
of
children

Married White Families

1972/73
(1)

(2)

1960/61
(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

117
412
—475

485
—28
—375

92
92

The distribution rule

Constant (

— C)

1

756

2
3

99
—203

983
156
—650

—21.03

—20.82

—20.84

0.804
0.784
0.736

0.777
0.777
0.777

0.847
0.767
0.679

Wife's weeks of

work ()

Consumption

1

2
3

285
285

285

92

0.835
0.698
0.786

0.770
0.770
0.770

0.841
0.745
0.714

5627
6099
6309

5627
6099
6309

The intrafamily distribution
Family consumption

1

2

3

Parents' consumption

Children's
consumption

Parent's share

Expenditures
per child

Fixed costs of
children

8829
9779
10492

8829
9779
10492

8829
9779
10492

5627
6099
6309

1

7476

7468

7388

4815

4818

4824

2

7471

7463

3

7245

7232

7493
7138

4669
4484

4668
4483

4636
4597

1353
2308
3247

1361
2316
3260

1441
2286
3354

812
1430
1825

809
1431
1826

803
1463
1712

1

2
3

1

0.85

0.85

0.84

0.86

0.76

0.86

0.76

0.86

2

0.77

0.77

3

0.77

0.76

0.69

0.69

0.68

0.71

0.71

0.73

1353
1154
1082

1361
1158
1087

1441
1143
1118

812

809
716

803

833
1303

1064
2102

1

2
3
2

3

0
0

715
608

—423
753

608
594
1117

732
571
0

0

—53—

Table Al: The Consumption of Adult Clothing by Number of Children
White Married Families 1972/73

Number
0

b

Constant

Husband's
education
Husband's
age
2

of

children
2

1

t

b

t

b

3
t

b

t

—273.124

4.88

—251.856

2.24

—224.815

1.78

—53.335

0.23

12.131

5.75

14.409

3.91

10.102

3.04

5.506

1.22

—2.902 1.41

—2.350

0.39

—6.085

0.86

—7.364

0.57

(Age)

0.032

1.50

0.026

0.35

Husband's
weeks of
work

0.628

1.92

0.815

1.15

1.561

1.72

—0.790

0.71

Wife's weeks
of work

1.493

5.06

0.074

0.16

0.080

0.18

0.024

0.04

—10.745

0.45

6.262

0.31

2.374

0.09

Children
age 2—15

N. central

—4.844

0.28

—8.600

0.30

—13.316

0.54

68.126

2.08

—17.746

0.95

—11.106

0.37

—18.062

0.69

11.795

0.33

South

19.842

1.16

5.613

0.20

29.566

1.19

72.598

2.19

Rural

—18.843

1.22

—36.391

—14.625

0.61

West

Consumption

Adjusted R2

0.0762 46.39

0.456

1.35

0.0604 23.33

0.365

0.0604 26.44

0.390

0.0594 20.77

0.435

—54—

Table A2: The Consumption of Adult Goods by Number of Children

White Married Families 1972/73

of

t'umber

0
b

Constant

children
2

1

t

b

t

b

3
t

b

t

—330.869

4.95

—185.694

1.15

82.956

0.46

107.189

0.117

Husband's
education

6.098

2.42

—0.245

0.05

—2.668

0.66

—5.392

1.025

Husband's
age

9.190

3.73

13.130

1.68

—3.705

0.41

0.407

0.03

(Age)2

0.107

4.22

—0.169

1.80

—0.003

0.01

—0.108

0.54

Husband's
weeks of
work

0.723

1.85

0.293

0.31

0.892

0.81

0.436

0.33

Wife's weeks
of work

1.461

4.15

—0.559

0.95

0.442

0.81

—0.040

0.05

1.735

0.05

—8.053

0.50

0.004

0.00

Children

age<5
N. central

—27.238

1.34

2.429

0.07

—20.171

0.67

38.708

1.00

West

—28.050

1.26

—36.658

0.97

—43.580

1.87

—56.671

1.75

South

—13.584

0.67

—43.575

1.24

—29.536

0.98

17.479

0.44

Rural

—46.911

2.54

—74.982

2.21

—33.549

1.31

—78.624

Consumption

Adjusted R2

0.0951 48.55

0.485

0.0750 23.08

0.342

0.0757 27.38

0.382

0.0697 20.54

0.414

Table

—55—

b

2.05

t

—4.131

35.184

b

1.27

1.88

0.24

t

0.104

—9.284

—0.281

90.406

h

3.05

3.13

3.50

0.23

1.67

.A3:

The
of Adult Clothing by Number of Children
Consumption
White Married Families 1960/61
children

t

—175.571

0.89

—9.663

1.14

21.790

of

b

0.58
1.545

1.26

0.114

0.32

Number

t

56.228
0.35

5.391

1.57

4.331

1—3

b

1.84
—0.805

1.37

—0.085

0.85

3

—171.433
0.03

—6.174

1.13

9.016

2

0.058

0.49

0.062

2.28

0

Husband's
education
2.057

0.38

29.886

1.08

8.

748

—21.403

—45.1165

2.85

0.48

1.20

2.20

—32.222

4.592

8.329

—20.314

2.08

0.33

0.64

1.59

10.

655

19. 398

29.176

—4.382

0.57

1.08

1.80

0.29

—30.721

15.050

4.187

—36.144

2.86

1.57

0.46

4.00

t

Husband's
age
0.017

2.28

Constant

(Age)2

31.519

—19.399

1.05

—60. 5 68

Wife
employed

N. central

—19.599

2.97

5

West
—61.804

Youngest
child <

South

1.89

50.30

13.581
0737

1.49

0.

19.173

30.59
0.537

0783

2.45

0.

25.506

0.462

0672 31.13

0.68

0.

9.449

0.469

0.0811 28.51

1.80

0.479

0965 33.27

25.287
0.

Rural
Consumption
Adjusted R2

1.46

4.216

0.1346 35.01

Consumption

Adjusted R2

4.024

Rural

0.524

0.68

1.92

—52.958

3.47

2.02

South

—48.007

—85.797

central

West

N.

5

30.159

Wife
employed

Youngest
child <

4.51

—0.278

(Age)2

1.64

4.38

24.162

—

3.89

—479.936

t

Husband's
age

Husband's
education

Constant

b

0

Table A4:

8.881

1.00

2.49

0.96

1.53

2.12

2.51

1.40

1.01

2.44

0.07

t

0.498

0.1065 29.55

—17.570

—66.958

—22.216

—34.690

—55.042

41.608

—0.097

5.772

—7.050

—

b

1

Number
2

1.42

3.26

2.58

0.488

0.0954 32.99

19.853

—67.541

—47.620

1.07

0.39

6.652

—18.692

—

1.59

1.89

1.57

1.37

22.495

—0.138

8.998

—3.188

1.24

t

children

—142.630

b

of

4.661

0.1125

5.900

—13.407

—

27.247

23.865

20.840

0.088

—7.658

—13.139

80.196

b

3

0.554

32.01

0.33

0.52

0.60

1.23

1.13

1.12

0.64

0.73

4.35

0.40

t

36.408

0.016

—2.655

—6.729

81.361

b

—

0.1024

1.779

—53.633

—21.218

—11.803

0.60

3.80

1.68

0.99

2.26

3.88

0.36

0.76

4.27

1.14

t

0.498

53.23

1—3

—26.852

The Consumption of Adult Goods by Number of Children
White Married Families 1960/61

—56—

Figure 1

Adult
goods
q0

No children

/
/

a

/
/
/

/

x3

True lines
Biased estimates
0 children

a
a.

1 child

—. —.-— 2 children
3 children

With
children

x

Consumption

