                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PENSION PLANS:
                             STICKY OR DISCERNING MONEY?

                                           Clemens Sialm
                                            Laura Starks
                                           Hanjiang Zhang

                                        Working Paper 19569
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19569


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013


The authors thank Susan Christoffersen, Zhi Da, Steve Dimmock, Nancy Eckl, Michael Halling, Jennifer
Huang, Veronika Pool, Jim Poterba, Jonathan Reuter, John Simon, Irina Stefanescu, Marno Verbeek,
conference participants at the 2012 SIFR Conference on Mutual Funds in Stockholm, the 2013 Asian
Bureau of Finance and Economic Research Conference in Singapore, the 2013 China International
Conference in Finance in Shanghai, the 2013 Conference on Professional Asset Management at the
Rotterdam School of Management, and seminar participants at Georgia State University, the Hanken
School of Economics, the Helsinki School of Economics at Aalto, New York University, the University
of Oklahoma, the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Texas at Dallas, and the University
of Virginia for helpful comments. We thank Veronika Pool and Irina Stefanescu for sharing their Form
11-K data with us. The authors also thank Tania Davila for research assistance. Clemens Sialm thanks
the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research for financial support during his Sabbatical. Laura
Starks is a trustee of mutual funds and variable annuities offered by a retirement service provider.
She has also consulted for mutual fund management companies and 401(k) plan sponsors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Clemens Sialm, Laura Starks, and Hanjiang Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Defined Contribution Pension Plans: Sticky or Discerning Money?
Clemens Sialm, Laura Starks, and Hanjiang Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 19569
October 2013
JEL No. G02,G18,G23,G28,H55

                                            ABSTRACT

Participants in defined contribution (DC) retirement plans rarely adjust their portfolio allocations,
suggesting that their investment choices and consequent money flows are sticky and not discerning.
Yet, the participants’ inertia could be offset by the DC plan sponsors, who adjust the plan’s investment
options. We examine these countervailing influences on flows into U.S. mutual funds. We find that
flows into funds that derive from DC assets are more volatile and exhibit more performance sensitivity
than non-DC flows, primarily due to the adjustments of the investment options by the plan sponsors.
Thus, DC retirement money is less sticky and more discerning.


Clemens Sialm                                      Hanjiang Zhang
University of Texas at Austin                      Division of Banking and Finance
McCombs School of Business                         Nanyang Business School
1 University Station; B6600                        Nanyang Technological University
Austin, TX 78712                                   Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798
and NBER                                           Zhanghj@ntu.edu.sg
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu

Laura Starks
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
laura.starks@mccombs.utexas.edu
         Mutual fund holdings in employer sponsored defined contribution (DC) plans are an

important and growing segment of today’s financial markets. Assets in DC plans increased from

$1.7 trillion in 1995 to $5.1 trillion in 2012. Further, at the end of this period, DC plans

constituted 22% of total U.S. mutual fund assets and 27% of U.S. equity fund assets.1 Such
holdings are expected to remain important with the increasing number of Americans moving

toward retirement and with the transition of corporations and public entities towards the use of

defined contribution plans rather than defined benefit (DB) plans.

         Despite the prevalence of mutual fund holdings in employer-sponsored retirement

accounts, little is known about the effects of DC plan sponsors (i.e., employers) and participants

(i.e., employees) on mutual fund flows. Our paper analyzes the behavior of these sponsors and

participants and asks the central question of whether DC pension plan investments constitute a

source of sticky or discerning money for mutual funds. Conventional wisdom, based on previous

studies regarding the behavior of DC plan participants, suggests that the DC plan assets in

mutual funds should be sticky.2 However, the decisions regarding the composition of DC plan

menus are made by DC plan sponsors, who might frequently delete funds with poor prior

performance and add funds with superior prior performance. Which of these influences has a

greater effect on fund flows is an empirical question that we address in this paper. Further, we

consider the implications of these influences for both plan participants and the mutual fund
industry.

         Although investors who own mutual funds directly have the flexibility to choose among

the universe of mutual funds, typically participants in employer-sponsored DC plans have

limited choices.3 These choices arise through a two-stage process. In the first stage plan sponsors
1
  Investment Company Institute (ICI), The U.S. Retirement Market, Fourth Quarter 2012, Trends in Mutual Fund
Investing, February 2013, and 2013 Investment Company Handbook, p. 114.
2
  See for example, Benartzi and Thaler (2001); Madrian and Shea (2001); Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick
(2002); Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003); Duflo and Saez (2003); Huberman and Jiang (2006); and Carroll et
al. (2009). In contrast, evidence suggests that individual investors exhibit relatively high turnover in their traditional
(directly held) brokerage accounts (e.g., Barber and Odean (2000), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), and Ivković and
Weisbenner (2009)).
3
  For example, a 2011 Deloitte survey of DC plan sponsors found that the median DC plan includes 16 investment
options.

                                                            1
select the DC plan menus and adjust the investment options through time by removing or adding

options. In a second stage, the employees allocate their individual DC account balances among

the choices made available to them by the plan sponsors.

        This two stage process contributes to different investor behavior patterns for DC plan

investors versus ordinary mutual fund investors. Thus, we expect the fund flows from DC plans

to behave differently than flows from non-DC sources. On the one hand, DC plan participants

make periodic retirement account contributions and withdrawals, which are persistent over time.

In addition, they may evaluate their present and prospective fund holdings differently from non-

DC fund investors due to longer investment horizons and a different tax status.4 These aspects
may explain the documented inertia by DC plan participants in the previous literature in which

retirement savers are found to have a tendency to rebalance and trade infrequently and to follow

default options. The documented inertia in DC plan participants’ investment decisions leads to

the commonly held belief that retirement money flows should have low volatility, high

autocorrelation, and low sensitivity to prior fund performance.

        On the other hand, the infrequent trading by individual plan participants could be offset

by the plan sponsors’ adjustments to the plan’s menus. That is, to satisfy their fiduciary

responsibilities, plan sponsors monitor the available investment options.5 They may choose to

replace poorly-performing funds with investment options that exhibited superior prior
performance.6 Thus, rather than being sticky, DC money could actually act as an important
disciplining mechanism for fund managers, resulting in money flows that exhibit higher

volatility, lower autocorrelation, and higher flow-performance sensitivity.


4
  The tax on income to investments in DC plans is deferred until the income is distributed. See Sialm and Starks
(2012) for a discussion of tax clienteles in equity mutual funds.
5
  See the U.S. Department of Labor’s Employee Benefits Services Administration website for information on
fiduciary obligations in DC plans: http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/publications/fiduciaryresponsibility.html. Over the last
decade there have been numerous lawsuits filed against plan sponsors and service providers. Most of these lawsuits
allege the plans are charging excessive or hidden fees, however, the complaints have also included allegations of
improper monitoring of options
(http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204777904576651133452868572.html).
6
  In 2011, 43% of plan sponsors responding to a Deloitte survey of DC plans stated that they had replaced at least
one fund due to poor performance within the previous year.

                                                        2
       To test these competing influences regarding the effects of DC plans on mutual fund

flows, we compare the flows of DC and non-DC mutual fund investors from 1997 to 2010. We

find that money flows into mutual funds by DC plan participants are more volatile and exhibit a

lower serial correlation than the flows into mutual funds by other investors. Thus, DC asset

flows tend to be less sticky than non-DC flows.

       Furthermore, our empirical results show that DC flows react more sensitively to prior

fund performance than do non-DC flows. In fact, the flow-performance sensitivity of the DC

flows is particularly pronounced for funds in the lowest and highest performance quintiles. Using

the piecewise linear specification of Sirri and Tufano (1998), we find that a ten percentile

deterioration in prior-year performance for a bottom quintile mutual fund generates outflows of

11.9% by DC investors compared to outflows of only 3.3% by non-DC investors. On the other

hand, a ten percentile improvement in prior-year performance for a top quintile mutual fund

generates inflows of 17.8% by DC investors and inflows of only 4.9% by non-DC investors.

Thus, contrary to the widely held conventional wisdom, we find that DC money is actually more

sensitive to prior performance than non-DC money.

       These results suggest that plan sponsors counteract the previously documented inertia of

DC participants. To test the follow-on hypothesis that the high flow-performance sensitivity of

DC funds is driven by the actions of the plan sponsor, we use data on a sample of 401(k) plans

that have 11-K filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. This data allows us to

decompose flows into those resulting primarily from plan sponsor actions versus those resulting

from participant actions. We find that our flow results are primarily driven by the actions of the

plan sponsors and consistent with previous research, we also confirm that the plan participants

themselves exhibit inertia and do not react sensitively to prior fund performance.

       To investigate whether DC fund flows are more discerning than non-DC flows, we

consider whether mutual fund flows from DC and non-DC investors can predict funds’ long-term

future return performance. Berk and Green (2004) present a model with decreasing returns to

scale in fund management where fund flows rationally respond to past performance. Their model
                                                  3
implies that fund flows do not predict future fund performance. For DC flows, consistent with

the Berk and Green hypothesis, we find no significant predictability for future performance. On

the other hand, we find that non-DC flows predict longer-term performance negatively. Overall,

our results indicate that DC money is less sticky and more discerning than non-DC money.

         Del Guercio and Tkac (2002), Heisler, Knittel, Neuman, and Stewart (2007), and Goyal

and Wahal (2008) have provided important evidence regarding the actions of defined benefit

(DB) pension plan sponsors on retirement money flows to the DB plan investment managers.

This evidence does not necessarily correspond to the effects of DC plan sponsors and

participants on mutual fund flows for several reasons.7 First, DB plans and DC plans exhibit very
different asset allocations and the investment risks are borne by different market participants. In

a DB plan the plan sponsors make the decisions regarding the portfolio allocations and the

investment risks are primarily borne by the plan sponsors. On the other hand, in a DC plan the

allocation decisions are made by the individual participants from options selected by the plan

sponsors and the investment risks are borne by the participants. Thus, DC asset allocations are

the result of a joint decision made by the actions of the plan participants and the plan sponsors.8

         Second, DC plan sponsors need to consider the attraction and appropriateness of different

investment options for their participants. The ultimate allocations of DB plans depend on the

choices of the DB plan sponsors whereas the ultimate allocations of DC plans depend on the
two-stage process described above, that is, the menu choices of the DC plan sponsors and the




7
  Papers on the design of DC pension plans include Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992); Benartzi and Thaler
(2001); Madrian and Shea (2001); Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2002, 2006); Agnew, Balduzzi, and
Sunden (2003); Duflo and Saez (2003); Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner (2007); Davis and Kim (2007); Elton,
Gruber, and Blake (2006, 2007); Huberman and Jiang (2006); Rauh (2006); Goyal and Wahal (2008); Carroll et al.
(2009); Cohen and Schmidt (2009); Stewart et al. (2009); Brown and Harlow (2012); Tang, Mitchell, Mottola, and
Utkus (2010); Balduzzi and Reuter (2013); Christoffersen and Simutin (2013); Pool, Sialm, and Stefanescu (2013),
and Rydqvist, Strebulaev, and Spizman (2013).
8
  Further, as pointed out by Heisler, Knittel, Neuman, and Stewart (2007), in a DB plan the sponsors may frequently
rebalance their asset allocations. This rebalancing will affect investor manager flows in a DB plan. In contrast, in our
setting the participants of a DC plan have control over their asset allocation. Thus, the type of rebalancing suggested
by these authors would only occur if the participants made the choice, not the plan sponsor.

                                                           4
selections of the individual plan participants. Thus, the aggregate plan allocations of DB and DC

plans would be expected to differ substantially as they do.9
        Third, whereas DC plans typically include mutual fund investment options, DB plans

generally invest lower proportions in mutual funds. Thus, we do not have evidence on the flow-

performance sensitivity of employer-sponsored retirement plan investments in mutual funds and

no reason to believe they would follow the patterns documented for DB plans.

        Finally, in the U.S., DC plans have become a more important retirement vehicle than DB

plans. According to EBRI and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the percentage of full-time

employees at medium and large private establishments in 1993 who participated in DB and DC

plans equaled 56% and 49%, respectively. By 2012, the percentage of DB participation of

employees at medium and large private establishments declined to 28%, whereas the

participation in DC plans increased to 54%.10 Thus, as DC plans have gained prominence relative

to DB plans, it has become important to analyze the behavior of DC plan sponsors and

participants and particularly their effects on the mutual fund industry.

        Having a better understanding of the impact of defined contribution plans on fund flows

and their sensitivity to fund performance is important for several reasons. First, fund flows can

affect the resource allocation of capital markets through their effects on asset prices. They thus

influence which sectors and companies obtain financial resources.11 Second, performance-based
compensation in the mutual fund industry occurs primarily through fund flows. That is, high-

performing funds garner more assets and receive higher remuneration, since management fees

are typically a fixed percentage of assets. It is important to understand the determinants of fund


9
 McFarland (2013) reports that the asset allocations for selected Fortune 1000 companies differ substantially
between DB and DC plans. In 2010 the average DB asset allocation includes 48% public equity, 34% debt, 2% real
estate, and 16% other, whereas the average DC asset allocation includes 60% public equity, 34% debt, 0% real
estate, and 6% other. – A small allocation to specialized investment options (e.g., commodities, hedge funds, private
equity, venture capital) is often desirable in DB plans. However, DC plan sponsors might choose to only offer such
specialized choices in their retirement menus through a fund of funds such as target date funds.
10
   The 1993 data is available at http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/sp/ebbl0024.pdf and the 2012 data is available at
http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2012/ownership/private/table02a.pdf.
11
   See for example, Wermers (2003); Coval and Stafford (2007); and Lou (2012).

                                                         5
flows since portfolio managers are primarily incentivized through fund flows.12 Finally, fund
flows exert externalities on the remaining fund investors. For example, fund flows can require

fund managers to adjust their portfolios, incur trading and tax costs, and change their investment

strategies.13

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the data sources

and gives summary statistics. Section II compares the standard deviations and the

autocorrelations of fund flows in DC and non-DC environments. Section III analyzes the flow-

performance relation for DC and non-DC fund assets. Section IV contrasts the impact of plan

sponsors and plan participants on the flow-performance relation of DC assets. Section V studies

the performance predictability of DC and non-DC fund flows and Section VI concludes.



                                                     I. Data
A. Data Sources
        We employ several different databases for our analysis. The first set of data is obtained

from annual surveys of mutual fund management companies conducted by Pensions &

Investments over the 1997-2010 time period.14 In these surveys the companies are asked to report

the dollar amount of the mutual fund assets held in Defined Contribution (DC) retirement

accounts (as of December 31st of the year prior to the survey date) for the mutual funds most
used by DC plans.15 Mutual fund families are asked in the survey to report the DC plan assets for


12
   See for example, Brown, Harlow and Starks (1996); Chevalier and Ellison (1997); Sirri and Tufano (1998); Del
Guercio and Tkac (2002, 2008); Berk and Green (2004); Huang, Wei, and Yan (2007, 2012); Ivkovich and
Weisbenner (2009); and Del Guercio and Reuter (2013).
13
   See for example, Barclay, Pearson, and Weisbach (1998); Edelen (1999); Khorana and Servaes (1999); Dickson,
Shoven, and Sialm (2000); Bergstresser and Poterba (2002); Alexander, Cici and Gibson (2007); Christoffersen,
Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2006); Coval and Stafford, (2007); Chen, Goldstein and Jiang (2010); and Sialm and
Starks (2012).
14
   We thank David Klein from Pensions & Investments for providing us with the survey data. Additional information
about the survey can be obtained from the website at http://www.pionline.com. Earlier surveys from the same data
source have been used previously by Christoffersen, Geczy, Musto and Reed (2006) and Sialm and Starks (2012). In
a contemporaneous paper Christoffersen and Simutin (2013) investigate the risk taking incentives of mutual funds
with different investor clienteles.
15
   The sample includes 401(k), 403(b), 457, profit sharing, and other defined contribution plan assets. This
specifically excludes other tax qualified investment vehicles that could be held in mutual funds such as Individual

                                                        6
the twelve funds with the largest DC assets in each of several broad investment categories

(Domestic Equity Funds, Domestic Fixed Income Funds, International Equity Funds, Balanced

Funds, Money Market Funds). We focus on the category of domestic equity funds because they

are the most used mutual funds in DC plans over our sample period and because we can abstract

from changes in asset classes across the plans.16
        Our second set of data, which is derived from the CRSP Survivorship Bias Free Mutual

Fund database, consists of mutual fund characteristics such as fund returns, total assets under

management, fees, and investment objectives. To avoid the incubation bias described by Evans

(2010), we exclude funds which in the previous month managed less than $5 million, funds with

missing fund names in the CRSP database, and funds where the year for the observation is in the

same year or in an earlier year than the reported fund starting year. For funds with multiple

share classes, we combine the classes into one observation per fund and compute the fund-level

variables by aggregating across the different share classes. We merge the CRSP data with the

survey data using the funds’ ticker symbols and names. We also merge the CRSP database with

the Thomson Financial CDA/Spectrum holdings database and the CRSP stock price database

using the MFLINKS file based on Wermers (2000) and available through the Wharton Research

Data Services (WRDS).

        In order to understand the generalizability of our analysis, we compare the domestic

equity funds listed in the Pensions & Investments dataset to those included in the CRSP database.

We find that the Pensions & Investments dataset has wide coverage – the fund families in our

sample control over 77% of the total value of equity funds included in CRSP. In addition,

although we do not have the level of DC assets for all funds in families that have many mutual

funds, the levels of assets that we do have indicate that the excluded funds tend to have relatively


Retirement Accounts (IRAs), Keoghs and SARSEPs. It also does not include other retirement assets under
administration by the fund family such as sponsoring company stock.
16
   Specifically, we eliminate balanced, bond, international, and money market funds, as well as funds that, on
average, hold less than 80% of common stock. Index funds are included. However, our results are not affected
qualitatively if we exclude index funds. Target date funds are not included in this classification because they are
typically funds of funds and tend to hold bond funds as well as equity funds.

                                                        7
low DC assets. In particular, the funds in our database (with non-censored DC assets) account for

85% of the total equity assets of the surveyed fund families.

        Our final data set derives from plan sponsors’ required annual Form 11-K filings with the

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).17 These filings are only required when an employer
offers company stock as part of their DC plan. Included in the information on Form 11-K are the

values of assets in each of the plan’s investment options along with the name of the mutual fund

or other plan provider. This data set allows us to decompose the fund flows from the plan into

flows driven primarily by the actions of plan sponsors and flows driven primarily by plan

participants.



B. Flow Definitions
        Using the Pensions & Investments data we divide the flows into DC flows and non-DC

flows as follows:


          DC Flow f , t 
                                                                    
                            DC Assets f , t  DC Assets f , t 1 1  R f , t   
                                     DC Assets f , t 1 1  R f , t 
                                                                                                            (1)


          NonDC Flow f , t 
                                 NonDC Assets f ,t  NonDC Assets f ,t 1 1  R f ,t      
                                                                         
                                             NonDC Assets f ,t 1 1  R f , t                              (2)




where DC Flowf,t denotes the defined contribution flows to fund f in year t based on the
difference between the end of year DC assets in the fund less the product of the beginning of

year DC assets and one plus the fund’s return in that year. The denominator ensures that the fund

flows never fall below -100%. The NonDC Flowf,t is defined analogously where NonDC Assetsf,t

are fund f’s total assets at time t less the fund’s DC assets at time t adjusted for the fund returns.




17
  We thank Veronika Pool and Irina Stefanescu for providing us with the data. Additional information on the data
can be obtained from Pool, Sialm, and Stefanescu (2013). Their paper analyzes favoritism by mutual fund families
toward their own affiliated funds.

                                                            8
        The 11-K data give us the assets of plan p invested in mutual fund f at time t (Assetsp,f,t).
We aggregate across all plans invested in fund f at times t and t-1. That is, to obtain the Plan

Flow of fund f at time t using the 11-K data, we sum the estimated dollar flows across all plans

that offer the fund and divide this aggregate flow by the aggregate initial plan value adjusted for

the fund return. We only compute the plan flow for a fund if at least one 401(k) plan in the 11-K

data offers that specific mutual fund in the prior year.

                              Assets p, f ,t   Assets p, f ,t 1 1  R f ,t 
         Plan Flow f , t 
                              p                       p

                                        Assets p, f ,t 1 1  R f ,t 
                                                                                                                (3)
                                        p




        Although we cannot observe the individual allocation decisions of plan participants and

sponsors, we do observe whether a new investment option is included in a plan or whether an old

option is excluded by comparing the asset allocations from one year to the next. Since the plan

sponsor determines the changes in the menu, we term the flows due to fund additions and

deletions as Plan Sponsor Flow:

                                             Assets p, f ,t   Assets p, f ,t 1 1  R f ,t 
                                       p Additions                  pDeletions
         Plan SponsorFlow f , t 
                                                           Assets p, f ,t 1 1  R f ,t 
                                                                                                                (4)
                                                           p




        The residual flows are termed Plan Participant Flows, because plan participants can

generally allocate their retirement funds freely between the various investment options provided

in the plan’s menu:18

18
  Plan sponsors might also influence the residual Plan Participant Flows due to incremental changes in the plan
design. Examples of sponsor decisions that could also influence Plan Participant Flows include closures of mutual
funds to new investments while grandfathering current fund holdings, selection of specific funds as default
investment options, and additions of new funds that compete with incumbent funds. On the other hand, it is unlikely
that Plan Sponsor Flows would capture direct allocation decisions solely made by plan participants. This would only
happen if all plan participants would coordinate their allocation decisions and completely avoid investing in a fund
that is an available menu choice. Thus, our measure of Plan Sponsor Flow likely underestimates the influence of
sponsors and overestimates the influence of participants.

                                                                 9
        Plan Participant Flow f , t  Plan Flow f , t  Plan Sponsor Flow f , t              (5)



C. Summary Statistics
        Our primary sample of merged data from the CRSP and Pensions & Investments
databases covers 1,078 distinct equity funds and 5,808 fund-year observations over the period
between 1996 and 2009. Panel A of Table I shows the summary statistics. The equal-weighted
mean of the proportion of assets in the mutual funds held in DC plans (DC Ratio) is 25.4%, with
the first quartile being 8.5% ranging up to 35.5% for the third quartile. However, some large
actively managed funds have very high DC ratios. For example, in 2010, Fidelity’s Contrafund
had a DC ratio of 65.9%, Vanguard’s Primecap Fund had a DC ratio of 53.4%, and American
Fund’s Growth Fund of America had a DC ratio of 42.5%. Table I also shows that the funds in
the sample have average assets under management of around $3.9 billion, come from a fund
family with an average of $57.2 billion in assets under management, are on average 16 years old,
charge an average expense ratio of 1.16%, exhibit an average turnover rate of 78%, and have an
average annual return of 6.8%.
       To reduce the impact of outliers, we winsorize the extreme fund flows at the 2.5% level.
Table I shows that the annual growth in DC assets for the average fund in our sample has been
much larger than the annual growth in the Non-DC assets at 32.0% compared to 6.7%. Part of
this difference is due to the fact that DC assets start on average from a smaller base.
       The data from the annual Form 11-K filings indicate that this sample’s 401(k) plans
include on average 9.8 equity mutual funds over the sample period from 1999 to 2009. The
average number of equity mutual fund options has increased from 5.9 in 1999 to 12.2 in 2009.
The 11-K filings indicate that plan sponsors adjust their investment menus frequently. On
average, plans delete 1.2 domestic equity fund options and include 1.9 new domestic equity fund
options every year. Table I shows that plan flows into the mutual funds on the menu average
around 22.3% with a median of 3.6%, indicating that a substantial proportion of flows are
concentrated on a relatively small number of funds. Dividing these flows between sponsors and
                                                   10
participants shows that sponsor decisions result in an average annual inflow of 9.7% and plan
participants’ actions lead to an average annual flow of 12.6%. The standard deviation of plan
sponsor flows is around three times higher than the standard deviation of plan participant flows,
indicating that most fund flows in 401(k) plans are caused by the addition and deletion decisions
of plan sponsors.
       Panel B of Table I summarizes the correlations between the key variables. While the DC
ratio for a fund is positively correlated with fund and family size, it is negatively correlated with
fund age, expense ratio, and fund turnover. Thus, DC plans tend to focus on large but relatively
younger mutual funds with lower expense ratios and lower portfolio turnovers. Finally, the
various flow measures are all positively correlated, suggesting that the flows of different market
participants are following similar signals.



                    II. Standard Deviation and Autocorrelation of Fund Flows
       The documented inertia of DC plan participants leads to the commonly held belief that
DC flows into mutual funds should have lower volatility than other investor flows. Moreover,
given the stability of contributions and withdrawals into DC plan retirement accounts over time,
one would also expect a higher autocorrelation of flows from DC plans than that from non-DC
plans. Table I, however, provides preliminary evidence against these hypotheses in that DC
flows tend to be substantially more volatile than non-DC flows. This relation is at first glance
surprising given the relative stability in DC contributions and withdrawals over time. However,
since plan sponsors and their participants can reallocate their DC assets across different mutual
funds their actions could create more volatile flows for funds with high DC assets. The tests in
this section are designed to evaluate these alternative hypotheses in more detail.
       To test whether DC money is more stable than non-DC money in mutual funds, we
examine the relation between the standard deviation (or the autocorrelation) of the growth rate of
new money and fund characteristics. Specifically, for each fund in our sample, we compute the
standard deviation and the autocorrelation of the annual flow over the time period the fund
                                                 11
appears in our sample.19 In the regressions we pool the DC and non-DC flows together and
regress the moments against an indicator variable for DC investor flows along with control
variables that are evaluated at the beginning of the respective time periods. We report the results
in Table II. In the first and fourth columns of the table, the indicator variable is the sole
independent variable. In the second and fifth columns we add control variables for fund
characteristics, such as the logarithm of fund size, the logarithm of family size, the logarithm of
fund age, the expense ratio, and the portfolio turnover. The continuous control variables are
demeaned so that we can interpret the constant as the fitted moments for non-DC funds evaluated
at the means of the control variables. Finally, in the third and sixth columns we also include
interaction effects between the DC indicator variable and the demeaned control variables.
        Regardless of the specification, we find significant differences in the behavior of the DC
flows as compared to the other flows. First, the standard deviation of DC flows exceeds the
corresponding moment of non-DC flows. For example, the standard deviation of annual DC
flows exceeds the standard deviation of non-DC flows by between 21.2% and 52.2% per year
depending on whether we adjust for other fund characteristics. After adjusting for fund
characteristics, the difference in standard deviations is reduced, but still highly significant. The
reason for the reduction is primarily because the level of DC assets in a fund tends to be smaller
than the level of non-DC assets. Second, we find that the autocorrelation of DC flows is
significantly lower than that for non-DC flows in all specifications. These results support the
hypothesis that DC flows are not stickier than non-DC flows. In fact, counter to conventional
wisdom, the DC flows are actually significantly more volatile and less autocorrelated than non-
DC flows. These results support the hypothesis that DC plans have significant effects on the
mutual funds in which their assets are invested. The extent of these effects is explored in more
detail in the following section.



19
  For this part of the analysis, in order to compute these moments we require funds to have at least five years of
available flow data.

                                                       12
                   III. Flow-Performance Relation for DC and Non-DC Assets
        We next test hypotheses regarding the flow-performance sensitivity of DC versus non-
DC assets by examining the percentage flows by DC and non-DC assets separately. We have
hypothesized that a difference in the flow-performance sensitivity in the two environments could
occur because the actions of plan sponsors and participants could be different from that of
direct mutual fund investors. Two alternative hypotheses exist regarding these differences. First,
a lower flow-performance sensitivity for DC assets would be expected if plan sponsors and their
participants exhibit inertia by not changing their DC account portfolio allocations as frequently
as do non-DC investors in directly held mutual fund accounts. The second, contrasting
hypothesis considers the possibility that DC plan sponsors or participants are actively adjusting
their plan choices based on prior fund performance. In this case, DC assets would exhibit more
flow-performance sensitivity.20 Moreover, the heightened sensitivity would be expected under

both low and high performance if it is due to the plan sponsor replacement process. That is, when
plan sponsors adjust their investment option menus by moving participants’ assets from a poorly
performing fund to a replacement fund, this action would induce flow-performance sensitivity in
the lower performance range. Correspondingly, since the plan sponsors’ replacement process
typically restricts the replacement fund to a set of better performing funds in the same investment
objective group as the previous fund, this process would also induce flow-performance
sensitivity in the higher performance range.

A. Estimation Method
        In this section we compare the flow-performance relation for DC and non-DC assets. For
each fund in our sample we employ the Pensions & Investments data to separate the DC and non-




20
   Plan sponsors and participants may behave differently in such situations. We expect the observed flow-
performance sensitivity to reflect the dominant forces between these two parties. We compare the behavior of plan
sponsors and participants in Section IV.

                                                       13
DC assets and compute the annual percentage flows (growth rates) of DC and non-DC assets
according to equations (1) and (2).
        To capture the flow-performance sensitivity, we relate these annual flows to the relative
fund performance rank (Rank) over the prior year while controlling for other lagged fund
characteristics, such as the logarithms of the total DC and non-DC assets (DC Size and NonDC
Size), the logarithm of family TNA (Fam Size), the logarithm of the time period since fund
initiation (Age), the lagged expense ratio (Exp), the lagged annual turnover of the fund (Turn),
the monthly return volatility over the prior year (Vol), the average contemporaneous flow of
funds in the same style category (SFlow), and year fixed effects ():



                                       
          Flow f , t  f Rank f , t 1  1DC Size f , t 1   2 NonDC Size f , t 1   3 Fam Size f , t 1
                      4 Age f , t 1   5 Exp f , t 1   6Turn f , t 1   7Vol f , t 1   8 SFlow f , t   t   f , t (6)


        We define the fund performance measure Rankf,t as the percentile performance rank a

particular fund f obtains across all equity funds in the sample during a specific performance
evaluation period. Funds in the worst performance percentile obtain a rank of 0.01 and funds in
the best performance percentile obtain a rank of 1.00.21
        To capture non-linearities in the flow-performance relation we use two different
functional forms for f(Rankf,t). The first non-parametric functional form simply estimates
separate effects for each percentile:


         f1 Rank f ,t     j I 100  Rank f ,t  j 
                          100
                                                                                                                               (7)
                          j 1




21
   We also present robustness tests in which the performance rank is computed within objective-code categories,
within holdings-based style categories, and using the Carhart (1997) four-factor adjusted performance measure over
the prior year.

                                                              14
where I(100×Rank = j) is an indicator variable that equals one if the performance rank of a
specific fund falls in the jth percentile and zero otherwise. The coefficient j captures the average
flow of funds in the jth percentile if all the other covariates of equation (4) are equal to zero. In
this specification we estimate 100 different performance-sensitivity coefficients .
       A second functional form follows Sirri and Tufano (1998) and estimates a piecewise
linear specification:


                    
        f 2 Rank f , t   L Low f ,t   M Mid f ,t   H High f ,t ,                            (8)


       where Lowf,t = min(Rankf,t, 0.2); Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6); and Highf,t = (Rankf,t –

Lowf,t – Midf,t).        The performance coefficients L, M, and H capture the marginal flow-
performance sensitivities in the bottom quintile, in the three middle quintiles, and in the top
quintile, respectively. For example, a fund in the 15th percentile would experience flows of
0.15×L if all the other covariates were equal to zero. On the other hand, a fund in the 85th
percentile would experience flows of 0.2×L + 0.6×M + 0.05×H if all the other covariates were
zero. This specification estimates a continuous piecewise linear function.



B. Percentile Flows
       Figure 1 depicts the flow-performance relation for DC and non-DC assets using the non-
parametric specification with percentile ranks. The dots show the average flows for the 100
performance groups, where the remaining covariates are evaluated at their sample means. The
diamonds correspond to DC flows and the circles correspond to non-DC flows. The solid curves
show the least-squares cubic relation. Since the funds in our sample are held in both DC and non-
DC environments, for each fund we calculate two different asset growth rates corresponding to
DC assets and non-DC assets. Thus, the fund composition of the various performance rank
percentiles between DC and non-DC portfolios are identical and the flow differences between
DC and non-DC assets cannot be explained by differences in fund characteristics.
                                                          15
        We observe that DC assets on average experience larger fund flows than non-DC assets
due to the significant growth of tax-qualified retirement accounts over our sample period. Funds
with performance ranks in the middle 10% (i.e., funds with performance ranks between the 46th
and the 55th percentile) experience inflows of 23.7% for DC assets and 2.1% for non-DC assets.
        Whereas the flow-performance relation is close to linear for non-DC assets, the relation is
clearly non-linear for DC assets. Further, the flow-performance relation is particularly steep for
DC assets corresponding to funds in the top and bottom performance groups. For example, funds
in the bottom decile of performance experience an average outflow of 8.3% of their DC assets
and funds in the top decile experience an average inflow of 53.6% of their DC assets. On the
other hand, funds in the bottom decile experience an average outflow of 11.8% of their non-DC
assets and funds in the top decile experience an average inflow of 17.9% of their non-DC assets.
Although bottom decile funds experience similar DC and non-DC flows, the low growth of DC
assets of poorly performing funds is meaningful given the substantial growth of DC assets over
our sample period.22



C. Piecewise Linear Specification
        The non-parametric flow-performance relation from Figure 1 justifies the piecewise
linear specification suggested by Sirri and Tufano (1998), who estimate different flow-
performance sensitivities for the top and bottom performance quintiles. The results of these
alternative panel regressions are summarized in Table III. The first three columns are based on
the fund performance over the prior year, whereas the last three columns are based on fund
performance over the prior five years. For each horizon, we report the coefficient estimates for
DC and non-DC percentage flows and the coefficient estimates for a regression in which the
dependent variables equal the difference between the DC and the non-DC percentage flows. The

22
  Unreported tests using the first three polynomials of fund performance ranks indicate that only the cubic term on
the demeaned fund performance rank is statistically significant for DC flows, whereas only the linear term on the
performance rank is statistically significant for non-DC flows. These results are available in Table A-I in the
Appendix.

                                                        16
standard errors of the coefficients are reported in parentheses and adjust for clustering at the fund
level. The regressions include time-fixed effects.
        Consistent with Figure 1, Table III indicates an economically and statistically significant
flow-performance relation for the extreme performance quintiles using the DC flows for both the
1-year and 5-year performance periods. A ten-percentile increase in the performance rank over
the prior year increases the DC flows by 11.9% for the bottom quintile, by 2.4% for the middle
three quintiles, and by 17.8% for the top quintile. On the other hand, the flow-performance
relation is more linear for the non-DC flows. For example, a ten-percentile increase in the
performance rank over the prior year increases the non-DC flows by 3.3% for the bottom
quintile, by 2.8% for the middle three quintiles, and by 4.9% for the top quintile. The third
column indicates that the differences in flow-performance sensitivities are significant for the top
and bottom performance quintiles. We illustrate the results of this linear piecewise regression in
Figure 2, which depicts the flow-performance relation for DC and non-DC flows evaluated at the
means of the remaining covariates.23
        Consistent with Sirri and Tufano (1998), we find that the sensitivity to the one-year
performance is generally stronger than the sensitivity to longer-term performance measures. This
difference in sensitivity is less pronounced for DC flows than for non-DC flows. Although the
DC flows are the result of a joint decision by plan sponsors and participants and as explained
earlier the role of plan sponsors in DC plans is fundamentally different from that of DB plan
sponsors, it can still be instructive to compare our results to those of studies on DB plan
sponsors. In particular, Del Guercio and Tkac (2002) and Heisler, Knittel, Neumann, and Stewart
(2007) document that DB pension clients do not flock disproportionately to recent winners,
which varies from our results for DC plans. However, our results are consistent with those of



23
   The results are not affected qualitatively if we use the Fama-MacBeth (1973) estimation method, as summarized
in Table A-II in the Appendix. Furthermore, as shown in Table A-III in the Appendix, the results are similar if the
piecewise linear segments are estimated based on the funds with performance ranks in the highest or lowest 10% or
30% of the sample.

                                                        17
Goyal and Wahal (2008), who find that DB plan sponsors hire investment managers after they
earn large positive excess returns.
       Important remaining explanatory variables for fund flows in Table III are the sizes of the
DC and non-DC assets invested in the fund and the size of the fund family. The fund’s DC asset
size has a negative effect on DC flows for both the one- and the five-year horizon and the fund’s
non-DC asset size has a negative effect on the non-DC flows. These negative effects would be
expected because the growth rates of fund flows tend to decline with the size of the assets under
management. The positive effects of family size capture positive spillovers between non-DC and
DC clienteles, which is also reflected in the positive coefficient on non-DC size with DC flows.
Thus, funds from larger fund families tend to attract both DC and non-DC assets with no
significant difference between the two.
       The flow-performance relation for DC assets in mutual funds differs substantially from
the relation reported in the literature for mutual funds in general. (See, for example, Chevalier
and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998), Huang, Wei, and Yan (2007), and Kim (2011),
among others.) These studies typically find a convex flow-performance relation for the total
mutual fund assets. Our results provide a contrast as we find that as a group, DC savers and their
sponsors appear to be monitoring their mutual funds more closely than traditional mutual fund
investors, resulting in a more sensitive flow-performance relation for extreme performers.



E. Alternative Performance Benchmarks
       Since performance can be measured in many different ways, in this section we consider
the flow-performance relation for alternative performance measures. The results are summarized
in Table IV. The first set of columns ranks our sample of funds within the three objective codes
given by the Thomson Financial fund holdings database for domestic equity mutual funds
(Aggressive Growth, Growth, Growth and Income). The second set of columns uses holdings-
based style measures to rank the performance of funds. Following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and
Wermers (1997) and Wermers (2003), we group each stock listed in CRSP into respective
                                               18
quintiles according to its market value (using NYSE cutoff levels) and its industry-adjusted
book-to-market ratio. Using the quintile information of stocks held by a mutual fund, we
compute the value-weighted size and book-to-market scores for each fund in each period. Mutual
funds are subsequently divided into terciles according to their average size score and their
average book-to-market score. Based on the size and book-to-market terciles, we form nine style
groups. Finally, each year we rank the equity funds within each of the nine size and book-to-
market groups according to their raw performance. The third set of columns in Table IV ranks
mutual funds according to their Fama-French-Carhart alphas over the prior year using weekly
returns, which reflect the funds’ performance after adjustment by a market factor, a size factor, a
book-to-market factor, and a momentum factor. For all models we rank the performance of the
funds over the prior 12 months. Furthermore, the specifications control for the standard
deviations of the objective-adjusted, the style-adjusted, and the four-factor adjusted returns
during the prior year. These volatilities correspond to the tracking errors relative to the respective
benchmark returns. In all three alternative specifications we find that the sensitivity of flows to
prior performance is stronger for DC assets than for non-DC assets confirming our previous
results. Thus, our results are not driven by style or objective effects.



F. Different Subperiods
       The structure of DC pension plans has evolved substantially over our sample period.
Possible drivers of this evolution include regulatory changes, participant lawsuits, and pressure
from employees and the public. For example, some of the structural changes include the
broadening of the available investment choices, the movement toward a more open architecture
in which the plan menus include investment options from different providers, the adoption of




                                                  19
automatic enrollment, which directs new funds into the default fund specified by the plan, and
the movement away from fixed income default funds to target date default funds.24
        Beyond the changes in plan structures, the behavior of fund investors could also vary
across different market environments. For example, Kim (2011) does not find convexity in the
flow-performance relation during the 2000s when markets are volatile and there is less
dispersion in performance across funds.
        To investigate whether plan structure and market environment changes have affected the
flow-performance relation over our sample period, we divide our sample into two equal
subperiods (1996-2002 and 2003-2009). Table V reports the results of the piecewise linear
specification over the two subperiods. For the non-DC assets we find a significant convex flow-
performance relation between 1996 and 2002, which disappears between 2003 and 2009. On the
other hand, for the DC assets we find a strong flow-performance sensitivity for the bottom and
the top performance quintiles over the later period (between 2003 and 2009). Interestingly, the
sensitivity of flows to bottom quintile performance for DC assets is relatively weak over the
earlier period (1996-2002) and strengthens significantly during the subsequent period (2003-
2009). Thus, DC plans become more sensitive to poor performance over the recent time period,
which may be due to participant lawsuits, pressure from employees and the public, and
regulatory changes.



G. Interactions with Asset Size and Age
        The flow-performance sensitivity might differ depending on the size and the age of the
mutual funds. Although we control in the previous specifications for the logarithms of DC and
non-DC asset sizes and for the logarithm of the age of the funds, these specifications do not
allow the flow-performance relation to differ by asset size or fund age. Thus, in this section we


24
  See Campbell et al. (2011) for an analysis of recent changes in DC accounts. The Pension Protection Act (PPA) of
2006 changed the regulatory environment of DC plans and induces employers to incorporate automatic enrollment,
automatic contribution escalation, and a diversified default asset allocation.

                                                       20
consider these potential factors since the DC and the non-DC asset sizes are related to the
distribution of flows. In Table VI we use the one-year performance specifications from Table III
and add controls for the interactions between the fund performance variables and the demeaned
fund characteristics of size and age. The results show that none of the interaction coefficients are
significant at a 5% significance level. Furthermore, the estimated coefficients on the three
piecewise linear performance segments remain very similar to the results reported in Table
III.25,26



H. Sample Selection
            One potential concern regarding our analysis is whether selection bias could be affecting
our results. That is, we typically observe only the amount of DC assets for a fund family’s 12
domestic equity funds that have the largest amount of DC assets. Since some mutual fund
families have more than 12 domestic equity funds, we might not observe the DC assets for
smaller funds within that family or for funds with relatively small proportions of DC assets.27
This sample selection could be problematic because of our inability to compute the DC and the
non-DC flows for funds that enter and exit our sample and thus, these funds would be missing
from our analysis. Furthermore, this sample selection issue could be more problematic for small
funds, since large funds are more likely to consistently remain in the sample.
            To analyze the relevance of this sample selection issue we examine the likelihood of exit
and entrance of funds according to their characteristics, including performance. Thus, we
consider funds that listed DC assets in the prior period and have missing DC assets in the current


25
   For the interaction effects we use the demeaned logarithm of DC size, the demeaned logarithm of non-DC size,
and the demeaned logarithm of age, so that the coefficients on the piecewise linear performance ranks can be
interpreted as the coefficients of funds at the means of the logarithms of the corresponding variables.
26
   For additional robustness tests, we replace the percentage DC and non-DC flows with the percentiles of DC and
non-DC flows. Consistent with our base case specification in Table III, we find that the percentile DC flows are
more sensitive to top and bottom quintile performance than the middle three performance quintiles. Furthermore, the
relation is close to linear using the percentile of non-DC flows. The results are available in Table A-IV in the
Appendix.
27
   It should be noted, however, that some fund families provide the information on more than 12 funds.

                                                        21
period (exit funds) and funds that had missing DC assets in the prior period and have available
DC assets in the current period (entry funds).28
        Table VII reports the coefficient estimates of a multinomial logit regression for fund
entry and exit decisions. The base group corresponds to funds that have non-missing DC assets
for two consecutive time periods. We find that funds with poor prior performance have a higher
probability of exiting the sample and funds with superior prior performance have a higher
probability of entering the sample.
        These results are consistent with our earlier results regarding the flow-performance
sensitivity of DC assets. The results indicate that DC assets are more likely to flee poorly
performing funds (and thus, become missing from the data set), if the fund experiences poor
prior performance. Similarly, DC assets in a fund are more likely to increase and cause the fund
to enter the data set if the fund experiences superior prior performance. Moreover, these selection
effects likely attenuate the flow-performance relation for DC assets in our base case
specifications. Taking into account these selection effects would likely further increase the
sensitivity of DC flows to performance.



                         IV. Plan Sponsor versus Plan Participant Decisions
        Our results in the previous section show that the performance-sensitivity of DC asset
flows is higher than that of non-DC asset flows, which suggests that either DC plan sponsors or
their participants are actively making decisions on plan holdings related to the funds’
performance. To determine which of these parties is more important, we employ data from the
SEC Form 11-K which allows us to separate plan sponsor actions from those of their
participants. Our identification in this decomposition considers that when plan sponsors add an
investment option to plan menus, the option and its assets will appear on the subsequent Form
11-K filings. On the other hand, when plan sponsors terminate an investment option, the assets in

28
  Since we are interested in the entries and exits of individual funds in the Pensions & Investments list, we do not
include the entries and exits of mutual funds that are determined by the entries and exits of whole families.

                                                        22
that option usually are mapped to a replacement option. Thus, the changes by plan sponsors will
be reflected in the annual flows associated with the appearance or disappearance of an
investment option on plan menus and such flows can be attributed primarily to decisions by the
plan sponsors. The annual flows at other times can be attributed primarily to participants.
       The differences in flow-performance sensitivity of the flows attributed to plan sponsors
versus plan participants are striking as is illustrated in Figure 3 in which we evaluate the
covariates of equation (6) at their sample means. Figure 3 depicts the plan flows and the
estimated participant flows for percentile portfolios formed according to the prior-year fund
return, where plan flow is computed based on equation (3) and captures the total growth of fund
assets held in 401(k) plans. The participant flows are based on equation (5) and capture the fund
flows that are not driven by addition and deletion decisions by plan sponsors. The distance
between plan flows and the participant flows capture the sponsor flows.
       Figure 3 illustrates that most of the flow-performance sensitivity is driven by addition
and deletion decisions of plan sponsors. On the other hand, the participant flows are only weakly
related to the prior fund performance.
       Using the piecewise linear specification based on fund performance over the prior year,
we assess the flow-performance sensitivities of plan sponsors and participants separately while
controlling for other fund characteristics. The results of these regressions are summarized in
Table VIII. In the first three columns we use the Pensions and Investments sample of funds used
in our earlier tests and report the coefficient estimates for total percentage flows, flows ascribed
to plan sponsors and flows ascribed to plan participants, respectively. The second set of
regressions in columns 4-6 are based on all funds included in the Form 11-K filings with the
requisite information on CRSP. The regressions include time-fixed effects. The standard errors
of the coefficients, which have been adjusted for clustering at the fund level, are reported in
parentheses.
       Consistent with our earlier results in Table III for the DC assets, when examining the
total plan flows in the first column, we find a stronger flow-performance relation for the extreme
                                                23
performance quintiles, with larger coefficients for the low and high returns. We find this same
general relation also holds when we focus on only the sponsors’ actions in column 2. In contrast,
when we examine the flows generated by participants, we find a much weaker flow-performance
relation. The participants neither invest more in high performers nor significantly pull out of low
performers. Thus, comparing the results in columns 2 and 3 shows that the flow-performance
sensitivity we have documented in the earlier tests is primarily driven by the sponsors’ actions in
adding and deleting funds on the plan menu rather than the participants’ actions in making their
menu choices.
        We also find that plan size, fund size and the fund’s expense ratio are important for both
plan sponsor and participant flows. In particular, the plan sponsors and participants invest more
into funds with lower expense ratios.
        Because our Pension & Investments sample is weighted toward larger funds and larger
fund families, in the last three columns we report the results of analyses that include all funds in
the 11-K sample. Although we find more muted results, we continue to find significant flow-
performance sensitivity among these funds and that the flow-performance sensitivity results are
driven by plan sponsors, rather than plan participants.29
        Overall, our results using the data on plan flows provide support to the hypothesis that the
flow-performance sensitivity we find for DC assets in the larger data set is being driven by
purposeful actions of plan sponsors.




29
  The flow results of the expanded 11-K sample are likely noisier since they only cover a subsample of DC plans
because Form 11-K only needs to be filed for companies that have employer stock as an investment option in their
401(k) plans. Furthermore, the 11-K sample only covers 401(k) accounts and does not include other DC types (e.g.,
403(b), 457, profit sharing, and other defined contribution plan assets), which are included in the Pensions &
Investments sample. On the other hand, the 11-K sample covers a larger number of funds than the Pensions &
Investments sample, since not all fund families participate in the Pensions & Investments survey and since the
survey typically lists each family’s twelve funds in an investment category with the largest DC assets. For our
purposes to separate and compare between DC and non-DC fund flows, it is more appropriate to use the complete
DC assets in the Pensions & Investments data, but we include the total funds in the 11-K sample for robustness.

                                                       24
                                         V. Performance Predictability
        The previous tests have shown that DC flows tend to leave poorly performing funds and
move into higher performing funds, suggesting that they chase performance. However, this result
does not necessarily imply that DC money is smart, that is, that DC money can predict future
fund abnormal performance. In fact, Berk and Green (2004) derive in a rational model that flows
should not predict future abnormal performance. They assume that skilled managers will attract
larger flows and that the resulting increase in fund size will subsequently deteriorate the average
investment ability of these managers due to decreasing returns to scale. The empirical evidence
suggests that flows are smart in the short term (Gruber (1996) and Zheng (1999)) but dumb at
longer horizons (Frazzini and Lamont (2008)). That is, flows show positive predictability in the
short term, but negative predictability in the long term.
        The relative sophistication of the plan sponsors and their use of consultants suggests that
DC fund flows should be more discerning than non-DC flows. Thus, we test whether mutual
fund flows from DC or non-DC investors can predict funds’ long-term future performance. Since
we only have annual measures of DC and non-DC flows, we run our performance predictability
regressions at an annual frequency.



    Perf f ,t  1DC Flow f ,t 1   2 Non DC Flow f ,t 1   3 Perf f ,t 1   4 Size f ,t 1   5 Fam Size f ,t 1
               6 Age f ,t 1   7 Exp f ,t 1  8Turn f ,t 1   9 DC Ratio f ,t 1   t   f ,t               (9)


         To evaluate the performance differences across DC and non-DC flows, we employ a
number of different measures of mutual fund return performance: raw fund return per month,
objective-adjusted return (where we subtract the mean return of funds in the same objective
category from the fund return), style-adjusted return (where we subtract the mean return of funds




                                                            25
in the same style classification based on the fund holdings),30 and alphas based on the Capital
Asset Pricing Model, the Fama-French (1993) model, and the Carhart (1997) model. The
remaining control variables are the return over the prior year, the logarithm of the total assets of
a fund, the logarithm of family size, the logarithm of fund age, the expense ratio, the turnover,
and the DC ratio. The specifications also include year-fixed effects and cluster the standard
errors by fund.
        Table IX presents the results for the tests of flow predictability of fund performance. As
the table shows, we find different effects for DC and non-DC flows. For the latter, consistent
with Frazzini and Lamont (2008), we find a negative relation between non-DC flows and next
year’s performance using various performance measures. On the other hand, we do not find a
significant relation between DC flows and subsequent fund performance. Furthermore, we also
report in the last row the p-values of an F-test that investigates whether the coefficients on DC
flows equal the coefficients on Non-DC flows. The results indicate that coefficients between the
two flow measures differ for all considered performance measures at least at a ten percent
significance level.
        The insignificant performance predictability results for DC flows are broadly consistent
with Berk and Green’s (2004) theoretical model. The results indicate that in contrast to retail
investors the performance-chasing phenomenon of DC pension plans does not harm their long-
term performance prospects.



                                               VI. Conclusions
        In this paper we examine the effects of DC plans on the mutual funds in which they
invest. Our results have several implications for the structure of employer-sponsored pension
plans and for the mutual fund industry.


30
  The holdings-based styles are determined by dividing mutual funds into terciles according to the mean size and
mean book-to-market ratio of their holdings. Thus, in each period we obtain nine different fund styles according to
the holdings (e.g., small-cap growth, mid-cap growth, large-cap growth, small-cap blend, …, large-cap value).

                                                        26
         First, flows from the assets in DC plans are driven by the menu choices offered by plan
sponsors and the decisions of individual plan participants. Contrary to the widely held belief that
DC plan assets should be sticky because of plan participants’ inertia, we find that the DC money
is more volatile, has less autocorrelation and exhibits more flow-performance sensitivity than
non-DC money. Moreover, using a sample of plan sponsor data we find that this flow-
performance sensitivity is driven by the actions of plan sponsors in dropping poorly performing
funds from their menus and adding well-performing funds (and in so doing, moving their
participants’ assets). These results indicate that the actions of plan sponsors in changing their
menus counteract the previously well-documented inertia of plan participants. Further, the
differences in flow patterns between DC and non-DC investors that we document suggest that
mutual fund management companies can diversify the net flows into their funds by offering the
funds to both DC and non-DC investors.
         We also examine whether the fund selections of DC plan sponsors and their participants
are more discerning than the non-DC investors. Specifically, we test whether mutual fund flows
from DC or non-DC investors can predict funds’ long-term future return performance. We find
that whereas non-DC fund flows predict future performance negatively, DC fund flows have no
predictability, suggesting that DC investors are neither smart nor dumb money. This suggests
that plan sponsors prevent their participants, on average, from being part of the dumb money
crowd.
         This role of plan sponsors has implications for the composition of the fund industry,
particularly given the growth in defined contribution plans. Ultimately, perhaps, the most
important implication is that the presence of DC plans adds increased discipline to mutual fund
portfolio management. For example, the increasing flow-performance sensitivities due to the
growth of DC assets means that there will be more monitoring of mutual fund management,
which implies more managerial effort and fewer agency problems in this part of the delegated
money management industry.


                                                27
                                        References

Alexander, Gordon J., Gjergji Cici, and Scott Gibson, 2007, Does Motivation Matter When
    Assessing Trade Performance? An Analysis of Mutual Funds, Review of Financial Studies
    20, 125-150.
Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sunden, 2003, Portfolio Choice and Trading in a
   Large 401(k) Plan, American Economic Review 93, 193-215.
Balduzzi, Pierluigi and Jonathan Reuter, 2013, Heterogeneity in Target-Date Funds and the
    Pension Protection Act of 2006, Working Paper, Boston College.
Barclay, Michael J, Neil D. Pearson, and Michael S. Weisbach, 1998, Open-End Mutual Funds
    and Capital-Gains Taxes, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 3-43.
Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
    Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 2001, Naïve Diversification Strategies in Defined
   Contribution Savings Plans, American Economic Review 91, 79-98.
Bergstresser, Daniel and James Poterba, 2002, Do After-Tax Returns Affect Mutual Fund
    Inflows? Journal of Financial Economics 63, 381-414.
Berk, Jonathan C., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational
    Markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269-1295.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner, 2007, Individual Account Investment
   Options and Portfolio Choice: Behavioral Lessons from 401(k) Plans, Journal of Public
   Economics 91, 1992-2013.
Brown, Keith C., W. Van Harlow, and Laura T. Starks, 1996, Of Tournaments and Temptations:
   An Analysis of Managerial Incentives in the Mutual Fund Industry, Journal of Finance 51,
   85-110.
Brown, Keith C., and W. Van Harlow, 2012, How Good are the Investment Options Provided by
   Defined Contribution Plan Sponsors? International Journal of Portfolio Analysis and
   Management 1, 3-31.
Campbell, John Y., Howell E. Jackson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Peter Tufano, 2011, Consumer
   Financial Protection, Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, 91-114.
Carhart, Mark, 1997, On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance, Journal of Finance, 52, 57–
    82.
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick,
    2009, Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124,
    1639-1674.
Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2010, Payoff Complementarities and Financial
   Fragility: Evidence from Mutual Fund Outflows, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 239-
   262.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997. Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
   Incentives. Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167-1200.

                                            28
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002, Defined
   Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least Resistance,
   In Tax Policy and the Economy 16, James M. Poterba, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2006, Saving for
   Retirement on the Path of Least Resistance, Behavioral Public Finance (Russell Sage
   Foundation: E.McCaffrey and J. Slemrod, eds.), 304-351.
Christoffersen, Susan, Christopher Geczy, David Musto, and Adam Reed, 2006, Cross-border
    Dividend Taxation and the Preferences of Taxable and Non-taxable Investors: Evidence
    from Canada, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 121-144.
Christoffersen, Susan, and Mikhail Simutin, 2013, Plan Sponsor Oversight and Benchmarking:
    Effects on Fund Risk-taking and Activeness, Working Paper, University of Toronto.
Cohen, Lauren, and Breno Schmidt, 2009, Attracting Flows by Attracting Big Clients, Journal of
   Finance 64, 2125-2151.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity Markets,
   Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479-512.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring Mutual
   Fund Performance with Characteristic-Based Benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-
   1058.
Davis, Gerald F., and E. Han Kim, 2007, Business Ties and Proxy Voting by Mutual Funds,
   Journal of Financial Economics 85, 552-570.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula Tkac, 2002, The Determinants of the Flow of Funds of Managed
    Portfolios: Mutual Funds versus Pension Funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis 37, 523-557.
Del Guercio, Diane and Paula Tkac, 2008, Star Power: The Effect of Morningstar Ratings on
    Mutual Fund Flow, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 907-936.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Jonathan Reuter, 2013, Mutual Fund Performance and the Incentive to
    Generate Alpha, Forthcoming: Journal of Finance.
Deloitte Consulting, 2011, Annual 401(k) Benchmarking Survey: 2011 Edition.
Dickson, Joel, John B. Shoven, and Clemens Sialm, 2000, Tax Externalities of Equity Mutual
    Funds. National Tax Journal 53, 607–28.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, 2003, The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
    Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment, The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 118, 815-842.
Edelen, Roger, 1999, Investor Flows and the Assessed Performance of Open-End Mutual Funds,
    Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439-466.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, 2006, The Adequacy of Investment
    Choices offered by 401(k) Plans, Journal of Public Economics 90, 1299-1314.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, 2007, Participant Reaction and the
    Performance of Funds Offered by 401(k) Plans, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16,
    249-271.
                                              29
Evans, Richard, 2010, Mutual Fund Incubation, Journal of Finance 65, 1581-1611.
Fama, Eugene, and Ken French, 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
   Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene, and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,
   Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Frazzini, Andrea, 2006, The Disposition Effect and Underreaction to News, Journal of Finance
    61, 2017-2046.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen A. Lamont, 2008, Dumb Money: Mutual Fund Flows and the Cross-
    Section of Stock Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 299-322.
Goyal, Amit, and Sunil Wahal, 2008, The Selection and Termination of Investment Management
   Firms by Plan Sponsors, Journal of Finance 63, 1805-1847.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, What Makes Investors Trade?, Journal of Finance
    56, 589-616.
Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another Puzzle: The Growth in Actively Managed Mutual Funds,
   Journal of Finance 51, 783-810.
Heisler, Jeffrey, Christopher Knittel, John Neumann, and Scott Stewart, 2007, Why Do
    Institutional Plan Sponsors Hire and Fire Their Investment Managers? Journal of Business
    and Economic Studies 13: 88-115
Huang, Jennifer, Kelsey D. Wei, and Hong Yan, 2007, Participation Costs and the Sensitivity of
   Fund Flows to Past Performance, Journal of Finance 62, 1273-1311.
Huang, Jennifer, Kelsey D. Wei, and Hong Yan, 2012, Investor Learning and Mutual Fund
   Flows, Working Paper, University of Texas at Austin.
Huberman, Gur, and Wei Jiang, 2006, Offering versus Choice in 401(k) Plans: Equity Exposure
   and Number of Funds, Journal of Finance 61, 763-801.
Investment Company Institute, 2012, The Investment Company Fact Book 52.
Ivković, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2009, Individual Investor Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of
    Financial Economics 92, 223-237.
Khorana, Ajay, and Henri Servaes, 1999, The Determinants of Mutual Fund Starts, Review of
   Financial Studies 12, 1043-1074.
Kim, Min S., 2011, Changes in Mutual Fund Flows and Managerial Incentives, Working Paper,
   University of New South Wales.
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1992, The Structure and Performance of
   the Money Management Industry, Brookings Papers: Microeconomics, 339-379.
Lou, Dong, 2012, A Flow-Based Explanation for Return Predictability, Review of Financial
    Studies 25, 3457-3489.
Madrian, Brigitte, and Dennis F. Shea, 2001, The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
   Participation and Savings Behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149-1187.



                                             30
McFarland, Brendan, 2013, DB Versus DC Investment Returns: The 2009-2011 Update, Towers
   Watson Insider.
Pool, Veronika, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu, 2013, It Pays to Set the Menu: 401(k)
    Investment Options in Mutual Funds, Working Paper, Indiana University and University of
    Texas at Austin.
Rauh, Joshua, 2006, Own Company Stock in Defined Contribution Pension Plans: A Takeover
   Defense? Journal of Financial Economics 81, 379-410.
Rydqvist, Kristian, Ilya A. Strebulaev, and Joshua D. Spizman, 2013, Policy and Ownership of
   Equity Securities, Forthcoming: Journal of Financial Economics.
Sialm, Clemens, and Laura Starks, 2012, Mutual Fund Tax Clienteles, Journal of Finance 67,
    1397-1422.
Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of Finance
     53, 1589-1622.
Stewart, Scott, John Neumann, Christopher Knittel, and Jeffrey Heisler, 2009, Absence of Value:
    An Analysis of Investment Allocation Decisions by Institutional Plan Sponsors, Financial
    Analysts Journal 65, 34-51.
Tang, Ning, Olivia S. Mitchell, Gary R. Mottola, and Stephen P. Utkus, 2010, The Efficiency of
   Sponsor and Participant Portfolio Choices in 401(k) Plans, Journal of Public Economics 11-
   12, 1073-1085.
Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition into Stock-
   Picking Talent, Style, Transaction Costs, and Expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655-1702.
Wermers, Russ, 2003, Is Money Really 'Smart'? New Evidence on the Relation between Mutual
   Fund Flows, Manager Behavior, and Performance Persistence, Working Paper, University of
   Maryland.
Zheng, Lu, 1999, Is Money Smart? A Study of Mutual Fund Investors' Fund Selection Ability,
   Journal of Finance 54, 901-933.




                                              31
                                                   Figure 1
                         Flow-Performance Relation for Percentile Performance Portfolios
                                          of DC and Non-DC Assets

This figure shows the flow-performance relation for DC and non-DC assets. The dots represent
the average flows for 100 performance groups, where the remaining covariates are evaluated at
their sample means. Diamonds correspond to DC flows and circles correspond to non-DC flows.
The solid curves show the least-squares cubic relations.
                1                             DC Flow    Non‐DC Flow

              0.8


              0.6


              0.4
  Fund Flow




              0.2


                0
                     0              0.2           0.4           0.6            0.8         1
              ‐0.2


              ‐0.4
                                                    Performance Rank




                                                        32
                                       Figure 2
    Piecewise Linear Flow-Performance Relation for Percentile Performance Portfolios
                            of DC Assets and Non-DC Assets

This figure shows the flow-performance relation for DC and non-DC assets. The lines represent
the piecewise linear relation following Sirri and Tufano (1998), as summarized in Table III.


                0.7                DC Flow         Non‐DC Flow

                0.6

                0.5

                0.4
    Fund Flow




                0.3

                0.2

                0.1

                  0
                       0   0.2          0.4            0.6           0.8             1
                ‐0.1

                ‐0.2                    Performance Rank




                                              33
                                                  Figure 3
                         Plan Flows and Participant Flows by Performance Percentiles

This figure shows the flow-performance relation for total plan flows and participant flows based
on 11-K filings of 401(k) plans. The dots represent the average flows for 100 performance
groups, where the remaining covariates are evaluated at their sample means. Diamonds
correspond to total plan flows and circles correspond to participant flows. Participant flows are
computed as the difference between total flows and sponsor flows (i.e., flows driven by addition
and deletion decisions in 401(k) menus). The solid curves show the least-squares cubic relations.


                1                        Plan Flow       Participant Flow

              0.8

              0.6

              0.4
  Fund Flow




              0.2

                0
                     0            0.2            0.4              0.6         0.8          1
              ‐0.2

              ‐0.4

              ‐0.6
                                                     Performance Rank




                                                       34
                                             Table I
                                      Summary Statistics
This table provides the summary statistics for the sample of mutual funds over the 1996-2009
period. The DC ratio is the percentage of the fund assets held by defined contribution accounts at
the end of the year. The fund size (Total Net Assets), family size, age, expenses, turnover, and
fund returns are obtained from the CRSP mutual fund database. The annual DC flow is the
percentage flow of DC assets based on the annual surveys by Pensions & Investments, and the
annual Non-DC flow is the percentage flow based on the difference between total net assets and
DC assets. The annual plan, plan sponsor, and plan participant flows are based on annual Form
11-K filings by corporate DC plans.

                                       Panel A: Variable Distributions

Name                                            Mean         Std. Dev.     Quartile 1          Median     Quartile 3

DC Ratio (in % of Fund Size)                    25.38           22.00            8.50           19.85           35.52
Fund Size (in M$)                               3,931          10,289             269             967           3,122
Family Size (in M$)                            57,242         113,605           5,746          14,594          41,176
Age (in Years)                                  16.33           15.46            7.00           11.00           19.00
Expense Ratio (in % per Year)                    1.16            0.45            0.90            1.16            1.42
Turnover (in % per Year )                       78.26           82.60           30.51           61.00          103.00
Fund Return (in % per Year)                      6.76           24.96           -9.06            9.59           21.87
DC Flow (in % per Year)                         32.00          119.34          -20.78           -0.23           32.76
Non-DC Flow (in % per Year)                      6.65           44.37          -16.14           -3.96           14.06
Plan Flow (% per Year)                          22.27           84.76          -15.86            3.56           36.85
Plan Sponsor Flow (% per Year)                   9.68           74.12          -12.27            0.00            7.30
Plan Participant Flow (% per Year)              12.59           25.88           -1.85            3.35           17.35
Number of Observations                          5,808


                                             Panel B: Correlations
Variable                      (1)    (2)      (3)    (4)     (5)         (6)    (7)     (8)       (9)   (10)     (11)
(1) DC Ratio                  1.00
(2) Fund Size                 0.12    1.00
(3) Family Size               0.26    0.54    1.00
(4) Age                      -0.11    0.29    0.18    1.00
(5) Expense Ratio            -0.32   -0.29   -0.35   -0.13    1.00
(6) Turnover                 -0.10   -0.08   -0.07   -0.02    0.15    1.00
(7) Fund Return               0.00    0.01    0.02   -0.01    0.00   -0.01      1.00
(8) DC Flow                  -0.02   -0.07   -0.08   -0.13    0.10    0.01      0.03    1.00
(9) Non-DC Flow              -0.07   -0.04   -0.02   -0.15    0.00    0.03      0.06    0.23     1.00
(10) Plan Flow               -0.03   -0.03   -0.03   -0.09    0.02    0.03      0.02    0.26     0.26   1.00
(11) Plan Sponsor Flow       -0.02   -0.01   -0.01   -0.07    0.00    0.03      0.01    0.22     0.23   0.95     1.00
(12) Plan Participant Flow   -0.05   -0.07   -0.07   -0.12    0.08    0.03      0.05    0.21     0.19   0.54     0.26




                                                        35
                                              Table II
                  Relation Between Flow Variability and Fund Characteristics
This table summarizes the coefficients of a regression of moments of flows on fund
characteristics. The dependent variables are defined as the standard deviation and the
autocorrelation of the annual DC and non-DC flows over the lifetime of a fund, requiring that
funds have at least five annual observations. The independent variables include an indicator
variable for DC or non-DC flows, and the initial DC or non-DC size, and other initial fund
characteristics. All continuous independent variables are demeaned. The standard errors are
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote estimates that are statistically different from zero
at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels.

                              Standard Deviation of Flow                 Autocorrelation of Flow
Constant                0.332***      0.549***        0.439***    0.093***    0.080***         0.063*
                       (0.012)       (0.023)         (0.018)     (0.023)     (0.029)          (0.036)
DC Indicator            0.522***      0.212***        0.310***   -0.138***   -0.127***        -0.114***
                       (0.033)       (0.031)         (0.031)     (0.026)     (0.034)          (0.041)
Log Size                             -0.163***       -0.077***                0.005            0.018
                                     (0.014)         (0.009)                 (0.011)          (0.019)
Log Family Size                       0.035***        0.021***                0.027*           0.014
                                     (0.012)         (0.008)                 (0.014)          (0.017)
Log Age                               0.033          -0.039***               -0.026           -0.023
                                     (0.026)         (0.015)                 (0.022)          (0.033)
Expense Ratio                         1.071**         0.290                  -0.471           -0.252
                                     (0.460)         (0.261)                 (0.501)          (0.656)
Turnover                             -0.006           0.015                   0.029***         0.011
                                     (0.014)         (0.010)                 (0.011)          (0.016)
DC x Log Size                                        -0.117***                                -0.020
                                                     (0.018)                                  (0.021)
DC x Log Family Size                                  0.005                                    0.026
                                                     (0.018)                                  (0.019)
DC x Log Age                                          0.091**                                 -0.012
                                                     (0.040)                                  (0.038)
DC x Expense Ratio                                    1.338*                                  -0.532
                                                     (0.785)                                  (0.875)
DC x Turnover                                        -0.038**                                  0.036
                                                     (0.019)                                  (0.024)

Observations             1,032          987           987          1,032         987            987
R-Squared                0.162         0.390         0.420         0.018        0.030          0.035




                                                   36
                                              Table III
                 Piecewise Linear Panel Regressions of DC and Non-DC Flows
This table summarizes the coefficients of a piecewise linear panel regression of DC and non-DC
asset flows on fund variables. Low, Mid, and High represent the funds’ ranked return
performance where Lowf,t = min(Rankf,t, 0.2), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6), and Highf,t =
(Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The other variables are characteristics of the fund. The standard errors
of the coefficients are reported in parentheses and adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The
regressions also include time-fixed effects. *, **, and *** denote estimates that are statistically
different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels.


                         1 Year Prior Performance                    5 Year Prior Performance
                                  Non-                                       Non-
                   DC Flow      DC Flow        Difference      DC Flow     DC Flow        Difference

Low                 1.194***       0.328**       0.866**         0.845**       0.096         0.749**
                   (0.377)        (0.142)       (0.374)         (0.334)       (0.166)       (0.330)
Mid                 0.236***       0.284***     -0.049          0.421***      0.281***       0.140*
                   (0.086)        (0.037)       (0.090)         (0.082)       (0.036)       (0.083)
High                1.776***       0.487***      1.289***        0.619*        0.102         0.517
                   (0.497)        (0.180)       (0.476)         (0.329)       (0.154)       (0.334)
Log DC Size        -0.136***       0.007        -0.143***      -0.125***       0.006        -0.132***
                   (0.017)        (0.006)       (0.016)         (0.018)       (0.006)       (0.016)
Log Non-DC Size     0.041**       -0.070***      0.111***        0.020       -0.069***       0.089***
                   (0.016)        (0.009)       (0.018)         (0.014)       (0.010)       (0.016)
Log Family Size     0.039***       0.039***      0.000          0.042***      0.032***       0.010
                   (0.014)        (0.007)       (0.013)         (0.014)       (0.007)       (0.013)
Log Age            -0.037          0.003        -0.040*         -0.005         0.020*       -0.025
                   (0.024)        (0.010)       (0.022)         (0.024)       (0.011)       (0.024)
Expense Ratio      -0.471         -0.223        -0.248          -0.152        -0.380*        0.229
                   (0.551)        (0.219)       (0.511)         (0.509)       (0.227)       (0.481)
Turnover           -0.026         -0.018**      -0.007          -0.042**      -0.019*       -0.023
                   (0.019)        (0.008)       (0.016)         (0.018)       (0.011)       (0.018)
Volatility          1.026          0.009         1.017           0.499        -0.567         1.066
                   (0.870)        (0.317)       (0.857)         (0.963)       (0.477)       (0.951)
Style Flow          0.359          0.282**       0.077           0.051         0.248*       -0.197
                   (0.324)        (0.132)       (0.295)         (0.319)       (0.138)       (0.300)

Observations        3,851          3,851         3,851           3,249        3,249         3,249
R-squared           0.098          0.124        0.064            0.081        0.089         0.054




                                                 37
                                                                   Table IV
                       Piecewise Linear Panel Regression with Different Performance Benchmark Measures
This table summarizes the coefficients of a piecewise linear panel regression of DC and non-DC asset flows on fund variables. Low,
Mid, and High represent the funds’ ranked return performance where Lowf,t = min(Rankf,t, 0.2), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6), and
Highf,t = (Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The other variables are characteristics of the fund. The performance measures correspond to the
objective code-adjusted performance, the style-adjusted performance, and the Carhart-adjusted performance. The standard errors of
the coefficients are reported in parentheses and adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The regressions also include time-fixed
effects. *, **, and *** denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels.




                                                                  38
                                                          Table IV (Cont.)


                  Objective Code Adjusted Performance         Style Adjusted Performance             Carhart-Adjusted Performance
                                  Non-                                   Non-                                   Non-
                  DC Flow       DC Flow      Difference   DC Flow      DC Flow      Difference   DC Flow      DC Flow       Difference

Low                1.040***      0.379**     0.661*        1.219***       0.088        1.130**    0.927**       0.073        0.854**
                  (0.389)       (0.150)     (0.394)       (0.420)        (0.161)      (0.448)    (0.406)       (0.168)      (0.426)
Mid                0.237***      0.273***   -0.036         0.189*         0.275***    -0.086      0.138         0.281***    -0.143
                  (0.090)       (0.036)     (0.095)       (0.097)        (0.035)      (0.100)    (0.100)       (0.037)      (0.106)
High               1.736***      0.504***    1.232***      1.390***       0.415**      0.975**    1.625***      0.290        1.336***
                  (0.473)       (0.181)     (0.455)       (0.470)        (0.180)      (0.475)    (0.504)       (0.188)      (0.474)
Log DC Size       -0.136***      0.006      -0.142***     -0.144***       0.004      -0.148***   -0.130***      0.011*      -0.142***
                  (0.017)       (0.006)     (0.016)       (0.018)        (0.006)      (0.017)    (0.018)       (0.006)      (0.017)
Log Non-DC Size    0.041**      -0.070***    0.111***      0.037**       -0.074***    0.111***    0.030*       -0.073***     0.103***
                  (0.017)       (0.009)     (0.018)       (0.0 18)       (0.009)      (0.019)    (0.017)       (0.009)      (0.019)
Log Family Size    0.039***      0.039***    0.000         0.045***       0.044***     0.002      0.040***      0.037***     0.003
                  (0.014)       (0.007)     (0.013)       (0.015)        (0.007)      (0.013)    (0.015)       (0.007)      (0.014)
Log Age           -0.037         0.004      -0.041*       -0.047*        -0.006       -0.041*    -0.036        -0.001       -0.035
                  (0.024)       (0.010)     (0.023)       (0.024)        (0.010)      (0.022)    (0.027)       (0.010)      (0.026)
Expenses          -0.401        -0.191      -0.210        -0.416         -0.171       -0.245     -0.108         0.076       -0.185
                  (0.547)       (0.218)     (0.506)       (0.556)        (0.221)      (0.513)    (0.579)       (0.226)      (0.536)
Turnover          -0.024        -0.018**    -0.006        -0.030         -0.022***    -0.008     -0.029        -0.016*      -0.014
                  (0.019)       (0.008)     (0.016)       (0.019)        (0.008)      (0.017)    (0.020)       (0.008)      (0.018)
Volatility        -0.099        -0.506       0.408         0.096         -0.857*       0.953     -0.017*       -0.016***    -0.001
                  (1.304)       (0.468)     (1.284)       (1.914)        (0.506)      (1.881)    (0.008)       (0.003)      (0.008)
Style Flow         0.499         0.389***    0.111         0.788***       0.661***     0.127      0.439         0.332**      0.107
                  (0.322)       (0.132)     (0.293)       (0.229)        (0.089)      (0.214)    (0.331)       (0.131)      (0.301)

Observations        3,851         3,851        3,851        3,780         3,780       3,780       3,408         3,408         3,408
R-squared          0.097          0.125        0.063        0.098          0.128      0.064       0.089         0.110         0.063




                                                                    39
                                               Table V
   Piecewise Linear Panel Regressions of DC and Non-DC Flows for Different Subperiods
This table summarizes the coefficients of a piecewise linear panel regression of DC and non-DC
asset flows on fund variables. Low, Mid, and High represent the funds’ ranked return
performance where Lowf,t = min(Rankf,t, 0.2), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6), and Highf,t =
(Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The other variables are characteristics of the fund. The standard errors
of the coefficients are reported in parentheses and adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The
regressions also include time-fixed effects. *, **, and *** denote estimates that are statistically
different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels.

                                 1996-2002                                 2003-2009
                                    Non-                                      Non-
                    DC Flow       DC Flow      Difference     DC Flow       DC Flow      Difference

 Low                  0.660        0.318        0.343           1.546***     0.410**       1.136**
                     (0.630)      (0.223)      (0.649)         (0.473)      (0.196)       (0.462)
 Mid                  0.416***     0.333***     0.083           0.120        0.259***     -0.140
                     (0.141)      (0.051)      (0.148)         (0.111)      (0.053)       (0.113)
 High                 2.484***     1.234***     1.250*          1.296**     -0.031         1.327**
                     (0.733)      (0.297)      (0.717)         (0.650)      (0.208)       (0.625)
 Log DC Size         -0.163***     0.008       -0.171***       -0.114***     0.010        -0.123***
                     (0.028)      (0.008)      (0.028)         (0.017)      (0.008)       (0.016)
 Log Non-DC Size      0.046       -0.077***     0.122***        0.036**     -0.066***      0.103***
                     (0.029)      (0.013)      (0.032)         (0.015)      (0.011)       (0.017)
 Log Family Size      0.039*       0.049***    -0.010           0.034**      0.028***      0.006
                     (0.023)      (0.010)      (0.022)         (0.015)      (0.008)       (0.014)
 Log Age              0.015       -0.001        0.016          -0.078**      0.012        -0.090***
                     (0.034)      (0.013)      (0.034)         (0.032)      (0.015)       (0.031)
 Expense Ratio        0.362        0.125        0.238          -0.435       -0.208        -0.227
                     (0.815)      (0.331)      (0.772)         (0.673)      (0.284)       (0.619)
 Turnover             0.000       -0.016*       0.017          -0.065***    -0.023*       -0.042*
                     (0.027)      (0.009)      (0.024)         (0.023)      (0.013)       (0.025)
 Volatility           1.423        0.540        0.883          -1.865       -1.845**      -0.020
                     (1.104)      (0.354)      (1.110)         (1.803)      (0.726)       (1.756)
 Style Flow          -0.118        0.061       -0.179           0.400        0.417**      -0.017
                     (0.596)      (0.186)      (0.612)         (0.375)      (0.171)       (0.345)

 Observations         1,759         1,759        1,759          2,092         2,092        2,092
 R-squared            0.128         0.203       0.079           0.087         0.092        0.058




                                                 40
                                             Table VI
              Piecewise Linear Panel Regressions of DC and Non-DC Flows with
                                 Size and Age Interaction Effects
This table summarizes the coefficients of a piecewise linear panel regression of DC and non-DC
asset flows on fund variables. Low, Mid, and High represent the funds’ ranked return
performance where Lowf,t = min(Rankf,t, 0.2), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6), and Highf,t =
(Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The performance ranks are interacted with the logarithms of DC and
non-DC sizes and with the logarithm of the age of the funds. All the continuous control variables
are demeaned to facilitate the interpretation of the economic magnitude of the results. The other
variables are characteristics of the fund. The standard errors of the coefficients are reported in
parentheses and adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The regressions also include time-fixed
effects. *, **, and *** denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and
1 percent significance levels.




                                                 41
                                         Table VI (Cont.)
                            Size Interactions                         Age Interactions
                                  Non-                                     Non-
                  DC Flow      DC Flow        Difference    DC Flow      DC Flow       Difference
Low                0.970***       0.252*        0.718*       1.147***      0.287**       0.860**
                  (0.370)       (0.151)        (0.372)      (0.381)      (0.141)        (0.379)
Mid                0.258***       0.294***     -0.036        0.252***      0.302***     -0.050
                  (0.089)       (0.038)        (0.092)      (0.092)       (0.039)       (0.095)
High               1.492***       0.365**       1.128***     1.639***      0.373**       1.266***
                  (0.418)       (0.159)        (0.414)      (0.489)       (0.171)       (0.476)
Low *             -0.317        -0.154*        -0.163
Log DC Size       (0.218)       (0.091)        (0.223)
Mid *             -0.065        -0.002         -0.063
Log DC Size       (0.083)       (0.034)        (0.081)
High *            -0.271          0.071        -0.342
Log DC Size       (0.389)       (0.138)        (0.379)
Low *              0.162          0.251        -0.089
Log Non-DC Size   (0.307)       (0.165)        (0.313)
Mid *              0.033        -0.034          0.067
Log Non-DC Size   (0.074)       (0.047)        (0.085)
High *             0.149        -0.311          0.460
Log Non-DC Size   (0.451)       (0.221)        (0.481)
Low *                                                       -0.023        -0.034         0.011
Log Age                                                     (0.445)       (0.146)       (0.458)
Mid *                                                       -0.055        -0.078*        0.023
Log Age                                                     (0.135)       (0.046)       (0.141)
High *                                                      -0.702        -0.446        -0.256
Log Age                                                     (0.686)       (0.279)       (0.641)
Log DC Size       -0.052         0.035**      -0.086***     -0.135***      0.008        -0.142***
                  (0.033)       (0.014)       (0.033)       (0.017)       (0.006)       (0.016)
Log Non-DC Size   -0.003        -0.101***      0.098*        0.040**      -0.071***      0.111***
                  (0.054)       (0.028)       (0.054)       (0.016)       (0.009)       (0.018)
Log Family Size    0.040***      0.039***      0.001         0.039***      0.039***      0.000
                  (0.014)       (0.007)       (0.013)       (0.014)       (0.007)       (0.013)
Log Age           -0.034         0.004        -0.038*       -0.002         0.041*       -0.044
                  (0.023)       (0.010)       (0.022)       (0.068)       (0.021)       (0.069)
Expense Ratio     -0.486        -0.273        -0.213        -0.520        -0.257        -0.263
                  (0.540)       (0.218)       (0.500)       (0.556)       (0.217)       (0.519)
Turnover          -0.023        -0.019**      -0.004        -0.026        -0.018**      -0.007
                  (0.018)       (0.008)       (0.016)       (0.018)       (0.008)       (0.016)
Volatility         0.891         0.036         0.855         1.052         0.049         1.004
                  (0.854)       (0.320)       (0.842)       (0.873)       (0.317)       (0.865)
Style Flow         0.391         0.307**       0.084         0.351         0.281**       0.070
                  (0.325)       (0.132)       (0.294)       (0.324)       (0.133)       (0.296)

Observations       3,851         3,851         3,851         3,851         3,851        3,851
R-squared          0.103         0.130         0.067         0.100         0.129        0.064




                                                42
                                             Table VII
                        Multinomial Logit for Entry and Exit Decisions
This table summarizes the coefficient estimates of a multinomial logit specification for fund
entry and exit decisions. The exit (entry) indicator variable equals one if funds have non-missing
(missing) DC assets in the past year and missing (non-missing) DC assets in the current year.
The base group consists of all funds in the sample that have non-missing DC assets for two
consecutive years. The standard errors of the coefficients are reported in parentheses and
adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The regressions also include time-fixed effects. *, **,
and *** denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
significance levels.

                                                Exit                             Entry
Performance                                    -0.958***                         0.485**
                                               (0.221)                          (0.203)
Log Fund Size                                  -0.644***                        -0.653***
                                               (0.060)                          (0.063)
Log Family Size                                 0.594***                         0.549***
                                               (0.058)                          (0.057)
Log Age                                         0.071                           -0.202**
                                               (0.107)                          (0.099)
Expenses                                        3.193*                           0.953
                                               (1.828)                          (1.607)
Turnover                                        0.065                           -0.020
                                               (0.058)                          (0.055)
Volatility                                      2.368                            1.184
                                               (2.734)                          (2.906)
Style Flow                                     -3.161**                         -1.050
                                               (1.289)                          (1.169)

Observations                                   5,006                            5,006




                                               43
                                             Table VIII
        Flow-Performance Panel Regressions for Plan Sponsors and Plan Participants
This table summarizes the coefficients of a piecewise linear panel regression of total plan as well
as estimated plan sponsor and plan participant asset flows on fund variables based on 11-K
filings of 401(k) plans. Low, Mid, and High represent the funds’ ranked return performance over
the prior year where Lowf,t = min(Rankf,t, 0.2), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6), and Highf,t =
(Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The other variables are characteristics of the fund. The standard errors
of the coefficients are reported in parentheses and adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The
regressions also include time-fixed effects.

                  Pensions and Investments Sample of Funds              11-K Sample of Funds
                     Total        Sponsor     Participant      Total          Sponsor       Participant
                    Flows          Flows         Flows         Flows           Flows          Flows

Low                1.046***        1.050***    -0.004          0.773***         0.786***      -0.013
                  (0.399)          (0.376)     (0.111)        (0.299)          (0.274)        (0.100)
Mid                0.465***        0.310***     0.156***       0.516***         0.380***       0.135***
                  (0.091)          (0.083)     (0.024)        (0.068)          (0.062)        (0.021)
High               1.584***        1.389***     0.194          0.744**          0.718**        0.026
                  (0.482)          (0.427)     (0.136)        (0.324)          (0.291)        (0.101)
Log Plan Size     -0.089***       -0.063***    -0.026***      -0.092***        -0.065***      -0.027***
                  (0.010)          (0.009)     (0.003)        (0.006)          (0.005)        (0.002)
Log Fund Size      0.047**          0.036*      0.011*         0.048***         0.048***      -0.001
                  (0.021)          (0.019)     (0.006)        (0.012)          (0.011)        (0.004)
Log Family Size    0.006            0.005       0.002          0.016**          0.010*         0.006**
                  (0.017)          (0.015)     (0.005)        (0.007)          (0.006)        (0.003)
Log Age           -0.056*          -0.040      -0.016*        -0.076***        -0.053***      -0.023***
                  (0.033)          (0.029)     (0.009)        (0.023)          (0.021)        (0.007)
Exp. Ratio        -1.473***        -1.136**    -0.336**       -0.741*          -0.531         -0.210
                  (0.528)          (0.478)     (0.165)        (0.420)          (0.353)        (0.142)
Turnover           0.032            0.038      -0.006         -0.030*          -0.011         -0.020***
                  (0.025)          (0.025)     (0.007)        (0.018)          (0.018)        (0.005)
Volatility         1.061            0.277       0.783**        0.536           -0.037          0.573**
                  (1.056)          (0.919)     (0.354)        (0.746)          (0.647)        (0.254)
Style Flow         0.811**          0.461       0.350***       0.873***         0.685***       0.188**
                  (0.341)          (0.303)     (0.087)        (0.280)          (0.254)        (0.082)

Observations        2,815         2,815          2,815          8,268          8,268           8,268
R-squared          0.120          0.081         0.115          0.083           0.054           0.079




                                                   44
                                                                 Table IX
                                                    Return Predictability Regressions
This table summarizes the coefficients of a regression of funds’ long-term future performance on mutual fund flows from DC and non-
DC investors and additional control variables. The table uses six different performance measures. The standard errors of the
coefficients are reported in parentheses and adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The regressions also include time-fixed effects. *,
**, and *** denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels.




                                                                    45
                                                            Table IX (Cont.)

                                          Objective Code-                                          Fama-French-     Carhart-
                                             Adjusted             Style-Adjusted   CAPM-Adjusted     Adjusted      Adjusted
                        Raw Performance    Performance             Performance      Performance     Performance   Performance
DC Flow                     -0.262           -0.260                   -0.091          -0.176           0.114         -0.011
                            (0.163)          (0.160)                  (0.133)         (0.144)         (0.128)        (0.121)
Non-DC Flow                 -1.567***        -1.102**                 -0.815**        -1.261***       -0.657**       -0.948***
                            (0.455)          (0.436)                  (0.351)         (0.405)         (0.286)        (0.276)
Return over Past Year        0.089***         0.089***                 0.021           0.132***        0.189***       0.162***
                            (0.021)          (0.022)                  (0.023)         (0.019)         (0.019)        (0.018)
Log Size                    -1.006***        -0.877***                -0.550***       -0.967***       -0.257**       -0.352***
                            (0.183)          (0.179)                  (0.145)         (0.169)         (0.118)        (0.115)
Log Family Size              0.642***         0.553***                 0.414***        0.598***        0.257**        0.280***
                            (0.168)          (0.162)                  (0.134)         (0.153)         (0.106)        (0.103)
Log Age                     -0.143           -0.038                    0.109          -0.094           0.193          0.114
                            (0.295)          (0.292)                  (0.228)         (0.261)         (0.196)        (0.184)
Expense Ratio                0.089           -0.213                   -0.969***       -0.352          -0.788***      -0.613**
                            (0.408)          (0.405)                  (0.327)         (0.388)         (0.253)        (0.247)
Turnover                    -0.444*          -0.604***                -0.615***       -0.379*         -0.568***      -0.531***
                            (0.231)          (0.231)                  (0.205)         (0.205)         (0.162)        (0.145)
DC Ratio                     0.848            0.427                    0.118           0.014          -0.275         -0.097
                            (0.818)          (0.786)                  (0.633)         (0.777)         (0.516)        (0.517)

Observations                 4,116             4,075                   3,999           4,009           4,009         4,009
R-squared                    0.020            0.018                    0.008          0.034           0.078          0.066
p-value for F-Test
DC Flow=Non-DC Flow          0.009***         0.074*                   0.059*         0.016**         0.024**        0.004***




                                                                  46
                                                    Appendix

         In this appendix we include some additional robustness tests not included in the main

body of the paper. In addition, we explain in more detail the performance measures used in the

paper.



A. Robustness Tests


         Tables A-I through A-IV provide the results of additional robustness tests of the flow-
performance sensitivity of DC and non-DC flows. In Table A-I we use two alternative functional
forms for the performance rank:


                               
           f Linear Rank f ,t   1 Rank f ,t  0.5                                                        (A-1)

           f Cubic Rank f ,t    1 Rank f ,t  0.5   2 Rank f ,t  0.52   3 Rank f ,t  0.53   (A-2)


         In the linear specification we find that DC flows are more sensitive to performance than

non-DC flows. For the cubic specification, only the cubic term is statistically significant for the

DC flows and only the linear term is statistically significant for the non-DC flows, which is

consistent with Figure 2.

         In Table A-II we conduct cross-sectional regressions and then aggregate the coefficients

across the years using the Fama-MacBeth (1973) approach. The primary variables of interest are

low, middle, and high ranked return performance where the lowest is min(Rankf,t, 0.2), the

middle is min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6), and the highest is (Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). We also control

for other characteristics of the fund.

         In Table A-III we show that the results of Table III are robust to different classifications

of performance. We again use the panel regressions employed in the main body of the paper and


                                                         47
run a piecewise linear panel regression of DC and non-DC asset flows on fund variables. Low,

Mid, and High ranked return continue to represent the funds’ ranked return performance but we

change the definitions so that Lowf,t = min(Rankf,t, 0.1 or 0.3), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.8 or

0.4), and Highf,t = (Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The other variables are characteristics of the funds.

The standard errors of the coefficients are reported in parentheses and adjusted for clustering at

the fund level and the regressions also include time-fixed effects.

       In Table A-IV we summarize the coefficients of a piecewise linear panel regression of

DC and non-DC asset percentile flows on fund variables. The dependent variables are the

percentiles of the DC and non-DC flows in each year and the percentile of the difference

between the DC and non-DC flows. The other variables are characteristics of the fund.

Consistent with our base case specification in Table III, we find that the percentile DC flows are

more sensitive to top and bottom quintile performance than the middle three performance

quintiles. Furthermore, the relation is close to linear using the percentile of non-DC flows.



B. Details on Mutual Fund Performance Tests

       The performance measures we employ in the paper are the raw return, objective-adjusted

return, style-adjusted return, CAPM-adjusted performance, Fama-French adjusted performance

and Carhart adjusted performance. The objective-adjusted return is defined as the difference

between the fund return and the mean return of funds in the same objective category. The style-

adjusted return is defined as the difference between the fund return and the mean return of funds

in the same style classification based on the fund holdings, where the holdings-based styles are

determined by dividing mutual funds into terciles according to the mean size and the mean book-

to-market ratio of their holdings. Thus, in each period we obtain 9 different fund styles according



                                                  48
to the holdings (e.g., small-cap growth, mid-cap growth, large-cap growth, small-cap blend, …,

large-cap value).

        Our performance measures also include several risk-adjusted measures of return

including alphas from the Capital Asset Pricing Model, Fama-French (1993), model and Carhart

(1997) model:

        Ri,t – RF,t = i + βi,M(RM,t – RF,t) + i,t                                                (A-3)

        Ri,t – RF,t = i + βi,M(RM,t – RF,t) + βi,SMBSMBt + βi,HMLHMLt + i,t                      (A-4)

        Ri,t – RF,t = i + βi,M(RM,t – RF,t) + βi,SMBSMBt + βi,HMLHMLt + βi,UMDUMDt + i,t         (A-5)

where Ri,t – RF,t and RM,t – RF,t are the monthly excess returns on the fund portfolio and the

market portfolio respectively, and SMBt , HMLt and UMDt are the monthly size, value and

momentum factor returns.31




31
  The market, size, book-to-market, momentum factors and the risk-free rate are obtained from Ken French's
website (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/index.html).

                                                      49
                                             Table A-I
                          Linear and Cubic Flow-Performance Relation
This table summarizes the coefficients of linear and cubic panel regressions of DC and non-DC
asset flows on fund variables. Rank captures the ranked performance and the other variables are
characteristics of the fund. The standard errors of the coefficients are reported in parentheses and
adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The regressions also include time-fixed effects. *, **,
and *** denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
significance levels.

                             Linear Specification                       Cubic Specification
                                  Non-DC                                      Non-DC
                   DC Flow          Flow         Difference   DC Flow           Flow        Difference
(Rank-0.5)          0.494***      0.311***        0.183***     0.131           0.260***       -0.129
                   (0.059)       (0.023)          (0.058)     (0.126)         (0.053)        (0.129)
(Rank-0.5)2                                                    0.064           0.057           0.007
                                                              (0.243)         (0.084)        (0.235)
(Rank-0.5)3                                                    2.454***        0.335           2.118**
                                                              (0.855)         (0.331)        (0.849)
Log DC Size        -0.137***      0.007          -0.144***    -0.136***        0.007         -0.143***
                   (0.017)       (0.006)          (0.016)     (0.017)         (0.006)        (0.016)
Log Non-DC Size     0.041**      -0.070***        0.111***     0.041**        -0.070***       0.111***
                   (0.017)       (0.009)          (0.018)     (0.016)         (0.009)        (0.018)
Log Family Size     0.040***      0.039***         0.001       0.040***        0.039***        0.001
                   (0.014)       (0.007)          (0.013)     (0.014)         (0.007)        (0.013)
Log Age            -0.041*        0.002           -0.043*     -0.038           0.003         -0.041*
                   (0.024)       (0.010)          (0.022)     (0.024)         (0.010)        (0.022)
Expense Ratio      -0.387        -0.202           -0.185      -0.411          -0.222         -0.189
                   (0.543)       (0.216)          (0.499)     (0.556)         (0.220)        (0.515)
Turnover           -0.026        -0.018**         -0.008      -0.026          -0.018**       -0.008
                   (0.019)       (0.008)          (0.016)     (0.019)         (0.008)        (0.016)
Volatility          1.067         0.052            1.015       1.174           0.023           1.151
                   (0.815)       (0.314)          (0.813)     (0.871)         (0.317)        (0.863)
Style Flow          0.362         0.283**          0.079       0.362           0.282**         0.080
                   (0.326)       (0.132)          (0.297)     (0.324)         (0.132)        (0.295)

Observations         3,851         3,851          3,851         3,851          3,851         3,851
R-squared             0.095        0.124          0.061         0.097          0.124         0.063




                                                   50
                                             Table A-II
                 Fama-MacBeth Regressions of DC and non-DC Asset Flows
This table summarizes the coefficients of piecewise linear regressions of DC and non-DC asset
flows on fund variables, where we aggregate across years using the Fama-MacBeth (1973)
approach. Low, Mid, and High represent the funds’ ranked return performance where Lowf,t =
min(Rankf,t, 0.2), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6), and Highf,t = (Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The
other variables are characteristics of the fund. The standard errors of the coefficients are reported
in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10,
5, and 1 percent significance levels.


                                DC Flow                 Non-DC Flow                  Difference
Low                             1.261***                    0.380**                   0.881**
                               (0.308)                     (0.157)                   (0.310)
Mid                             0.345***                    0.329***                  0.016
                               (0.093)                     (0.063)                   (0.080)
High                            1.768***                    0.738**                   1.030**
                               (0.416)                     (0.246)                   (0.360)
Log DC Size                    -0.140***                    0.006                    -0.146***
                               (0.021)                     (0.007)                   (0.022)
Log Non-DC Size                 0.049***                   -0.068***                  0.117***
                               (0.012)                     (0.011)                   (0.017)
Log Family Size                 0.026                       0.037***                 -0.011
                               (0.019)                     (0.008)                   (0.016)
Log Age                        -0.033                       0.001                    -0.034
                               (0.035)                     (0.012)                   (0.034)
Expense Ratio                  -0.248                       0.030                    -0.278
                               (0.371)                     (0.201)                   (0.477)
Turnover                       -0.026                      -0.019                    -0.007
                               (0.031)                     (0.017)                   (0.027)
Volatility                     -0.007                      -1.479                     1.473
                               (3.051)                     (0.965)                   (3.062)
Style Flow                     -0.189                       0.183                    -0.372
                               (0.563)                     (0.162)                   (0.578)

Number of Dates                   12                         12                         12




                                                 51
                                              Table A-III
      Piecewise Linear Panel Regression with Different Cut-Off Levels for Performance
This table summarizes the coefficients of a piecewise linear panel regression of DC and non-DC
asset flows on fund variables. Low, Mid, and High represent the funds’ ranked return
performance where Lowf,t = min(Rankf,t, 0.1 or 0.3), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.8 or 0.4), and
Highf,t = (Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The other variables are characteristics of the fund. The
standard errors of the coefficients are reported in parentheses and adjusted for clustering at the
fund level. The regressions also include time-fixed effects. *, **, and *** denote estimates that
are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5, and 1 percent significance levels.

                            10/80/10 Classification                     30/40/30 Classification
                                   Non-DC                                      Non-DC
                    DC Flow          Flow         Difference    DC Flow          Flow         Difference
Low                  2.104**        0.134            1.970**     0.781***       0.404***         0.377*
                    (0.939)        (0.351)          (0.881)     (0.223)        (0.085)          (0.228)
Mid                  0.382***       0.317***         0.065       0.182          0.212***        -0.031
                    (0.066)        (0.028)          (0.067)     (0.128)        (0.055)          (0.135)
High                 2.781**        0.260            2.522**     1.032***       0.479***         0.553*
                    (1.238)        (0.470)          (1.181)     (0.296)        (0.105)          (0.285)
Log DC Size         -0.136***       0.007           -0.143***   -0.136***       0.007           -0.143***
                    (0.017)        (0.006)          (0.016)     (0.017)        (0.006)          (0.016)
Log Non-DC Size      0.040**       -0.070***         0.111***    0.041**       -0.070***         0.111***
                    (0.017)        (0.009)          (0.018)     (0.016)        (0.009)          (0.018)
Log Family Size      0.039***       0.039***         0.000       0.040***       0.039***         0.001
                    (0.014)        (0.007)          (0.013)     (0.014)        (0.007)          (0.013)
Log Age             -0.039          0.002           -0.041*     -0.038          0.003           -0.041*
                    (0.024)        (0.010)          (0.022)     (0.024)        (0.010)          (0.022)
Expense Ratio       -0.440         -0.206           -0.235      -0.427         -0.214           -0.213
                    (0.546)        (0.217)          (0.505)     (0.557)        (0.220)          (0.516)
Turnover            -0.026         -0.018**         -0.008      -0.027         -0.018**         -0.008
                    (0.019)        (0.008)          (0.016)     (0.019)        (0.008)          (0.016)
Volatility           1.103          0.025            1.078       1.029          0.042            0.987
                    (0.864)        (0.321)          (0.852)     (0.862)        (0.315)          (0.853)
Style Flow           0.355          0.283**          0.072       0.364          0.283**          0.081
                    (0.325)        (0.132)          (0.296)     (0.324)        (0.132)          (0.296)

Observations         3,851           3,851          3,851        3,851           3,851          3,851
R-squared            0.097           0.124          0.063        0.097           0.125          0.062




                                                    52
                                             Table A-IV
    Piecewise Linear Panel Regressions of DC and Non-DC Flows Using Percentile Flows
This table summarizes the coefficients of a piecewise linear panel regression of DC and non-DC
asset percentile flows on fund variables. The dependent variables are the percentiles of the DC
and non-DC flows in each year and the percentile of the difference between the DC and non-DC
flows. Low, Mid, and High represent the funds’ ranked return performance where Lowf,t =
min(Rankf,t, 0.2), Midf,t = min(Rankf,t – Lowf,t, 0.6), and Highf,t = (Rankf,t – Lowf,t – Midf,t). The
other variables are characteristics of the fund. The standard errors of the coefficients are reported
in parentheses and adjusted for clustering at the fund level. The regressions also include time-
fixed effects. *, **, and *** denote estimates that are statistically different from zero at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent significance levels.

                                                                                  Percentile of
                            Percentile of              Percentile of           Difference Between
                             DC Flows                  Non-DC Flow            DC and Non-DC Flows
Low                            0.508***                   0.318***                      0.305***
                              (0.122)                    (0.115)                       (0.116)
Mid                            0.168***                   0.339***                     -0.018
                              (0.028)                    (0.028)                       (0.028)
High                           0.423***                   0.189*                        0.351***
                              (0.126)                    (0.113)                       (0.124)
Log DC Size                   -0.027***                  -0.002                        -0.026***
                              (0.004)                    (0.004)                       (0.004)
Log Non-DC Size                0.011**                   -0.027***                      0.029***
                              (0.005)                    (0.005)                       (0.005)
Log Family Size                0.021***                   0.026***                      0.003
                              (0.004)                    (0.005)                       (0.004)
Log Age                       -0.031***                  -0.005                        -0.025***
                              (0.007)                    (0.008)                       (0.007)
Expense Ratio                 -0.356**                   -0.655***                      0.103
                              (0.152)                    (0.168)                       (0.140)
Turnover                      -0.009*                    -0.028***                      0.010**
                              (0.005)                    (0.005)                       (0.005)
Volatility                     0.798***                  -0.069                         0.694***
                              (0.304)                    (0.249)                       (0.259)
Style Flow                     0.255***                   0.266***                      0.070
                              (0.093)                    (0.097)                       (0.082)

Observations                   3,851                       3,851                       3,851
R-squared                      0.097                       0.152                       0.040




                                                  53
