NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF RETIREE HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN CHARACTERISTICS
ON RETIREES’ CHOICE AND EMPLOYERS’ COSTS
Robert Clark
Melinda Morrill
David Vanderweide
Working Paper 19566
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19566

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

This paper was prepared for presentation at the NBER Conference on State and Local Health Plans
for Active and Retired Public Employees, pursuant to a grant from the Smith Richardson Foundation
to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors are grateful to the staff at BCBS NC and
the SHP for providing data and for their support of this project. The authors would like to thank Maria
Fitzpatrick and Jonathan Skinner for useful comments and discussions. The opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of the National
Bureau of Economic Research or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19566.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Robert Clark, Melinda Morrill, and David Vanderweide. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Retiree Health Insurance Plan Characteristics on Retirees’ Choice and Employers’
Costs
Robert Clark, Melinda Morrill, and David Vanderweide
NBER Working Paper No. 19566
October 2013
JEL No. H75,I13,J32
ABSTRACT
To moderate the rate of growth of retiree health insurance costs, employers can modify plans and move
retirees into less expensive plans. We examine policy modifications implemented by the North Carolina
State Health Plan. We investigate whether incentives produce the desired plan elections and whether
these changes, along with cost shifting, produce the expected reductions in cost growth. Using individual-level
administrative data, along with aggregated data on expenditures for retirees, we estimate the effects
of the introduction and subsequent repeal of a Comprehensive Wellness Initiative for non-Medicare
eligible retirees, as well as increases in coinsurance and copayments and the introduction of a premium
for all retirees. Over a third of non-Medicare retirees shifted into the least generous plan between
June 2009 and December 2012. The level effects on annual costs and unfunded accrued liabilities
were relatively modest, but growth rates were diminished. Increases in the retiree premiums reduced
projected costs.

Robert Clark
Poole College of Management
Box 7229
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
and NBER
robert_clark@ncsu.edu
Melinda Morrill
Department of Economics
North Carolina State University
Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu

David Vanderweide
Fiscal Analyst
Fiscal Research Division
North Carolina General Assembly
Raleigh, NC 27601
david.vanderweide@ncleg.net

I.

Introduction
Most state and local government employers allow retirees to continue to be enrolled in

their employee health plans.1 While retiree health insurance (RHI) is common in the public
sector, this benefit has been rapidly disappearing in the private sector.2 Important factors that
influence firms to eliminate this benefit include the continuing rapid increase in the cost of
health insurance coupled with the aging of the population and increasing longevity of retirees
(which results in more retirees relative to active workers and increases the total cost). The
decline in private sector coverage of RHI also coincided with the issuance of new standards by
the Financial Accounting Standards Board in 1989 that required firms to acknowledge unfunded
liabilities associated with these plans on their balance sheets (FASB, 1989). After FAS 106,
employers were forced to properly value the cost of this benefit, and many chose to eliminate
their RHI plan after this.
Public sector employers are now facing the same cost pressures as private employers
and, in response, have been adopting policies in an effort to limit the cost associated with
providing RHI. In 2004, the Governmental Accounting Standards Board issued Statement No.
45 requiring public employers to also acknowledge the unfunded liabilities associated with RHI
plans for public employees (GASB, 2004). In the public sector, accounting is less important
than cash flow, and so, for the most part, the new accounting standards did not lead to a
substantial decline in RHI coverage in the public sector.

1

Franzel and Brown (2013) report that between 2002 and 2006, 92 to 96 percent of state government

units offered health insurance to their retirees under age 65. There has been a substantial decline in the
incidence of retiree health insurance after 2005 and the proportion of state governmental units with
retiree health insurance fell to 69 percent in 2011.
2

Kaiser Family Foundation (2012) reports that only 25 percent of firms with 200 or more workers that

offer health benefits to their active employees extend this coverage to retirees. This is down from 66
percent in 1988.

2

A retiree’s choice of health plan could affect her economic well-being both through
annual out-of-pocket costs and through exposure to the risk of a high-cost health event. Most
public employers offer workers the choice of several different types of health insurance plans. In
many states, workers can choose from HMOs, PPOs, indemnity plans, and consumer-driven
high deductible plans. Even when a state offers only one type of plan, employees and retirees
usually are able to select among several options within the plan type. The plan options typically
differ in the premium the retiree must pay, the level of deductibles and co-payments, and the
percentages of co-insurance payments. Employers may attempt to reduce costs by providing
incentives (either subsidies or penalties), in an effort to reduce costs and shift retirees into less
generous plans.
While most public employers continue to offer RHI as an employee benefit, plan
modifications that shift cost to the retiree have the potential to degrade the promised benefit.3
On the other hand, for the provision of RHI to be sustainable, plan modifications and cost
shifting can be an avenue to reduce costs and shore-up the long-term viability of this benefit.
Public sector employers facing large unfunded RHI liabilities might otherwise have to raise
taxes and/or reduce spending on other priorities in order to provide this expensive employee
benefit (for a discussion, see Clark and Morrill 2010, 2011).
Large unfunded liabilities associated with employer-provided RHI, and the continued
existence of these plans, has driven the need and desire for plan reforms in many states (Franzel
and Brown 2013). To date, there has been little systematic assessment of the impact of policy
changes on these plans and the benefits they provide to retirees. This analysis provides a unique
evaluation of how retirees respond to efforts to shift workers from higher cost to lower costs
3

Franzel and Brown (2013) report that in each of the past three years, over 60 percent of state

governments responding to a survey had made changes in the health benefits offered to employees and
retirees with 31 percent stating that they had shifted more health care costs from the employer to retirees
by raising premiums, copayments, and/or increasing deductibles. In addition, the states have been
increasing the age of eligibility and years of service required in order to vest in the retiree health plans.

3

plans through wellness programs and premiums. The study uses data on retired teachers and
state employees in North Carolina’s State Health Plan (SHP).4
The plan has made a series of policy changes that have produced substantial movement
between the two PPOs currently offered by the state. Using monthly enrollment data and
administrative records from July 2009 through December 2012, we track the movements
between plans as two wellness programs are adopted and then removed and a premium is added
to the Standard Plan. We explore the characteristics of retirees who change plans. In addition,
we assess the impact of the policy changes and varying plan choices on the annual cost of the
state health plan and the unfunded liability of the retiree health plan. The key finding of the
analysis is that policy changes such as the implementation of comprehensive wellness programs
resulted in a substantial shift of non-Medicare retirees across types of PPOs. At the same time,
Medicare-eligible retirees, who were not affected by the first set of policy changes, remained in
their preferred plan. Despite this large shift in plan choice among non-Medicare retirees, the
resulting contemporaneous cost savings was modest in levels. However, the evidence suggests
that cost growth was moderated. Additionally, increases in retiree-paid premiums and other
forms of cost-shifting did reduce the long term costs to the state associated with RHI.
II.

Background on the North Carolina State Health Plan (SHP)
The North Carolina State Health Plan (SHP) is self-funded and covers all public school

teachers and state employees, including both active and retired workers. As in many states, the
rapidly escalating cost of this employee benefit threatens to swamp the state budget as health
care expenditures grow faster than state revenues.5 Until September 2011, public sector

4

In North Carolina, the State Health Plan (SHP) offers exactly the same benefits to active and retired

state employees and teachers, with the exception that when retirees reach age 65 they must enroll in
Medicare which becomes their primary insurer.
5

GAO (2011) predicts that in the United States state and local government expenditures on health care,

including both Medicaid programs and the provision of health insurance to active and retired workers,

4

employers in North Carolina paid the full cost of the premium for employees for all health plans
offered by the state, but the employees paid the full premium for dependent and family
coverage. Because of both escalating costs and large unfunded liabilities associated with the
retiree health plan, North Carolina has implemented several measures to moderate the growth
of health insurance costs for active and retired employees, including increasing cost-shifting and
implementing wellness initiatives. Over the time period studied, North Carolina implemented
several pilot studies of weight loss, exercise and nutrition, smoking cessation, and other
traditional wellness initiatives. Because these programs affected all SHP members, we chose to
focus our analysis on the impact of the large-scale Comprehensive Wellness Initiative, which
directly affected plan choice. North Carolina is a particularly interesting case to study because a
change in the political environment lead to the repeal of the Comprehensive Wellness Initiative
just 14 months after it was first implemented. At the same time, a premium on the more
generous plan was introduced, causing a large shift to the more basic plan offering. Thus, over a
two year span, the state implemented three major policy changes that affected their choice of a
health insurance plan. In the following analysis, we show that in response to the policy changes
over one third of retirees who were not eligible for Medicare shifted from one plan to the other.
In North Carolina, public employees may continue their health insurance coverage in
retirement with the full cost of the premium paid by the state in at least one plan as long as some
specified minimum years of service requirement are met.6 The plan itself is generous in that the
full cost of the premium is covered for the employee/retiree. However, the plan also has
relatively high out-of-pocket costs and no subsidy for dependent coverage. Actuarial reports
will grow substantially faster than GDP. They argue that their simulations project a rise in health-related
costs that is (p. 4) “the root of the fiscal difficulties” faced by state and local governments nationally.
6

Retirees must be receiving a pension benefit from employment in North Carolina to be covered by the

health insurance plan. Workers hired after 2006 are subject to the following premium schedule based on
years of service: 5-9 years must pay full premium, 10-19 years must pay 50 percent of premium, and 20
or more years pay no premium. All retirees must still pay the full premium for dependent health.

5

produced in accordance with the GASB 45 rule indicate a large and growing liability associated
with these promised benefits. North Carolina is typical of most states with large unfunded
liabilities in that not only is the promised benefit generous, but little funds have been set aside to
meet this obligation and funding is generally “pay-as-you-go.” According to estimates in Clark
and Morrill (2011), North Carolina ranked fifth in unfunded actuarially accrued liability (UAAL)
levels and eighth in per capita UAAL among state employee retiree health plans.7
The predecessor to the SHP was established in 1972 to provide health insurance to
teachers and state employees.8 Initially, the appropriation by the legislature for state employee
health insurance was not to exceed $10 per month for each employee. In 1974, the state began
allowing retired employees who were receiving a retirement annuity from the Teachers and
State Employees Retirement System to remain in the health plan. In the early years, the retiree
had to pay the full premium for health insurance coverage. In 1976, the state created a separate
insurance benefit for Medicare eligible retirees and began requiring retirees to enroll in
Medicare when they became eligible to do so. In 1978, the state appropriated sufficient funds to
pay the full premium for retirees, thus making retiree health insurance noncontributory.
Today, the North Carolina SHP provides health insurance to active and retired teachers
and state employees and their spouses and dependents (hereafter we refer to children, spouse,
and family coverage as simply “dependent coverage”). The premium for dependent coverage is
calculated using a common risk pool for dependents of both active workers and retirees not yet
eligible for Medicare (hereafter non-Medicare retirees), so the price non-Medicare retirees must
pay is less than what would be typically found on the open market for health insurance prior to
Medicare eligibility. This potentially leads to adverse selection into the risk pool, since the
retirees with the highest costs will be those with the most to benefit from participating in the
7

Pew (2011) and Franzel and Brown (2012, 2013) both report similar levels of underfunding.

8

In North Carolina, most of the funds for salary and benefits for teachers are provided by the state, and

teachers and state employees are in the same pension plan and health insurance plans.

6

plan. Active and retired workers are subject to the same deductibles and co-payments and are
able to purchase dependent coverage, but the premium for dependent coverage does vary by
whether the individual and/or the dependents are eligible for Medicare. For simplicity we group
subscribers into two categories, Medicare-eligible retirees (hereafter Medicare retirees) and
non-Medicare retirees, based on the subscriber’s status.9
Retired teachers and state employees meeting a minimum years of service requirement
are eligible to continue their participation in the SHP.10 When first introduced, retired
employees who were receiving a state retirement benefit (which required five years of service)
were eligible to continue receiving the state health insurance for the rest of their lives without
paying any premium for this coverage.11 Since the plan was implemented, the ratio of retirees to
workers increased, health care expenditures per person rose, and life expectancy increased. As
the magnitude of the cost of this employee benefit became more salient, state policy makers
began to focus on the escalating costs, especially for employees who had relatively short careers
with the state. In 2006, the state raised the eligibility requirement for all newly hired
employees.12 Since the change in eligibility standards applies only to persons hired after 2006,

9

Alternatively, one could also group by whether the subscriber covers dependents and whether any

dependents are eligible for Medicare. Employee premiums vary by dependents’ eligibility for Medicare,
but plan rules apply only to the subscriber’s status.
10

Upon becoming Medicare eligible, retirees must enroll in Medicare. Medicare becomes the primary

payer for these individuals, thus reducing the cost to the state of providing what becomes supplemental
health insurance.
11

The service requirements for RHI were quite minimal. For example, at that time, someone could have

worked for a local government that did not participate in the SHP for at least 5 years, then work for the
State for one month and get RHI indefinitely.
12

The years of service requirements for eligibility for those hired after 2006 are listed in footnote 4. The

first retirees covered by these new rules would have retired on October 1, 2011. Any individual hired prior
to 2006 was eligible for RHI as long as he/she is receiving a retirement benefit from the system and
worked at least five year in a job covered by the SHP.

7

the short term impact of this change has only a modest effect on current cost and the accrued
liabilities of the SHP.13
The structure of the SHP is somewhat unique. A subscriber, who is either an active
employee or retiree of the State, has the option to cover dependents (children, spouse, or family
coverage). Until September 2011 the employer paid the full premium for the employee/retiree
for either the Standard or Basic Plan. The Standard Plan is identical or superior to the Basic
Plan along each dimension. Thus, a subscriber that is not covering dependents would have no
reason to voluntarily choose the Basic Plan prior to September 2011. However, the SHP
stipulates that the subscriber be in the same plan as his/her dependents. Employees/retirees
that cover dependents may therefore choose the less expensive Basic Plan so that the premiums
associated with dependent coverage are lower. All plans are Preferred Provider Organizations
(PPOs) administered by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina.14
Typically, the SHP plan is funded by the legislature in two year cycles, so that any
modifications to premiums or other plan design features would happen every other year and be
effective as of July 1 of an even numbered year.15,16 However, over the course of the time period

13

It is interesting to note that the General Assembly enacted the same change in eligibility requirements

for retiree health insurance in 1995 (SL1995-507). However, before these new standards could affect any
retirees, the legislature eliminated the new requirements and reestablished the old eligibility standards in
2000 (SL2000-184).
14

In the year prior to our data, the SHP was offering employees the choice of three plan options: the Basic

Plan with a 70/30 co-insurance split, the Standard Plan with 80/20 co-insurance split, and the Premium
plan with a 90/10 co-insurance split. The Premium Plan required the employee to pay a premium for
coverage, and as of July 2009 that plan was eliminated and subscribers in the Premium Plan were
defaulted into the Standard Plan. In June 2009 about 12 percent of retired subscribers were in the
Premium Plan (16,730 retirees). Of those, only 33 were in the Basic Plan in July 2009.
15

This is not a requirement, but in recent years the political process has been such that modifications

(typically benefit cuts) are only adopted in non-election years.
16

The 2009-2010 session of the NC General Assembly had a 68-52 Democratic majority in the House and

30-20 Democratic majority in the Senate with a 10-5 majority of Democrats on the Joint Committee on

8

studied, plan changes were implemented off-cycle because of the time needed to implement the
policy changes. The plan is self-funded with funds coming through employer and employee
contributions and state appropriations. Cost shortfalls are met with special funding allocated as
needed.17
Table 1 summarizes the premiums that would be paid by the subscriber and his/her
employer under each regime between July 2009 and June 2013.18 Note that family coverage was
also available, so this list is not a complete set of premiums and plan options available to
retirees. The premiums also vary by whether the employee/retiree and his/her dependents are
eligible for Medicare. The most common combinations are presented in Table 1. Table 2
describes other important differences between the plans in terms of copayments and
coinsurance rates.
[Table 1]

Employee Hospital and Medical Benefits. For the 2011-2012 session, the Republicans gained the majority
in both chambers for the first time since 1870. During that session the House had a 68-52 Republican
majority and the Senate had a 31-19 Republican majority. Technically, the Joint Committee on Employee
Hospital and Medical Benefits still existed, but it only met once during the 2011-2012 session and did not
make any decisions. During that same session, control over the SHP was moved from the Joint
Committee to the Treasurer’s Office (the Treasurer, Janet Cowell, is a Democrat and won reelection in the
2012 elections) [see http://www.ncleg.net/gascripts/Committees/Committees.asp]. The change in
management was made effective January 1, 2012. Substantial changes to plan offerings are currently
being developed and are planned to become effective January 1, 2014.
17

Since at least 1997, all premiums (employee, employer, and dependents) were increased by the same

percent regardless of the relative experience. There were only some minor exceptions to this, such as
when spousal coverage split off from family coverage and when the employee only premium was
introduced in 2011.
18

Nationally, the total cost of employee health premiums for state employees in 2009 averaged $474 with

employees paying an average of 8 percent of the total cost for individual coverage. Data from a survey by
the National Conference of State Legislatures found that in 2009 the average total premium for family
coverage was $1,062 with employees paying an average of 18 percent of the total premium (Cauchi,
2009).

9

[Table 2]
Tables 1 and 2 illustrate that the Standard Plan dominates the Basic Plan along almost
every dimension. While the Standard Plan is clearly more generous than the Basic Plan, the
member out-of-pocket costs are high in both plans. Although there are clear differences in the
plans, both include high copayments, coinsurance, deductibles, and dependent premiums.
These two tables also illustrate the broad ways that the plan parameters were altered
over time. Table 3 provides a summary of the major plan modifications that occurred over the
time period of our study. The plan year begins in July. In general, open enrollment periods
allow workers to change plans starting in July. Workers and retirees must remain in the same
plan throughout the year unless there is a qualifying event that provides them with the
opportunity to shift plans.19
[Table 3]
The Comprehensive Wellness Initiative (CWI) was phased-in over two open enrollment
periods, July 2010 and July 2011. In the first year, all non-Medicare retirees were defaulted to
the Basic Plan. The CWI did not apply to Medicare retirees, regardless of the Medicareeligibility of any covered dependents. Thus, all Medicare retirees were defaulted into their prior
plan selections. For non-Medicare retirees, in order to switch from the default Basic Plan to the
Standard Plan the subscriber had to attest that she was not a tobacco user and that no covered
dependents used tobacco products.20 The SHP provided tobacco cessation assistance and
members participating in a cessation program were allowed to join the Standard Plan.
In July 2011, the second phase of the CWI went into effect. At this time, all nonMedicare retirees were again defaulted into the Basic Plan, while Medicare retirees were not

19

Qualifying events include the birth of a child, employment status change of self or spouse, or a change in

marital status.
20

North Carolina is one of nine states that have established premium differentials for smokers; however,

39 states have instituted programs to help workers stop smoking (NCLS, 2011).

10

affected. Under CWI-II, the subscriber would have to attest both to not smoking and to not
being overweight (defined as having a BMI greater than 40) for him/herself and his/her
dependents. It should be noted that the SHP did stipulate that audits of individuals and their
behavior might be conducted, but in practice there were no tests actually conducted to make
sure individuals were in compliance. This is particularly important for retirees, who are not
present at a place of employment where smoking or weight could easily be measured or
observed.21
Although the full CWI, including the BMI certification, was implemented for the July
2011 open enrollment period, it was quickly repealed. There was a second open enrollment
period for September 2011, which had been announced prior to July. Thus the response to CWIII may have been muted due to the announcement of the repeal. In September 2011, members
were defaulted into their July 2011 plan election but had the option of switching to any plan.
The CWI was repealed so there were no restrictions on who could choose the Standard Plan, but
at the same time a premium was introduced on the Standard Plan for subscribers. Following the
ACA rules to maintain “grandfathered” status, the employee’s share of the premium could only
be increased by 5 percent relative to the employee premium in the previous year. Because the
previous year’s premium was zero, the SHP imposed a premium that was slightly less than 5
percent of the total premium. At the same time, most copayments, deductibles, and coinsurance
maximums were increased by approximately 16 percent relative to July 2011.22
21

A tobacco testing plan was developed, but never implemented. The plan was to randomly select

subscribers who had attested they did not use tobacco and then test both the subscriber and his/her
spouse (if covered). Dependent children were not to be tested, even if over the age of 18. Because the rate
of enrollment was roughly equal to the estimated fraction of smokers in the SHP, the SHP felt that
members were mostly compliant and audits were not necessary [see minutes of the 8/31/2010 Board of
Trustees Meeting].
22

For dependent premiums, the new employee-only amount was added to the total premium for the

employee plus dependent coverage, resulting in an increase in premiums between 5% and 14% for
employee plus dependent coverage.

11

III. Retiree Plan Choices
As predicted in Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), prior research has found an important
role for adverse selection in plan choice, whereby the less healthy choose more generous plans
(e.g., Cutler, Lincoln, and Zeckhauser, 2010; Naessen et al., 2008; Tchernis, et al., 2006). In our
case, we instead explore how plan parameters affect plan choice, holding constant any time
invariant differences in individual health endowments through the use of subscriber fixed
effects. Furthermore, we consider plan choice in a unique environment where the relative
generosity of the plans is clear, but the choice of the less generous plan is going to be influenced
by defaults, inertia, and the wellness incentives as well. We also consider the introduction of a
premium on the more generous plan, with findings that confirm prior research. For example,
using data from the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, Atherly, Florence, and Thorpe
(2005) find that individuals are less likely to switch within PPO’s than managed care plans, but
individuals’ plan choices within PPO’s are responsive to premium increases.
III.A. Data and Descriptive Statistics
Data used in the analysis on retirees’ choices between the two PPOs is derived from the
administrative records of the SHP record-keeper, Blue Cross/Blue Shield of North Carolina.
The data include plan elections, status, and basic demographics (gender, birth year, employer,
and county) for all members for each month from July 2009 through December 2012, along
with a member identification code that allows individuals to be linked across periods and for
dependents to be linked to the subscriber.23 Unfortunately, the administrative records do not
indicate whether retirees were married or had dependents; we only observe the existence of
dependents if the subscriber selects to include them as part of their insurance election at some
time during our sample period. The sample is restricted to those who were 50 or older on

23

The data exclude any member (subscriber or dependent) who is age 90 or older. Thus, in addition to

missing some subscribers in the data, we may erroneously classify some older subscribers as having no
dependents.

12

January 1 of the observation year. Age is measured as observation year minus birth year minus
one. For this analysis, we collapsed the data to the subscriber-level and recorded whether the
subscriber was covering any dependents. As described above, any dependents must be in the
same plan as the subscriber. The final dataset includes 79,090 non-Medicare retirees and
126,506 Medicare retirees that appear in the data for at least one month during the time period
July 2009-December 2012.24 The analysis sample is at the subscriber-month level and includes
observations for each subscriber in every month in which he/she was a member; this results in
an unbalanced panel of plan choice in each month between July 2009 and December 2012. A
subscriber is only present in the data in the month-years in which he/she is retired. When the
data are expanded to subscriber-months, the final sample includes 2,122,969 non-Medicare
retiree-months and 4,323,064 Medicare retiree-months.
Table 4 includes sample descriptive statistics, first for the full sample and then broken
out by Medicare-eligibility status. Because the CWI did not cover Medicare-eligible members, it
is not surprising to see so many fewer Medicare-eligible retirees are in the Basic Plan (as
opposed to the Standard Plan), on average. The age categories are broken out to highlight the
important time period when individuals first become eligible for Medicare. Although we only
observe year of birth, we can assume that those who were ages 64 or 65 on January 1 of the
given year are almost eligible or newly eligible for Medicare during any month that year.
The bottom portion of Table 4 illustrates the substantial movement to the Basic Plan
between 2009 and the end of 2012. The first column presents averages across the entire sample,
while Column (2) includes only non-Medicare retirees and Column (3) includes only Medicare
retirees. This same data is presented in Figure 1, except the means are plotted monthly. We
24

The data were cleaned by dropping any duplicate observations and any observations where the age rose

by more than one year or dropped at all (1,347). We also dropped the less than one percent of the sample
that had age greater than 65 and was not eligible for Medicare. Note that while it is possible that someone
over age 65 does not qualify for Medicare, that it is unlikely in this setting and could otherwise potentially
distort the coefficients on age.

13

observe that CWI was associated with an enormous increase in Basic Plan enrollment among the
non-Medicare retirees, from 1.58% in July 2009 to 30.44% in July 2010. However, for Medicare
retirees, who were exempt from the CWI, we do not observe any such change over the two CWI
periods. The repeal of the CWI and concurrent introduction of the premium did not alter the
percent enrolled in the Basic Plan by much, although we see that the premium increase did lead
to a doubling of enrollment in the Basic Plan among the Medicare retirees and a slight drop
among the non-Medicare retirees. In Table 9 we explore whether equal proportions of nonMedicare retirees switch into and out of the Basic Plan in September 2011, or whether plan
selection did not change for the vast majority of subscribers.
[Table 4]
[Figure 1]
Before turning to the statistically analysis, we present additional figures that illustrate
some heterogeneity in response to the plan modifications. Figure 2 further disaggregates the
non-Medicare and Medicare groups into age categories. As health typically declines with age,
we would expect to see that younger subscribers are more likely to be in the Basic Plan than
older subscribers, all else equal. Indeed, in Figure 2 we see that the highest rate of Basic Plan
enrollment is among the non-Medicare retirees ages 50-59. Although the level of Basic Plan
enrollment is always lower than the 50-59 year olds, the age 60-64 non-Medicare retirees have a
similar jump in Basic Plan enrollment over the two CWI periods. The youngest Medicare
retirees, ages 64-69, are slightly more affected by the plan changes than their older peers, but
each Medicare retiree age group demonstrates a slight shift upward when the premium was
introduced on the Standard Plan.25

25

Age is measured as of January 1st of a given year. We divide the sample by Medicare-eligibility status,

but do not observe an individual’s exact age. So the Medicare retiree age 64-69 group will contain some
64 year olds that qualify for Medicare due to disability. Medicare retirees younger than age 64 are
excluded from Figure 2, but are included in the regression estimates presented below.

14

[Figure 2]
In Figure 3, we restrict the sample to non-Medicare retirees, who are most affected by
the plan changes. We consider whether the responsiveness to the plan changes varies by
whether or not the subscriber covers dependents. Prior to CWI, a retiree that does not cover
dependents would have no reason to enroll in the Basic Plan, since the full premium for the
Standard Plan was covered by the employer. Indeed, we see that prior to July 2010 basically no
non-Medicare retirees that had self-only coverage elected for the Basic Plan, while less than 10
percent of non-Medicare retirees with dependents elected for the Basic Plan. Interesting, the
two CWI periods were associated with similarly sized jumps in Basic Plan enrollment between
subscribers who covering dependents and those who were not. We observe that the CWI repeal
and premium introduction had a seemingly slightly larger effect on subscribers with
dependents. In Table 9, described below, we illustrate that the choice to cover dependents was
not affected by the plan modifications.
[Figure 3]
The plan data clearly indicate that these three policy changes produced a considerable
shift in enrollment patterns between the two plans. The following statistical analysis indicates
how changes vary across demographic characteristics of the retirees.
III.B. Regression Analysis of Plan Choice
While Figures 1-3 and the means presented in Table 4 are suggestive of a large impact of
the CWI and premium among non-Medicare retirees, it is important to control for secular time
trends and seasonality, and potentially any sample composition changes. To assess the changes
in plan choice over time, we estimate the following LPM for retirees selecting the basic plan:
(1)

Here Basic refers to the choice of the Basic Plan (opposed to the Standard Plan). The major
policy periods are CWI-I (July 2010-June 2011), CWI-II (July 2011-August 2011), and Repeal
15

and Premium (September 2011 – December 2012). The omitted category is the baseline period
from July 2009 through June 2010. The specification includes dummy variables for male,
covering dependents in that month, and age categories 50-59 (reference group for the nonMedicare retirees regressions), 60-63, 64-65 (becoming or recently transitioned to Medicareeligible), 66-69 (reference group for Medicare retirees regressions), 70-79, and 80 and older. All
regression specifications include month fixed effects to control for seasonality (open enrollment
is always in July, except for the second enrollment in 2011) and year fixed effects to control for
secular time trends, such as the aging of the population. Some specifications also include
subscriber fixed effects (μ), which controls for time invariant characteristics of individuals such
as underlying health, risk aversion, time preferences, etc.
For the first two time periods, CWI-I and CWI-II, the Medicare retirees serve as a
“control” group for the plan modifications in a difference-in-differences type setting since
Medicare retirees were not affected by the Comprehensive Wellness Initiatives. However,
Medicare retirees were affected by introduction of the premium, albeit with a lower total out-ofpocket expense since the premiums are substantially lower. We have chosen to estimate and
present the results for a pooled sample of retirees and then for non-Medicare retirees and
Medicare retirees separately, rather than estimate a full difference-in-differences model.
Table 5 presents the results from estimating equation (1) first for all retirees and then for
non-Medicare and Medicare retirees separately. The even numbered columns include
subscriber fixed effects. We see that the plan modifications were associated with a large shift
into the Basic Plan on average, but this pattern only holds for the non-Medicare retirees when
disaggregated by Medicare eligibility status. Although the means indicated that the premium
increased enrollment in the Basic Plan by the Medicare retirees, once covariates are included in
the model the coefficient is small and negative. By including individual fixed effects in the even
numbered columns we control for any unobserved, time invariant health or socioeconomic
characteristics of the individual. Results are largely unchanged when subscriber fixed effects are
16

included, although the age patterns are affected since those effects are only identified off of
individuals who cross an age category boundary in a given year (recall that age is actually age on
January 1 of a given year, as calculated from year of birth).
[Table 5]
Table 5, Columns (3) and (4) presents results for non-Medicare retirees only. Here we
see the plan modifications were associated with large increases in Basic Plan enrollment,
controlling for year, month, age, and dependent status. In Columns (5) and (6), we see that the
estimated coefficients on the plan modifications for the Medicare retirees are small and
negative. Interestingly, we do not see a large positive estimated coefficient on the introduction
of the premium for the Medicare retirees, suggesting that Medicare retirees were largely
unaffected by the premium increase, on average.
The estimates in Table 5 pooled together those covering dependents (who had to pay
premiums throughout the sample period) and those who only had single coverage. In Table 6,
we consider the choice to be in the basic plan separately for those covering dependents or not.
These equations include subscriber, month, and year fixed effects. Perhaps surprisingly, in
Columns (1) and (2), we see that the effects of the policy changes are nearly identical for nonMedicare retirees who cover dependents compared with those that do not. Similarly, in
Columns (3) and (4), we again see that on average the plan modifications did not substantially
alter the probability of being in the Basic Plan among Medicare retirees. The introduction of the
premium did lead to a small, positive increase in Basic Plan enrollment, but the point estimates
are small. Because there are not large differences by dependent coverage, we group together
those covering dependents and those that do not for the remainder of the empirical analysis.
[Table 6]
Next, we consider the special case of individuals in their first month of eligibility.
Presumably, these individuals will not be as affected by a “default” and will instead actively be
choosing coverage when signing up for retiree health insurance. First, we consider individuals
17

in the first month they have the status non-Medicare retiree. Estimates are reported in the first
column of Table 7. The specification is identical to Table 5, Column 3, and includes month and
year fixed effects. The data include only one observation per subscriber, since we are observing
choice in the first month retired. Means of the dependent variable (signing up for the Basic
Plan) are reported in the bottom row of Table 7. When comparing the estimates with those in
Table 5, Column 4, we see that the newly non-Medicare retirees are less likely overall to be in the
Basic Plan (17.4% versus 25.3%) and that the various plan modifications have a smaller effect,
although the magnitude is still large relative to the mean. We see that the largest increase in the
probability of Basic Plan enrollment occurred because of the introduction of the premium on the
Standard Plan. This suggests that in the full sample, a substantial portion of subscribers simply
retained the default plan choice.
[Table 7]
The second column of Table 7 includes individuals that are first observed in the data as
eligible for Medicare. Newly retired employees that are Medicare retirees had an overall sign-up
rate of 12.9% in the Basic Plan. Note that a small fraction of the sample reports ages below 65,
which may be due to eligibility for Medicare through disability. For this group we see basically
no impact of any plan modifications, except a small positive coefficient when the premium is
introduced. Interestingly, relative to those who begin retiree health insurance benefits between
the ages of 66-69, we see the largest probabilities of being in the Basic Plan for individuals
retiring between ages 60-65. The final column of Table 7 includes individuals who were nonMedicare retirees in the prior month and become newly Medicare retirees in the current month.
This sample is restricted to those ages 64-65 on January 1 of the given year. Prior results would
suggest that the Medicare retirees would mostly opt for the Standard Plan, since they would only
be affected by the CWI if they covered non-Medicare eligible dependents. However, we see large
estimated coefficients for each of the plan changes, indicating that this group of retirees was
very much influenced by the plan modifications. This may be due to newly Medicare retirees
18

opting to stay in the Basic Plan due to inertia. One potential concern is that the composition of
retirees changes as a function of these plan modifications, although we present results in Table 9
demonstrating this is not the case.
III.C. Regression Analysis of Plan Transitions
An alternative way to consider changes in plan choices is to model the transition between
the Standard Plan and Basic Plan, and vice versa, at open enrollment periods. In September
2011 the CWI was repealed and a premium was added to the Standard Plan. Although we do not
see a large change in the fraction of individuals enrolled in the Basic Plan, this could be masking
a large shift between the Standard and Basic Plans that roughly canceled out. To explore this
more formally, we estimate the following equation for non-Medicare retirees and Medicare
retirees separately.
(2)

In Table 8, the first three columns present estimates for each of the main plan changes:
(1) CWI-I on July 1, 2010; (2) CWI-II on July 1, 2011; and (3) repeal CWI plus introduce a
premium on the Standard Plan on September 1, 2011. For these equations, we restrict the
sample to those that were in the Standard Plan in the prior month, so the dependent variable is
the “transition” from the Standard Plan to the Basic Plan. The final column of Table 8 presents
the reverse equation:
(3)

In equation 3, the sample is now those in the Basic Plan in the prior month and the dependent
variable is the transition from the Basic Plan to the Standard Plan. These individuals may be
those whose behavior was affected by the CWI but who are not sensitive to the introduction of
the premium on the Standard Plan. Panel A of Table 8 presents results for the sample of nonMedicare retirees, while Panel B includes only Medicare retirees. The omitted age groups are
19

ages 50-59 in Panel A and ages 66-69 in Panel B. The sample excludes subscribers who changed
Medicare eligibility status (non-Medicare retirees versus Medicare) in the two-month period.
[Table 8]
Some interesting patterns emerge when considering these month-to-month transitions
during the open enrollment periods, presented in Table 8. First, considering the two CWI
periods, we observe a large shift from the Standard Plan to the Basic Plan. This may be due to
the need to “attest” to not being a tobacco user and not being overweight. However, it may also
result from the default being changed to the Basic Plan. We observe that the effect of
dependents is opposite under CWI-I and CWI-II. One explanation of this could be that retired
public employees in North Carolina are more likely to have dependents that smoke (the point of
emphasis in CWI-I) than to have dependents that are obese (the target of CWI-II). Also, the
repeal of CWI was announced prior to CWI-II being implemented, so that individuals may have
chosen their plan based on the repeal. If subscribers with dependents are less sensitive to the
premium, because they are subject to a premium even under the Standard Plan (albeit a smaller
premium), that would be consistent with the negative estimated coefficient on covering
dependents in columns (2) and (3). In Table 8, Columns (3) and (4) we consider the transition
from Standard to Basic and the transition from Basic to Standard, respectively. Interestingly,
men are more likely to switch under the CWI than women. Men are slightly more likely to
transition to the Basic Plan and significantly less likely to transition from Basic to Standard.
Older non-Medicare retirees are less likely than younger non-Medicare retirees to transition
from Standard to Basic, perhaps because of greater medical care needs.
Table 8, Panel B, repeats the same exercise for Medicare retirees. Recall that Medicare
retirees were not affected by the CWI and were never defaulted to the Basic Plan. We see that
less than a half of a percent of Medicare retirees transition to the Basic Plan from the Standard
Plan during either CWI period, and those that do transfer tend to be the youngest. Because
nearly all workers were in the Standard Plan prior to the introduction of the premium, only
20

about 2% of the population could be used to estimate Column 4 in Table 8 (Part B), so that has
been omitted. Prior literature suggests that as individuals age, price sensitivity declines and
plan changes are less likely overall (e.g., Buchmueller, 2002; Royalty and Solomon, 1999;
Strombom, Buchmueller, and Feldstein, 2002), which is consistent with the estimates in Table
8.
III.D. Robustness Check of Retirement Behavior and Dependent Coverage
One might be concerned that the choice to retire and/or the choice to cover dependents
is affected by the plan parameters. Prior work has shown a link between access to retiree health
insurance and the age of retirement (see Fitzpatrick 2013; Leisersen 2013; Robinson and Clark
2010; Shoven and Slavov 2013). However, to our knowledge, no link has been found between
the generosity of the health insurance and the probability of retiring. To confirm that this is not
influencing our findings, we consider whether plan modifications changed the probability of
retiring. Similarly, if dependent coverage becomes more expensive relative to outside options
we might find subscribers dropping dependents, whose coverage is not explicitly subsidized.
Table 9 explores both of these possibilities empirically. First, taking a sample of all
subscribers (whether active or retired) ages 50-69, we regress a dummy variable for being
retired on the plan period dummies, subscriber, month and year fixed effects, and the age
categories (age 50-59 is the omitted category). Even with over 8 million observations, the time
period dummy variables do not significantly predict retirement status, once year and month
fixed effects are included in the model (except for the pooled sample under CWI-I).
Reassuringly, we do observe that there is a strong age gradient with the probability of
retirement. The estimated coefficients are very similar when comparing individuals that cover
dependents versus those that do not.
[Table 9]
Columns (4) and (5) of Table 9 consider whether the choice to cover dependents is
influenced by the plan changes. We might expect that as the generosity of the plan declines,
21

individuals will chose to purchase health insurance in the private market, switch to spouse’s
insurance, or choose to go without insurance. However, during this time period, health
insurance costs are everywhere rising. The regressions again include subscriber, month, and
year fixed effects. Although the coefficients are statistically significant, the magnitudes are small
and do not indicate a strong pattern of a decline or increase of dependent coverage due to plan
modifications. These results suggest that the CWI, repeal, and premium did not substantially
influence the composition of the sample.
IV. Plan Costs and Unfunded Liabilities
Because the Basic Plan had a higher co-insurance rate and less generous plan
parameters, the large shift of non-Medicare retirees to the Basic Plan should have led to a
notable decline in both experienced and projected costs of providing retiree health insurance
(RHI). Here we explore whether the rate of annual increase in the total cost of SHP for retirees
was affected by these policy changes. While we can directly compare the level differences, it is
more difficult to assess what the growth in expenses would have been absent these changes.
When enrollees are shifted from a more generous to less generous plan, one concern is
that insurance unraveling could occur whereby the cost of providing the more generous plan
increases as the least costly individuals exit to the less generous plan (see Cutler and Reber 1998
for an example of insurance unraveling). In our setting, because subscribers must pay the full
cost for dependents and because the CWI was designed to bring less healthy, not the most
healthy individuals into the Basic Plan, the extent of adverse selection is predicted to be
relatively minor. Reductions in plan generosity are also predicted to decrease the consumption
of medical care (reducing “moral hazard” of overconsumption of medical services), as
individuals must pay more out-of-pocket for any medical treatments. The benefit of reduced
consumption could be outweighed by the cost of individuals forgoing preventative care and
ultimately experiencing greater medical costs.

22

IV.A. Fiscal Year Plan Costs
Table 10 explores several measures of cost and approximations for medical care
utilization. The enrollment figures in Panel A of Table 10 are consistent with the SHP data and
indicate a large shift into Basic Plan enrollment for non-Medicare retirees. We also observe that
the population of Medicare retirees is growing faster than that of non-Medicare retirees. Thus,
the cost figures are presented normalized by enrollment, so that the cost per member can be
directly compared.26
[Table 10]
The second set of rows, Panel B of Table 10, present the payments made by the SHP,
which are allowed charges minus employee out-of-pocket payments and coordination of benefits
(mostly Medicare payments). These figures are broken out by Standard and Basic Plan for nonMedicare and Medicare retirees. We see that between fiscal year 2010 (July 2009 – June 2010)
and fiscal year 2011 (July 2010 – June 2011) there was a marked increase in costs among the
non-Medicare retirees in both plans. This should be expected if the least expensive members of
the Standard Plan shifted to the Basic Plan, causing the per-enrollee costs to rise in each plan
(see Cutler and Reber, 1998 for a description of insurance unraveling). However, when
considering the average cost of providing RHI to non-Medicare retirees, we see a much more
modest rise of about 5 percent. Using the National Health Expenditure Data, Hartman, et al.
(2013) report that nationally, health consumption expenditures rose by exactly 3.9 percent in
2009, 2010, and 2011 (i.e., costs rose 11.7 percent between the beginning of 2009 and the end of

26

Note that the SHP data include only the explicit cost of retiree health insurance. By including retirees

and their dependents in the risk pool, the cost of active worker health insurance rises (see Clark and
Morrill, 2010). However, since the plan is self-insured, the “implicit” subsidy of pooling is not relevant for
total costs of SHP which includes both active and retired employees. GASB standards require that the
implicit subsidy be consider as a cost of RHI and must be reflected in the calculation of the accrued
liabilities of the retiree health plan. However, on an annual cost basis, the lower cost of premiums for
retirees is offset by a higher cost for active employees.

23

2011). Thus, relative to a national average for all health expenditures, the cost growth for nonMedicare retirees was moderate.
Next, if we consider the Medicare retirees as a control group in this first time period, we
notice a much smaller growth in the cost to the plan among that group, approximately 1 percent.
It appears that the cost growth for non-Medicare retirees was actually larger than for the
Medicare retirees. However, this does not necessarily imply that the CWI increased costs
relative to what they would have been. The SHP costs for Medicare retirees are a function of
Medicare allowed charges for services, whereas the allowed charges for non-Medicare retirees
are determined by the SHP directly. As discussed in detail below, it seems that over this time
period, Medicare reimbursement rates changed in ways that are difficult to explain and are not
due to SHP plan modifications.
Considering the difference between FY2011 and FY2012 (i.e., July 2010-June 2011 versus
July 2011-June 2012), we observe the blended effects of the implementation of CWI-II, the
repeal of CWI-I and CWI-II, the premium, and the approximately 16 percent increase in
copayments, coinsurance maximums, and deductibles. Here we see that the SHP plan costs
dropped slightly for non-Medicare retirees and by 8 percent for Medicare retirees. This large
decline in SHP plan payments for Medicare retirees is surprising, and we explore this in more
detail below.
Panel C of Table 10 considers the total allowed charges, which should not be sensitive to
the cost shifting to members through premiums, copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles that
happened in September 2011. Here we see a slightly higher 5 percent rise in charges between
FY2010 and FY2011 for non-Medicare retirees relative to a 4 percent rise for Medicare retirees.
This again suggests that the CWI-I did not moderate cost growth for non-Medicare retirees, if
Medicare retirees are an appropriate control group. Interestingly, the total allowed charges
were basically flat for non-Medicare retirees between FY2011 and FY2012, but fell by 6.5 percent
among Medicare retirees. So we are again finding that the second phase of CWI is associated
24

with a sharp drop in charges for Medicare retirees. Before exploring this further, we consider
first whether the FY2010 to FY2011 cost growth is consistent with national data.
At this time, the growth in Medicare spending per enrollee was 4.3%, 1.8%, and 3.6% in
2009, 2010, and 2011, respectively (Hartman et al, 2013), or approximately 10% between 2009
and 2011. Thus, compared with national trends, the CWI did not appear to reduce costs for RHI
and may have even lead to larger increases than would have been experienced in the absence of
plan modifications. This is similar to the findings of insurance market unraveling in Cutler and
Reber (1998), where when individuals on the margin are shifted into a less generous plan, the
costs actually rise in both plans due to adverse selection. However, without a true control group,
it is difficult to assess how the plan modifications changed costs.
To explore this further, Figure 4 plots historical data from 1991 through 2011, where
available, for Medicare expenditures and Medicare costs per enrollee (in North Carolina and in
the United States on average). We then include historical cost information on the SHP per
enrollee expenditure through 2012. These data are slightly different than that presented in
Table 10, in order to develop a historical trend line. 27 The year here is the fiscal year ending in
June (so 2009 corresponds to July 2008-June 2009). The data for 2007 and 2008 were not
available as the SHP did not make a report to the legislature in those years. The estimates are
for per enrollee expenditures on medical claims, net of Medicare reimbursements and out-ofpocket amounts and gross of refunds.
[Figure 4]
Figure 4 illustrates a steady rise in medical spending over the past two decades. The cost
growth in the SHP is approximately equal to the growth in Medicare spending, with the
exception of the most recent years. We see here that the rise between 2009 and 2011 and the

27

These figures include paid medical claims for retirees only (no dependents). From 1991-2006 the data

include paid pharmacy claims for retirees only, while the 2009-2012 figures include pharmacy claims for
dependents as well.

25

decline in 2012 was very slight compared with earlier trends. In this figure it appears that
during the time period under investigation in this study, the SHP costs grew at a lower rate than
what would have been expected from either the historical trend or the cost growth in Medicare.
As shown below, we believe this is attributable to the increases in out-of-pocket costs and the
introduction of the premium, not the CWI.
Although Figure 4 indicated no drop in Medicare expenditure nationally through 2011,
data for 2012 is not yet available. Returning to Table 10, we consider potential explanations for
the drop in Medicare retiree costs for the SHP in FY2012. We first consider whether utilization
dropped. Panel D presents the average number of visits per member. These are visits that are
subject to a copay, so do not include many outpatient procedures. We see that office visits
dropped for both groups of retirees, but the largest decline was a 4 percent decrease for nonMedicare retirees between FY2011 and FY2012. Thus, it does not appear that there was a drop
in utilization among Medicare retirees that would explain the large cost savings.
Finally, Panel E of Table 10 considers the total allowed charges per visit. Here we see
that for Medicare retirees, the allowed charges per visit fall substantially between FY2011 and
FY2012. There are several potential explanations for this. First, reimbursement rates to
Medicare could have dropped, resulting in lower costs for the SHP as well. There were some
adjustments over this time period for some Medicare inpatient rates, which declined in order to
recoup overcharges by hospitals in previous periods.28 In addition, or alternatively, there could
be some technological progress that disproportionately affected Medicare retirees such that the
cost of procedures declined. Similarly, patients could have chosen to be seen in more cost
efficient facilities or the mix of treatments needed could have changed to lower cost procedures.
As of October 8, 2013, the SHP has convened a group of subject matter experts to determine

28

For more information, see the CMS publication “Medicare’s FY 2011 Hospital Inpatient Prospective

Payment System Final Rule: Understanding the Documentation and Coding Adjustment”, available at:
http://www.cms.gov/apps/media/press/factsheet.asp?Counter=3805

26

why Medicare payments dropped by such a large percent during this time period. For our
purposes, it seems clear that the shift to the Basic Plan cannot explain the reduction in costs.
We therefore conclude that the plan modifications over this time period did not substantially
alter costs, with the caveat that there is some unexplained drop in costs for Medicare retirees
between FY2011 and FY2012.
On the whole, the large shifts in plan choice among non-Medicare retirees associated
with CWI-I, and the more moderate shifts due to the repeal of CWI and the introduction of the
premium, did not lead to a clear and unambiguous decline in the cost of providing RHI. We
next consider how the actuarially accrued liabilities associated with RHI were affected by the
plan modifications.
IV.B. RHI Unfunded Liabilities
Until recently, the liabilities associated with extending subsidized access to the SHP to
retirees were not well understood or clearly quantified.29 In 2004, the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board issued statements that required public employers to prepare
actuarial statements that reported the actuarial accrued liabilities (AAL) of retiree health plans.
The first such statement in North Carolina was prepared by Aon Consulting in December of
2006 covering the plan as of December 31, 2005. The actuarial statement indicated the AAL
was $23.9 billion and that the state had assets of only $139 million in reserve. Thus, the state
had unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities (UAAL) of $23.8 billion in 2005. Subsequent reports
covering the years 2007-2011 show a rise in the UAAL to $29.6 billion in 2011, an increase in 6
years of $5.8 billion (24 percent).
[Table 11]

29

Clark and Morrill (2010) discuss the GASB requirements and present evidence from these actuarial

reports for all 50 states. Similar analysis can be found in Pew Center on the States (2010). Clark (2010)
presents similar data focusing on retiree health plans for public school teachers. Additional discussion of
retiree health plans and their financial status is provided in Clark (2009).

27

The actuarial statements are based on current law, projections of future employment and
the number of retirees, and the health care cost trend rate. Unlike pensions, which have a
legislated formula that determines generosity, the actual health plan offered to retirees can be
modified within certain limitations established by case law. Table 11 shows the projected
liability in each valuation to date, as well as the primary reasons for any change in the projected
liability.30 Notice that the projected liabilities are most affected by out-of-pocket increases and
actuarial assumptions, and that the CWI did not seem to impact the UAAL at all.
Although the state maintains a small trust fund for retiree health, the annual cost of
premiums for retired workers is paid primarily by annual appropriations. The annual cost of
providing coverage to retirees has increased rapidly over the past three decades. In 1984,
premiums for retirees were $23.3 million. By 1990, state expenditures had increased to $70.8
million, and by 2000 the employer cost of premiums for retirees reached $192.0 million.
Annual costs have more than tripled in the last decade and in 2010 totaled $616.0 million.
Using inflation adjusted dollars (1982-84 = 100), the annual state expenditures rose from $22.4
million in 1984 to $282.2 million in 2010. The rate of increase in the annual cost of retiree
health insurance has outpaced the growth of the state budget. As a result, the proportion of the
state budget devoted to retiree health insurance has increased from 0.65 percent in 1995 to 1.33
percent in 2010, roughly a 105 percent increase in the proportion of the state budget allocated to
retiree health insurance over those 15 years. The UAAL as a percent of payroll has risen from
192.4 percent in 2005 to 216.5 percent in 2009. The actuarial statements report the annual
required contribution (ARC), which is the normal cost of the plan plus contributions needed to
amortize the UAAL over 30 years. The ARC has increased from $2.4 billion in 2005 to $3.0
billion in 2009. This represents an increase in the ARC as a percentage of state payroll from
19.3 to 19.9 percent. From 2005-2009, the state paid slightly more than the annual cost for
30

These figures are either explicitly provided in the reports or were provided by the actuaries preparing

the reports in publicly available presentations.

28

current retirees but had not attempted to reduce the UAAL by making the annual required
contribution necessary to move toward full funding of the plan, which is one cause of the
increase in the UAAL.31
IV.C. The Affordable Care Act
Like all employer-provided health insurance plans, the SHP has already been affected by
the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and will be affected in the coming years. Short-term impacts of
these changes in North Carolina are estimated have only minor cost implications. The
expansion of dependent coverage up to age 26 is estimated to increase annual expenditures by
the SHP by $15 to $20 million.32 Changes in the use of pre-existing condition clauses and the
elimination of lifetime caps on individual claims are expected to have only negligible effects on
annual expenditures. It should be noted that these changes are unlikely to affect North
Carolina’s SHP because it already did not subsidize dependent coverage and did not have
lifetime caps.
The Early Retiree Reinsurance Program provision of the Affordable Care Act provides
subsidies to employers who offer retiree health insurance to former employees between the ages
of 55 and 65. This program has already used all appropriated funds but provided approximately
$70 million of revenue to the SHP. The state will also need to make a decision on whether it
wishes to retain “grandfather status” of the SHP. Retaining this designation exempts the SHP
from some aspects of the Affordable Care Act but limits possible changes to the plan.33 Longerterm cost implications will be determined by the insurance exchanges that are established and
31

Clark (2009) compares the liabilities across states for general state employees while Clark (2010)

examines retiree health liabilities associated with providing this benefit to public school teachers.
32

Estimates were provided by plan actuaries and can be found in the following presentation made to the

Board of Trustees: http://statehealthplan.state.nc.us/library/pdf/board-materials/April-2011/updatedactuarial-forecast.pdf, [accessed June 26, 2013].
33

For a discussion of the pros and cons of retaining grandfathering status see, SHP Limits on Benefit

Changes, 2010a, 2010b, 2010c.

29

whether state employees or retirees migrate from the SHP to one of the exchanges. In addition,
costs will be influenced by whether federal law ultimately requires the state to provide a
specified level of health benefits that exceed the current levels offered by the SHP.
V. Discussion and Conclusions
The cost of providing health insurance for retired public workers continues to increase
rapidly and has been in excess of the inflation rate, the rate of growth of payroll, and the rate of
growth of state revenues in North Carolina. This fiscal pressure on state finances has occurred
despite changes in the SHP that have reduced annual costs. Unfunded liabilities associated with
health insurance for retirees are also rising because North Carolina, like many states, has
financed its plan using pay-as-you-go funding. Therefore accrued liabilities continue to grow
without any corresponding increase in funds to pay for these promised benefits.34
One method employers have adopted to moderate the increase in the cost health
insurance is to provide incentives or penalties in an effort to move employees and retirees into
plans that have lower employer costs. This study examines the impact of policy changes in the
North Carolina State Health Plan on the plan choices of retirees. The state introduced two
wellness initiatives that required smokers and then overweight retirees who were not yet eligible
for Medicare to move to a less generous plan which had lower employer costs. The adoption of
these CWIs resulted in about one third of all such retirees moving immediately from the
Standard to the Basic plan. At the same time, Medicare eligible retirees, who were not covered
by the CWIs, had only a small increase in enrollment in the Basic plan. Thus, it seems
reasonable to conclude that the policy initiatives successful achieved their primary objective of
moving less healthy, higher cost retirees into the less generous plan.

34

It should be noted that in North Carolina collective bargaining by public employees is not allowed by

law, so there are no powerful union interests that might hinder the state from adjusting employee
benefits.

30

Shortly after the introduction of the second CWI, North Carolina repealed both of the
CWIs and instituted a premium on the Standard plan. After the implementation of these two
policies, the total enrollment in the Basic plan remained relatively constant; however, we
observed considerable movement from the Standard to the Basic plan as some retirees shifted
plans to avoid the new premium and from the Basic to the Standard plan as many of those who
were required to move to the Basic plan shifted back to the Standard plan. The evidence seems
to clearly suggest that retirees are sensitive to policy changes such as wellness requirements and
premiums. In January 2014 the SHP is introducing a series of plan changes, including the
introduction of a consumer-driven health plan. The results of this study suggest that retirees do
shift between plans, although it is unclear whether retirees will be willing to adopt a plan that is
vastly different from the PPO’s that have been offered in the recent past.
Despite this substantial behavioral response to the plan modifications, the implications
for costs were relatively modest. Under CWI-I costs rose for both the non-Medicare retirees and
the Medicare retirees, although the evidence suggests that this growth may have been less than
what would have been expected given historical trends and trends in Medicare spending. When
considering the unfunded actuarially accrued liabilities (UAAL) associated RHI in North
Carolina, we see that the most significant factors were assumptions about trends and increases
in retiree-paid premiums. The CWI had very little impact on the UAAL calculations.

31

REFERENCES
Atherly, Adam, Curtis Florence, and Kenneth E. Thorpe. 2005. “Health plan switching among
members of the federal employees health benefits program,” Inquiry, 42: 255-265.
Aon Hewitt. 2005, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012. The State of North Carolina Report of
the Actuary on the Postemployment medical Benefits Valuation.
Buchmueller, Thomas. 2002. “The health plan choices of retirees under managed competition,”
Health Services Research, 35(5 Part I): 949-976.
Cauchi, Richard. 2009. “State and public employee health benefits: Trends across the states.”
http://www.ncsl.org/portals/1/documents/health/MIStateEmployee09.pdf
Chernew, Michael E., Hirth, Richard A., and Cutler, David M. 2009 “Increased spending on
health care: Long term implications for the nation,” Health Affairs, 28(5): 1253-1255.
Clark, Robert L. 2009. “Will public sector retiree health benefit plans survive? Economic and
policy implications of unfunded liabilities,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings. May, pp. 533-537.
Clark, Robert L. 2010. “Retiree health plans for public school teachers after GASB 43 and 45,”
Education Finance and Policy, Fall, 438-462.
Clark, Robert L. and Melinda Sandler Morrill. 2010. Retiree Health Plans in the Public Sector:
Is There a Funding Crisis? Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Clark, Robert L. and Melinda Sandler Morrill. 2011. “The funding status of retiree health plans
in the public sector,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(2): 291-314.
Cutler, David, Bryan Lincoln, and Richard Zeckhauser. 2010. “Selection stories:
Understanding movement across health plans,” Journal of Health Economics, 29: 821-838.
Cutler, David, and Sarah Reber. 1998. “Paying for health insurance: The trade-off between
competition and adverse selection" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 433-466.
Financial Accounting Standards Board. 1989. Employers’ Accounting for Post-Retirement
Benefits Other Than Pensions, Norwalk, CT: FASB.
Fitzpatrick, Maria. 2013. “Retiree Health Insurance for Public School Employees: Does It Affect
Retirement and Mobility?” NBER Conference State and Local Health Plans for Active and
Retired Public Employees.
Franzel, Josh and Alexander Brown. 2012. “Understanding finances and changes in retiree
health care.” Government Finance Review, February, pp. 59-63.
Franzel, Joshua and Alex Brown. 2013. “Retiree health care benefits for state employees in
2013,” Center for State and Local Government Excellence, June 4. http://slge.org/wpcontent/uploads/2013/06/Center_NASRA_OPEB_Spotlight_June2013.pdf
Government Accountability Office. 2011. “State and local governments’ fiscal outlook: April
2011 update,” GAO-11-495SP, April 2011.
32

Government Accounting Standards Board. 204. Statement No. 45. Accounting and Financial
Reporting by Employers for Post-employment Benefits Other Than Pensions.
Hartman, Micah, Anne B. Martin, Joseph Benson, Aaron Catlin, and the National Health
Expenditure Accounts Team. 2013. “National Health Spending in 2011: Overall growth remains
low, but some payers and services show signs of acceleration,” Health Affairs, 32(1): 87-99.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2012. Employer Health Benefits: 2012 Annual Survey.
http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/8345-employer-health-benefitsannual-survey-full-report-0912.pdf
Kearney, Richard, Robert Clark, Jerrell Coggburn, Dennis Daley, and Christina Robinson.
2009. At a Crossroads: The Financing and Future of Health Benefits for State and Local
Government Retirees, Center for State and Local Government Excellence.
Leiserson, Greg. 2013. “Retiree Health Insurance and Job Separations: Evidence from
Pennsylvania State Employees.” Working Paper. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Naessens, James M., Mahmud Khan, Nilay D. Shah, Amy Wagie, Rebecca A. Pautz, and Claudia
R. Campbell. 2008. “Effect of premium, copayments, and health status on the choice of health
plans,” Medical Care, 46(10): 1033-1040.
National Conference of State Legislatures. February 8, 2011.
http://www.ncsl.org/IssuesResearch/Health/StateEmployeeHealthBenefitsNCSL/tabid/14345/
Default.aspx?tabid=14345 Accessed February 14, 2011.
North Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and State Employees. The State Health Plan for
Teachers and State Employees. http://statehealthplan.state.nc.us/, Accessed February 23,
2011.
North Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and State Employees. The State Health Plan for
Teachers and State Employees. Financial Update, August 12, 2010a.
North Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and State Employees. The State Health Plan for
Teachers and State Employees. Early Retiree Reinsurance Program. August 12, 2010b.
North Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and State Employees. The State Health Plan for
Teachers and State Employees. Limits on Benefit Changes. August 12, 2010c.
Office of the State Budget and Management. 2009. The North Carolina State Budget: Summary
of Recommendations 2009-2011.
Pew Center on the States. 2010. The Trillion Dollar Gap.
Pew Center on the States. 2011. The Widening Gap: Updated. Pew Center.
Robinson, Christina and Robert Clark. 2010. “Retiree Health Insurance and Disengagement
from a Career Job.” Journal of Labor Research, 31(3), 247-262.

33

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets:
An essay on the economics of imperfect information,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
90(4): 629-649.
Royalty, Anne Beeson, and Neil Solomon. 1999. “Health plan choice: Price elasticity in a
managed competition setting,” The Journal of Human Resources, 34(1): 1-41.
Segal. Summer 2009. Study of State Employee Health Benefits.
Shoven, John and Sita Slavov. 2013. “The role of retiree health insurance in the early retirement
of state and local employees.” Paper to be presented at NBER Conference, August 2013.
Strombom, Bruce A., Thomas C. Buchmueller, and Paul J. Feldstein. 2002. “Switching costs,
price sensitivity, and health plan choice,” Journal of Health Economics, 21: 89-116.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2009. National Compensation Survey: Benefits in the United
States, March 2009. Bulletin 2731.

34

Figure 1: Plan Choices in Each Month from July 2009 – December 2012

35

Notes: The data only include year of birth, so age is measured as of January 1st of the given year.
In these data, a 64-year-old is grouped based on Medicare-eligibility status. A small number of
64-year-olds may qualify for Medicare due to disability, and so may not have reached age 65 by
the observation month. Medicare retirees younger than 64 are excluded from this graph.
Figure 2: Plan Choices by Age Group

36

Figure 3: Non-Medicare Retirees’ Plan Choices by Dependent Coverage

37

$12,000

$500,000

$10,000

$400,000

$8,000

$300,000

$6,000

$200,000

$4,000

$100,000

$2,000

$-

$-

Per Enrollee Expenditure (Dollars)

$600,000

Y1991
Y1992
Y1993
Y1994
Y1995
Y1996
Y1997
Y1998
Y1999
Y2000
Y2001
Y2002
Y2003
Y2004
Y2005
Y2006
Y2007
Y2008
Y2009
Y2010
Y2011
Y2012

Medicare Expenditure (Millions of Dollars)

Medicare and SHP Historical Trends

Calendar Year
Medicare Expenditure (Millions of Dollars)

North Carolina

United States

SHP

Notes: The Medicare expenditure data is from the National Health Expenditures by type of
service and source of funds, CY 1960-2011 file. Retrieved (July 9, 2013) at
http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-andReports/NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/NHE2011.zip. The North Carolina and United
States per enrollee expenditures are calculated from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (2011). Health Expenditures by State of Residence. Retrieved (July 9, 2013) at
http://www.cms.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/resident-state-estimates.zip .
The State Health Plan historical claims data are from records kept by the Legislative staff based
on reports from the SHP to the legislature. These figures include paid medical claims for
retirees only (no dependents). From 1991-2006 the data include paid pharmacy claims for
retirees only, while the 2009-2012 figures include pharmacy claims for dependents as well. The
estimates are for per enrollee expenditures on medical claims, net of Medicare reimbursements
and out-of-pocket amounts and gross of refunds.

Figure 4: Historical Medical Care Spending Levels

38

Table 1: Premiums for Retiree Health Insurance Coverage
Non-Medicare
Retiree
Self Only
Employer Retiree
July 2009

Medicare Retiree
Self Only

Non-Medicare Retiree
and Spouse

Retiree and Spouse
both with Medicare

Employer

Retiree

Employer

Retiree

Employer

Retiree

Standard

$377.22

0

$287.20

0

$377.22

$502.74

$287.20

$375.32

Basic

$377.22

0

$287.20

0

$377.22

$422.74

$287.20

$315.10

Standard

$410.80

0

$312.76

0

$410.80

$547.48

$312.76

$408.72

Basic

$410.80

0

$312.76

0

$410.80

$460.36

$312.76

$343.14

Standard

$410.80

0

$312.76

0

$410.80

$547.48

$312.76

$408.72

Basic

$410.80

0

$312.76

0

$410.80

$460.36

$312.76

$343.14

September
2011

Standard

$410.94

$21.62

$320.64

$10.00

$410.94

$576.42

$320.64

$440.32

Basic

$410.94

0

$320.64

0

$410.94

$484.70

$320.64

$351.90

July 2012

Standard

$432.66

$22.76

$336.25

$10.52

$432.66

$629.64

$336.25

$463.58a

July 2010

July 2011

Basic
$432.66
0
$336.25
0
$432.66
$510.32
$336.25
$370.50b
a Total monthly premium with traditional Rx Plan for both self and dependent
b Traditional Rx Plan, not Medicare Part D Plan
Notes: The standard plan is the 80/20 and the Basic Plan is the 70/30. This is a subset of possible combinations of
coverage, but includes the most common options.

39

Table 2: Other Plan Design Features for Retiree Health Insurance Coverage
Jul, 2009 through Aug, 2011

Sep, 2011 through Jun, 2013

Basic 70/30
(1a)

Standard 80/20
(1b)

Basic 70/30
(2a)

Standard 80/20
(2b)

Primary Care Copay

$30

$25

$35

$30

Specialist Copay

$70

$60

$81

$70

Physical/ Occupational/ Speech Therapy,
Mental Health, and Chiropractic Copay

$55

$45

$64

$52

$250

$200

$291

$233

$800/$2,400

$600/$1,800

$933/$2,799

$700/$2,100

30%

20%

30%

20%

$3,250/$9,750

$2,750/$8,250

$3,793/$11,379

$3,210/$9,630

Plan Design Feature

Inpatient Copay
Deductible (Individual/Family)
Coinsurance Percentage
Coinsurance Maximum (Individual /Family)

Notes: All amounts are for services provided in network. Pharmacy copays are not shown because they are the same across the two
plans. Deductible and coinsurance applies to inpatient and outpatient hospital and ambulatory surgery centers.

40

Table 3: State Health Plan Terms and Policies

Date

Default

Major Change

Other Changes

July 2009

Previous Plan
(Standard Plan if
previously in
Premium Plan)

Eliminated Premium
Plan

Increased annual deductibles, copayments, and
out-of-pocket maximums. Premium increase by
8.9% on plans with premiums.

July 2010

Basic Plan

CWI-I Tobacco
Cessation (nonMedicare retirees only)

Approximately 8.9% premium increase on plans
with premiums.

July 2011

Basic Plan

(1) ACA Coverage of Dependents 19-26
(2) No pre-existing condition waiting period if
younger than 19 years old.

September 2011

Previous plan

CWI-II Weight
Management Added
(non-Medicare retirees
only)
(1) CWI Repealed;
(2) Introduced
Employee Premium on
Standard Plan

July 2012

Previous plan

No major change

Approximately 5% premium increase on plans
with premiums.

41

Most copayments, plus deductibles and
coinsurance maximums increased by approx.
16% relative to July 2011. Premium increase by
5.3% on plans with premiums.

Table 4: Sample Descriptive Statistics
All Retirees
Observations
Basic Plan
Covers Dependents
Medicare-Eligible
Male
Age 50-59
Age 60-63
Age 64-65
Age 66-69
Age 70-79
Age 80+

(1)
6,446,033
10.5%
9.9%
67.1%
33.0%
16.6%
18.4%
9.8%
17.0%
27.1%
11.1%

Non-Medicare
Retirees
(2)
2,122,969
25.3%
13.9%

Medicare
Retirees
(3)
4,323,064
3.3%
8.0%

31.6%
43.5%
50.3%
6.1%

33.7%
3.3%
2.8%
11.6%
25.3%
40.4%
16.6%

Percent Choosing Basic Plan
July 2009: Baseline
1.28%
1.58%
1.13%
July 2010: CWI-I
11.16%
30.44%
1.48%
July 2011: CWI-II
14.75%
40.32%
2.24%
Sept. 2011: Repeal CWI,
15.33%
38.46%
3.74%
Premium
July 2012: Premium Increase
16.06%
36.55%
6.77%
Dec. 2012: End of Sample
16.75%
36.19%
8.03%
Notes: The sample is all subscribers who are receiving benefits as a Medicare-eligible or nonMedicare eligible retirees and who are at least age 50 as of January 1 of the observation year.
The sample is an unbalanced panel of plan choice in each month between July 2009 and
December 2012. Age refers to age on January 1 of the given year (approximated from year of
birth).

42

Table 5: Choice of Basic Plan
All Retirees
CWI-I
(July 2010-June 2011)
CWI-II
(July 2011-Aug. 2011)
Repeal CWI, Premium
(Sept. 2011-Apr. 2013)
Covers Dependents
Male

Non-Medicare
Retirees
(3)
(4)
0.291
0.292
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.422
0.426
(0.003)
(0.002)
0.412
0.421
(0.003)
(0.002)
0.076
0.075
(0.001)
(0.002)
0.076
(0.001)

(1)
0.089
(0.001)
0.126
(0.001)
0.132
(0.001)
0.066
(0.0004)
0.029
(0.0002)

(2)
0.091
(0.0004)
0.130
(0.001)
0.137
(0.001)
0.051
(0.001)

-0.010

0.117

-0.023

(0.0004)
-0.078
(0.0004)
-0.213
(0.0004)
-0.221
(0.0003)
-0.226
(0.0004)

(0.001)
0.188
(0.001)
0.122
(0.001)
0.053
(0.001)
-0.021
(0.001)
X

(0.001)
-0.019
(0.001)

(5)
-0.015
(0.0004)
-0.024
(0.001)
-0.010
(0.001)
0.053
(0.0003)
0.011
(0.0002)
0.048
(0.0005)

(6)
-0.004
(0.0002)
-0.009
(0.0004)
0.002
(0.0004)
0.024
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.023
(0.001)

-0.018

0.043

-0.015

(0.001)
-0.024
(0.001)

(0.001)
0.112
(0.0003)

(0.001)
-0.002
(0.0002)

-0.009
(0.0002)
-0.013
(0.0003)

0.002
(0.0002)
-0.001
(0.0004)
X

Age 50-59
Age 60-63
Age 64-65
Age 66-69
Age 70-79
Age 80+

Medicare Retirees

Subscriber FE
X
Observations
6,446,033
2,122,969
4,323,064
(Subscriber-Months)
Mean Dep. Var.
10.5%
25.3%
3.3%
Notes: The dependent variable is the choice of the basic plan. Coefficients are estimated by a
linear probability model with standard errors in parentheses. The sample is all subscribers who
are receiving benefits as a non-Medicare eligible retiree or Medicare-eligible retiree and who are
at least age 50 as of January 1 of the observation year. The sample is an unbalanced panel of
plan choice in each month between July 2009 and December 2012. The omitted groups are the
period from July 2009-June 2010 (baseline) and the age categories columns (1)-(4) ages 50-59,
columns (5)-(6) ages 66-69. The even numbered columns include individual fixed effects. All
specifications include month and year fixed effects, not reported.

43

Table 6: Choice of Basic Plan by Whether Covering Dependents in Current Year
Non-Medicare Retirees

CWI-I
(July 2010-June 2011)
CWI-II
(July 2011-Aug. 2011)
Repeal CWI, Premium
(Sept. 2011-Apr. 2013)
Age 50-59
Age 60-63
Age 64-65

Dependents
(1)
0.310
(0.002)
0.405
(0.005)
0.382
(0.004)

Self Only
(2)
0.290
(0.001)
0.431
(0.002)
0.430
(0.002)

-0.007
(0.002)
-0.045
(0.004)

-0.021
(0.001)
-0.024
(0.002)

294,082
32.04%

1,828,887
24.21%

Age 70-79
Age 80+
Observations
Percent in Basic Plan

Medicare Eligible Retirees
Dependents
(3)
0.002
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.005
(0.001)
-0.020
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)
344,013
8.60%

Self Only
(4)
-0.005
(0.0002)
-0.009
(0.0004)
0.001
(0.0004)
-0.023
(0.001)
-0.017
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.000)
0.003
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.000)
3,979,051
2.84%

Notes: Column (1) – (2) have an identical specification and sample to Table 5 column (4);
column (3)-(4) have an identical specification and sample to Table 5 column (6). The
dependent variable is the choice of the basic plan. Coefficients are estimated by a linear
probability model with standard errors in parentheses. The sample is all subscribers who are
receiving benefits as a Medicare-eligible or non-Medicare eligible retirees and who are at least
age 50 as of January 1 of the observation year.

44

Table 7: Choice of Basic Plan for Newly Retired and Newly Medicare Eligible
First Month Retired
Non-Medicare
Retirees
(1)
0.096
(0.011)
0.142
(0.019)
0.217
(0.020)
0.115
(0.006)
0.054
(0.004)

First Month MedicareEligible

Medicare
Medicaret|Non-Medicaret-1
Retirees
(2)
(3)
CWI-I
-0.014
0.251
(July 2010-June 2011)
(0.017)
(0.014)
CWI-II
-0.050
0.340
(July 2011-Aug. 2011)
(0.031)
(0.026)
Repeal CWI, Premium
0.066
0.376
(Sept. 2011-Apr. 2013)
(0.031)
(0.024)
Covers Dependents
0.062
0.018
(0.012)
(0.009)
Male
0.024
0.070
(0.007)
(0.006)
Age 50-59
-0.009
(0.017)
Age 60-63
-0.005
0.070
(0.004)
(0.028)
Age 64-65
-0.037
0.026
(0.011)
(0.008)
Age 70-79
-0.010
(0.010)
Age 80+
-0.079
(0.016)
Observations
33,869
9,796
23,064
Mean Dep. Var.
17.4%
12.9%
25.3%
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the retiree chose the Basic Plan in the
first month of being newly retired or being newly eligible for Medicare. The specifications
include month and year fixed effects, not reported. Coefficients are estimated by a linear
probability model with standard errors in parentheses. In Column (1) the sample is all nonMedicare retirees in the first month observed as a non-Medicare retiree (omitting July 2009),
while Column (2) includes retirees that first appear as a retiree eligible for Medicare (omitting
July 2009). In Columns (3) the sample is restricted to individuals ages 64-65 in the first month
after a transition from non-Medicare eligible to Medicare-eligible.

45

Table 8: Probability of Transitioning
CWI

Repeal CWI + Add
Premium
Basic to
Standard to
Standard
Basic

CWI-I:
CWI-II:
Standard to Standard to
Basic
Basic
June-July
June-July
Aug.- Sept.
Aug.-Sept.
2010
2011
2011
2011
(2)
(4)
(1)
(3)
Panel A: Non-Medicare Eligible Retirees (NMR)
Covers Dependents
0.037
-0.047
-0.045
-0.041
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.007)
Male
0.091
0.042
0.011
-0.053
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
Age 60-63
-0.026
-0.005
-0.018
0.017
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.005)
Age 64-65
-0.008
0.003
-0.036
0.016
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.012)
Observations
47,367
36,180
31,737
20,336
Mean of Dep. Var.
29.7%
24.4%
8.5%
14.4%
Panel B: Medicare-Eligible Retirees
Covers Dependents
0.005
0.001
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Male
0.003
0.000
0.004
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
Age 50-59
0.032
0.018
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
Age 60-63
0.030
0.011
-0.002
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
Age 64-65
0.005
0.011
0.009
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Age 70-79
0.000
0.000
-0.003
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
Age 80+
-0.001
-0.001
-0.008
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.001)
Observations
95,598
100,575
101,852
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.3%
0.2%
1.2%
Notes: The sample is subscribers who did not change status (non-Medicare versus Medicare) in
the two-month period. In Part A the omitted age group is Ages 50-59; in Part B the omitted age
group is Ages 66-69. The dependent variable is the change between plans, as indicated in the
column headings. Coefficients are estimated by a linear probability model with standard errors
in parentheses.

46

Table 9: Effects of Plan Modifications on Retirement Status and Choice to Cover Dependents
Dependent Variable: Retired
Sample: All subscribers (active and retired) ages
50-69

CWI-I
(July 2010-June 2011)
CWI-II
(July 2011-Aug. 2011)
Repeal CWI, Premium
(Sept. 2011-Apr. 2013)
Age 50-59
Age 60-63
Age 64-65
Age 66-69

All
Subscribers
(1)
-0.001
(0.0003)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.0001
(0.0005)

Covers
Dependents
(2)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.0003
(0.001)
-0.0004
(0.001)

0.047
(0.0003)
0.075
(0.0005)
0.074
(0.001)

0.036
(0.001)
0.059
(0.001)
0.063
(0.001)

Self Only
(3)
-0.001
(0.0003)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.0005
(0.001)
0.049
(0.0003)
0.076
(0.001)
0.073
(0.001)

Age 70-79

Dependent Variable: Cover
Dependents
Sample: All retired subscribers ages 50+
Non-Medicare
Retirees
(4)
-0.001
(0.0004)
0.002
(0.001)
0.002
(0.001)
0.002
(0.0004)
-0.003
(0.001)

Medicare Eligible
Retirees
(5)
-0.001
(0.0002)
-0.001
(0.0004)
-0.001
(0.0003)
0.017
(0.001)
0.017
(0.001)
0.007
(0.0002)

-0.001
(0.0002)
Age 80+
0.003
(0.0004)
Observations
8,791,158
1,438,649
7,352,509
2,122,969
4,323,064
Mean of Dep. Var.
45.48%
31.81%
48.16%
13.85%
7.96%
Notes: The unit of observation is a subscriber-month. In Columns (1) - (3) the dependent variable is whether the individual is
currently retired among all subscribers (active or retired) who were age 50-69 on January 1. In Columns (4) – (5), the dependent
variable is whether the retiree chose to cover dependents in that month among all subscribers who are receiving benefits as a
Medicare-eligible or non-Medicare eligible and who are at least age 50. Coefficients are estimated with a linear probability model;
standard errors are in parentheses. The sample is an unbalanced panel of status in each month between July 2009 and December
2012. Each specification includes subscriber, month, and year fixed effects.

47

Table 10: Plan Costs

A. ENROLLMENT
Standard (80/20) Non-Medicare
Basic (70/30) Non-Medicare
Standard (80/20) Medicare-Eligible
Basic (70/30) Medicare-Eligible

July 2009June 2010

July 2010June 2011

Baseline

CWI-I

July 2011June 2012
CWI-II, Repeal
CWI + Premium

60,167
1,826

44,934
19,173

39,759
25,470

108,491
1,555

112,224
2,014

114,863
5,725

$5,161
$3,962
$5,126

$5,548
$4,944
$5,367

$5,632
$4,844
$5,324

$897
$706
$894

$902
$1,040
$905

$837
$710
$831

B. TOTAL SHP PAYMENTS PER MEMBER
Standard (80/20) Non-Medicare
Basic (70/30) Non-Medicare
Non-Medicare
Standard (80/20) Medicare-Eligible
Basic (70/30) Medicare-Eligible
Medicare-Eligible

C. TOTAL ALLOWED CHARGES PER MEMBER (OOP + SHP Payments +
Medicare/Coordination of Benefits)
Non-Medicare
$6,176
$6,476
Medicare-Eligible
$8,823
$9,145
D. AVERAGE NUMBER OF VISITS (COPAY-SUBJECT) PER MEMBER
Non-Medicare
7.63
7.49
Medicare-Eligible
10.61
10.51

$6,516
$8,544
7.18
10.32

E. TOTAL ALLOWED CHARGES PER VISIT (OOP + SHP Payments +
Medicare/Coordination of Benefits)
Non-Medicare
$809
$865
$907
Medicare-Eligible
$832
$870
$828
Notes: SHP Payments and Allowed Charges are from the BCBSNC monthly claims reports
(Report 2) using incurred reported through December. Number of Visits is from BCBSNC
(Report 9) using incurred reported through December, and the enrollment figures are from
BCBSNC (Report 12) average enrollment over the fiscal year. The “per enrollee” and “per visit”
costs are calculated by the authors by dividing total charges by total enrollment or visits.

48

Table 11: UAAL RHI

Year

2005 Report

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020

23.786
25.852
27.932
30.069
32.259
34.508
36.837
39.295
41.895
44.646

Substantive
Changes

2007 Report

28.594
30.621
32.707
34.896
37.137
39.489
41.961
44.487
47.147

No trend reset

2008 Report

27.854
29.995
32.132
34.214
36.324
38.427
40.555
42.712
44.910
47.165

2009 Report

32.765
35.074
37.451
39.798
42.136
44.483
46.855
49.255
51.716
54.256

Out-of-pocket
increased;
Eliminated
Premium Plan

New
assumptions
from experience
study; Trend
reset

2010 Report

32.839
35.063
37.323
39.559
41.789
44.029
46.270
48.541
50.897
53.325

Out-of-pocket
increased;
Retiree
premiums in
Standard Plan

2011 Report

29.610
31.391
33.156
34.912
36.662
38.416
40.186
41.985
43.823
45.712
New drug plan
(EGWP); Change
to Segal
methods; No
trend reset

Note: UAAL’s are expressed in billions of dollars.
Source: Actuarial reports of the postemployment medical plan for retired teachers and state employees of North Carolina, prepared
by Aon Hewitt (2005-2010 reports) and The Segal Company (2011 report).

49

