                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    MARKET THICKNESS AND THE IMPACT OF UNEMPLOYMENT ON HOUSING
                         MARKET OUTCOMES

                                            Li Gan
                                         Qinghua Zhang

                                       Working Paper 19564
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19564


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2013




An earlier version of this paper was circulated as NBER Working Paper #12134 under the title "The
Thick Market Effect on Housing Market Transaction." The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Li Gan and Qinghua Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Market Thickness and the Impact of Unemployment on Housing Market Outcomes
Li Gan and Qinghua Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 19564
October 2013
JEL No. L1,R2

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper develops a search-matching model to study the impact of the unemployment rate on the
housing market in the presence of the thick market effect. We estimate the structural model using
Texas city-level data that covers three years, 1990, 2000 and 2010. Our structural estimation helps
identify the channel through which the thick market effect amplifies the impact of the unemployment
rate on housing market outcomes. Specifically, we show that an increase in the unemployment generates
a thinner market, which leads to poorer matching quality on average. As a consequence, prices and
the transaction volume both decline more than in the absence of the thick market effect. Simulations
based on our estimates predict that a three percentage-point increase in the unemployment rate lowers
the price by 7.74% and reduces the transaction volume by 9.98%. In addition, larger cities with more
population experience milder changes in prices in response to changes in the unemployment rate compared
to smaller cities.


Li Gan
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-4228
and NBER
gan@econmail.tamu.edu

Qinghua Zhang
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing 100871
China
zhangq@gsm.pku.edu.cn
      1. Introduction

        This paper develops a search-matching model to study the impact of the unemployment
rate on the residential housing market when the thick market effect is present. We conduct a
structural estimation using the city-level data of Texas. Simulations based on the structural
estimates show that arket thickness plays an important role in determining the housing market
outcomes. Specifically, an increase in the unemployment rate generates a thinner market and
leads to poorer matching quality. As a result, both the price and the transaction volume decline
more than in the absence of the thick market effect. In addition, smaller cities with less population
would experience a bigger change in prices than larger cities when facing similar changes in
unemployment rates.
        There has been substantial interest in understanding how housing markets interact with
the aggregate economy. Liu, Miao and Zha (2013) observe a prominent negative co-movement
between land price and unemployment at the national level over time since 1975 in the U.S. We
show a similar relationship between housing price and unemployment rate in Figure 1-a using
Texas city-level data over the three census years of 1990, 2000 and 2010. In addition, Figure 2-b
shows a negative relationship between the sales volume and the unemployment rate. Since both
the housing market and the labor market are two important markets in the economy, it is essential
to understand the interaction between them. Some literature studies the effect of housing market
shocks on the labor market. Liu, Miao and Zha demonstrate how a negative housing demand
shock can lead to an increase in the unemployment rate by building a model that incorporates a
housing market, collateral constrains and a labor market with search friction. Head and Lloyd-
Ellis (forthcoming) and Rupert and Wasmer (2012) study how housing market friction causes
differences in geographical mobility and unemployment rate.           Our paper complements the
aforementioned works by examining the causal relationship in the opposite direction; that is, how
unemployment influences housing market outcomes.
       Intuitively, when the unemployment rate increases (or decreases), the equilibrium price
and transaction volume will both decrease (or increase). However, because housing has some
distinctive features (e.g., down-payment requirement, search friction and heterogeneity) from
other goods markets, the impact of unemployment may be amplified. Some literature studies how
search friction amplifies the effect of aggregate shocks on housing markets, without specifically
investigating the impact of unemployment. Examples include Diaz and Jerez (2012), Novy-Marx
(2009) and Piazzesi and Schneider (2009). Their papers adopt an aggregate matching function (as
in Pissarides 2000) in which search friction may cause trading delay. Aggregate shocks change
the market tightness and affect the matching probability and the length of delay, which in turn


                                                 2
leads to amplified effect on prices. However, none of these papers pay attention to the thick
market effect in facilitating the matching process through improving the matching quality. As
Diamond (1982) suggests, the thick market effect may be an important factor that compounds the
impact of aggregate shocks. Our paper focuses on understanding this distinctive amplifying
channel.
     This paper also provides a complementary explanation to the well-documented positive
correlations between housing prices and transaction volumes. Stein (1995) finds that the elasticity
of transaction volume with respect to price is 4 (i.e., a decrease of 10 percent in price is related to
a 40 percent decrease in transaction volumes). The standard model, such as that of Poterba
(1984), has difficulty in explaining this strong and positive relationship. The down-payment
hypothesis 2 (Stein 1995, Genesove and Mayer 1997, and Ortalo-Magné and Rady 2006)
emphasizes the liquidity constraint of individual households. When the house price is down,
households may not be able to afford the down-payment of the new house by selling their current
house. Therefore, prospective sellers intend to hold their current houses longer, leading to an even
smaller transaction volume. According to the loss-aversion hypothesis3 (Genesove and Mayer
2001, and Engelhardt 2003), sellers tend to hold their houses in hope of offers higher than the
original purchasing prices when facing a down market, even though they would encounter
additional financial loss by doing so. Thus a decline in price leads to a further reduced transaction
volume. We study how the thick market effect amplifies the impact of unemployment on both
housing prices and transaction volumes in the same direction, which in turn generates a strong
positive correlation between them.
     In our model, the number of houses is fixed in the short run but is endogenously determined
in the long-run. Each house is heterogeneous in its characteristics and each household has
heterogeneous preferences on houses. Households are either homeowners or renters. Each period
homeowners are assumed to have a probability of changing houses. If a homeowner decides to
change house, she will move out of the current house, put the house for sale on the market and
meanwhile search for a new house to move in. Renters also search for suitable houses to move in.

2
  The down-payment hypothesis of Stein (1995) is empirically supported by Genesove and Mayer (1997).
In Ortalo-Magné and Rady (2006), houses are divided into “starter” homes and “trade-up” homes. An
increase in the household income as a positive demand shock will drive the price of “starter” homes up.
Thus more owners of “starter” homes may be able to afford the down payment of new “trade-up” homes
and thus get ready to move up, which may raise both the transaction volume and the price of “trade-up”
homes.
3
  The prospect theory of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) argues that the marginal disutility from a loss is
larger than the marginal utility from a gain. Genesove and Mayer (2001) and Engelhardt (2003) provide
supportive evidence to the loss aversion hypothesis in the housing markets.



                                                     3
On the market, buyers and sellers both search for trading partners. If a buyer cannot find a good
match this period, she will rent an apartment to live in for this period and continue to search next
period. Similarly, if a seller cannot find a good matched buyer, she will hold the house until next
period. The market size is characterized by the endogenously determined numbers of buyers and
sellers. When there are fewer buyers and sellers, the market is thinner and the quality of
matching between a buyer and a seller is poorer on average. A poorer matching quality leads to a
lower price and a lower sales volume. Like Ngai and Tenreyro (2013), 4 we refer to this
phenomenon as the thick market effect in our paper.
      The unemployment rate has both a direct effect and an indirect effect on the size of the
housing market. Directly, from the demand side, it serves as a financial constraint and reduces the
number of buyers because being unemployed practically prevents a household from entering the
housing market as a buyer since she cannot get a mortgage. From the supply side, an increase in
the unemployment rate lowers people’s expectations of job security and makes homeowners less
willing to change houses since they may not be able to buy new ones because of higher chances
of being unemployed the next period. Thus the number of sellers decreases as well. As for the
indirect effect, a higher unemployment rate would lower a household’s expected income which in
turn would make the household less likely to own a house. Also, a higher unemployment rate
raises the difficulty to sell houses and thus weakens the homeowners’ tendency to change houses.
The idea is similar to that of Head and Lloyd-Ellis (forthcoming) where the willingness of a
worker to move to other cities depends on how quickly she can sell her current house. As a result,
the numbers of buyers and sellers both decrease further. The market becomes thinner. The
average matching quality becomes poorer, which lowers the buyers’ willingness to pay for houses.
Both sellers and buyers find it more difficult to trade. Therefore, in the equilibrium, both the
average housing price and sales volume decline more than in the absence of the thick market
effect. In solving the model, we focus on the stationary equilibrium, following the tradition of the
search-matching literature. We investigate different housing market outcomes in the stationary
equilibrium under different unemployment rates, rather than the transitory dynamics.
     A structural estimation of our model is conducted using the Texas city-level data that covers
the three years of 1990, 2000 and 2010. We explore variation in the unemployment rate across
different city-year's. The set of parameters is obtained by matching the predicted values from the
model with the corresponding observed values in average housing prices, average rental price,
sales volume and time-to-sale at the city level.        We find a positive and significant marginal

4
 Ngai and Tenreyro (2013) examines how the thick market effect amplifies seasonal fluctuations in the
housing market.


                                                    4
disutility from mismatch for households. This indicates a household’s utility flow from the
housing services would decrease when the matching quality is poor, which would in turn lower
her willingness to pay for the house.
         Our simulations using the estimated parameters demonstrate that a decrease (or increase) in
unemployment rates would lead to a higher (lower) housing price and a larger (smaller) sales
volume, creating a positive relationship between the housing price and transaction volume.
Furthermore, changes in either prices or transactions in response to changes in unemployment are
amplified by the thick market effect. In particular, we find that in the presence of the thick
market effect, when the unemployment rate increases from 5 to 8%, the housing price will fall by
7.74% and the sales volume will fall by 9.98%. An OLS estimate without an amplifying effect
would suggest lower percentage changes. At the unemployment rate of 7%, the price elasticity
with respect to the unemployment rate is -0.17 while the sales volume elasticity is -0.23. The ratio
of the sales volume elasticity to the price elasticity is 1.34.
       In addition, our simulation shows that in a larger market with more buyers and sellers, when
the unemployment rate goes up (or down), sale prices decrease (or increase) by a smaller
percentage than in a thinner market. This result is consistent with Smith and Tesarek (1991) and
Mayer (1993). Smith and Tesarek's empirical study of the Houston market shows that prices of
more expensive houses rose by larger percentages during the housing market boom and dropped
by larger percentages during the bust. Our model helps explain this phenomenon since high-price
range houses are typically in a thinner market with smaller numbers of buyers and sellers.
           Previous studies have applied a search-matching framework to study housing markets,
including Wheaton (1990), Arnott (1989), Mayer (1995),Williams (1995) and Krainer (2001).
Our paper is closely related to the literature that studies the thick market effect in facilitating the
matching process through improving the matching quality.5 Zhang (2007) investigates how the
thick market effect speeds up the relocation of the used capital. The paper finds that the thick
market effect can lead to cyclical behaviors in the used capital market given entry cost even
though there are only idiosyncratic shocks at the firm level.            Gan and Zhang (2006) apply a

5
    The thick market effect may also influence the probability of matching between buyers and sellers.
However, the direction is ambiguous and depends on different matching mechanisms. For example, a
thicker market has adverse effect in Burdett, Shi and Wright (2002), has no effect in Lagos (2001), and has
a positive effect in Coles and Smith (1999). Gan and Li (2004) provide a model using the matching
mechanism of Roth (1984) and show that the average matching probability increases while the variance of
the matching probabilities decreases as the market becomes thicker.




                                                      5
similar idea to the labor market matching and find that the thick market effect can lead to
unemployment cycles in the local economy given search cost. Moreover, larger cities have
shorter and milder cycles on average. Among the earlier works that examine the relationship
between market size and housing market outcomes, Arnott (1989) finds that because of the
heterogeneity of both households and houses, when the rental market size is larger, the degree of
mismatch is smaller in general and landlords possess weaker monopoly power and thus set a
lower rent, which leads to lower vacancy rate. Mayer (1995) presents a negotiated-sale model in
the housing market following the setting of Arnott’s. The simulations of Mayer’s model show
that a larger market has a lower vacancy rate, a shorter time-to-sale and a lower sale price.
      A recent study by Ngai and Tenreyro (2013) applies the idea that a thicker market increases
the matching quality of the housing market and develops a model to show that smaller
deterministic seasonal shocks of the housing markets can be amplified through the thick market
effect into greater deterministic seasonal fluctuations in both prices and transaction volumes. Our
paper complements Ngai and Tenreyro’s work in two perspectives. First, we study the interaction
of the thick market effect with unemployment rate changes which is low frequency shock instead
of deterministic seasonal shocks. Second, Ngai and Tenreyro assume that the distribution of a
match-specific quality in a thicker market first-order stochastically dominates that in a thinner
market—a phenomena which they refer to as the thick market effect. To support this assumption,
they use individual household data from the American Housing Survey and run OLS regressions
to check if the matching quality is related to the seasonal dummy. Because there is no direct data
on the quality of matches, they use three proxies: (1) duration of the match, (2) number of repairs
and additions made to a house during the first two years after its purchase and (3) cost of repairs
and additions. Our paper shows that the discount in households’ willingness-to-pay due to
mismatch depends on how easily households can adjust their preferences and thus provides a
micro-foundation of the channel through which the thick market effect improves the matching
quality.
      This paper makes two contributions to the literature. First, it incorporates the
unemployment rate into a search-matching model. Our model provides a framework to study
how the thick market effect amplifies the impact of unemployment on housing markets and how
communities with different population size experience demand shocks differently. Second, this
paper provides a micro-foundation of the thick market effect. Our structural estimation sheds
light into the channel through which the thick market effect influences the housing market
outcomes. To our knowledge, few works in the literature have done so.




                                                 6
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model in detail. Section
3 first describes the estimation strategy, and then proceeds to discuss the data and the estimation
results. The estimated parameters are applied to simulate the effect of changing unemployment
rates on housing market outcomes, suggesting a significant thick market effect. Section 4
concludes the paper.


2. The Model
        In this section, we develop a search-matching model of the housing market. The model
demonstrates how changes in the unemployment rate change both the numbers of buyers and
sellers in the market, which in turn affects the matching quality and market outcomes such as
prices, transaction volumes and time-to-sale. We describe the model in seven parts, denoted as
part (a) to (g). We first present the short run model where the number of total houses in a market
is fixed, in part (a) through (f). In the last part, part (g), we extend our model to the long run
framework by allowing the total number of houses in the market to be endogenously determined.


(a) The Basic Setup
        In our model, the number of households in a city, denoted by M, is given. A household
either lives in her own house or rents an apartment. To simplify our discussions, we assume that a
house cannot become an apartment, and vice versa. In the short run, the total number of houses
TH in a market is fixed. All houses are different in terms of their hedonic characteristics. All the
households are different in their preferences in the characteristics of houses. We use a unit circle
to model the characteristic space of houses. Each point on the circle represents a unique
characteristic. To simplify the analysis, we let all the houses for sale be evenly spaced around the
circle. And all the buyers are uniformly distributed around the circle. A buyer’s location on the
circle means that she prefers the characteristic represented by this point the most, or that any
house located at the buyer’s location would be a perfect match.
        The matching mechanism between sellers and buyers is as follows. At the beginning of
each time period, sellers post advertisements and announce the characteristics of their houses to
the public. In order to buy a house, a buyer has to visit the house. We assume each buyer can
visit at most one house in one time period. Each buyer then chooses to visit the house that best
matches her. A seller may have multiple visitors. We assume each seller can negotiate with at
most one buyer in one time period. The seller asks her visitors to each make an initial offer and
then chooses to negotiate with the one who makes the highest initial offer. We assume that the
buyers’ initial offers preserve the ordering of their preferences towards the seller’s house,


                                                 7
although the sellers cannot observe the preferences of buyers directly. If a deal is reached finally,
the sale price is determined through bargaining between the seller and the buyer. Otherwise, the
seller holds the house and continues to search for buyers during the next time period.
           Next, let us introduce some important identity equations. Let N tH be the total number of

owner-occupied houses in the city at the beginning of time t, and N tR be the total number of
renters at the beginning of time t. The sum of renters and owner-occupied houses is equal to the
total number of households in the city:
                                    M  N tR  N tH                                      (1)

           Let N tS be the number of houses for sale on the market and let Ntsales be the number of

sales made during time t. The number of houses left unsold at the end of this period Ut equals the
difference between the houses for sale on the market and the number of houses sold during this
period:

                                    Ut  NtS  Ntsales                                   (2)

           During each time period, every household who lives in her own house has µ probability
of deciding to change her current house. Note that µ can also be understood as the probability of
having her current house listed for sale. In order to change her house, she will need to sell her
current house and buy a new one. We assume that she will move out and rent a place to live
during the transition if she cannot buy a new house to move in immediately. This simplifying
assumption allows us not to consider the situation that a household still lives in her current house
that is for sale. Unlike Wheaton (1990), the probability of changing houses in this paper is
endogenously determined. Since holding vacant houses and putting houses for sale are both costly
and time-consuming, a lower expected selling probability would reduce  . For simplicity, we do
not explicitly model homeowners’ decisions on whether to change houses or not; instead, we
specify:

                        min 1,  0  1urate   2income   3q S   4 size             (3)

where qS is the expected selling probability. A positive  3 means that the expected selling

probability increases the probability of changing houses.6 The unemployment rate, denoted as
urate, also influences the probability of changing houses. On the one hand, a higher


6
  Notice that here the probability of changing houses does not depend on the expected sale prices.
Therefore, our setup does not incorporate the possible effect of loss aversion, as in Genesove and Mayer
(2001) and the effect of liquidity constraint as in Genesove and Mayer (1997). This allows us to focus on
the amplifying channel of the impact of unemployment rate through the thick market effect only.


                                                      8
unemployment rate raises job insecurity. A household would worry if she changes her current
house; she may not be able to get a mortgage to buy a new house once unemployed. This concern
lowers the household’s probability of changing houses. On the other hand, as Ngai and Tenreyro
(2013) argued, when the matching quality is poor, the probability of changing houses is higher.
When the unemployment rate is higher, the average matching quality is poorer; thus the
probability of changing houses is higher in such an aggregate environment7. This may attenuate
the negative impact of unemployment on the probability of changing houses due to job insecurity
and financial constraints as discussed earlier. In addition, some household characteristics such as
household income and household size may also affect  .
        The houses on the market for sale this period is equal to those unsold houses from last
period, Ut-1, plus those from homeowners who would like to change houses and move out of their

houses this period, N t . Namely,
                        H



                              NtS  Ut 1  NtH                                          (4)

         The total number of houses in the city is equal to the sum of the number of owner
occupied houses at the beginning of this period, N tH , and the number of unsold houses for sale
from last period, Ut-1. Namely,

                           T H  U t 1  NtH                                             (5)

         Now we introduce the unemployment rate into the model as demand shocks. Both renters
and home occupiers are assumed to have the same probability of being unemployed in each time
period. We assume that unemployed people are not in the market to buy houses because it is
difficult for them to obtain mortgages. Therefore, for a household who is potential buyer (either a
homeowner who changes house or a renter), her probability of actually entering into the market as
a buyer, denoted as γ, cannot exceed the employment rate (i.e., γ ≤ 1-urate). Alternatively, γ can
be considered as the probability of signing on a buying agent who would have to check if the
potential buyer is eligible for financing before signing on. In particular, we let:
                               exp 0  1urate  2income  3hsize 
           1  urate                                                     ,           (6)
                              1  exp 0  1urate  2income  3hsize 



7
  In our model, for tractability, we do not incorporate the individual-wise matching quality when a
household purchases a house into the household’s probability of changing houses in the future. Note the
relationship between the initial matching quality and the probability of changing houses will be attenuated
by the fact that, after purchasing a house, the household typically will do some repairs, alterations and
additions to make it more suitable for herself to live in.



                                                     9
The logit-type functional form in the second part of (6) has the advantages that it is bounded
between 0 and 1, and that the continuity in urate may facilitate the estimation process. The
unemployment rate may have an additional discouraging effect on the probability of entering the
market because under a higher unemployment rate, a household would worry more about her job
security and the possibility of default in the future if unemployed. A negative 1 would mean

that the probability of entering into the market to buy is lower when the unemployment rate gets
higher, even if the household is employed this time. γ also depends on other exogenous factors
that capture the household characteristics, such as household income and household size, that are
typical demand driver of the housing market.
         The total number of buyers in the market during time t, therefore, is γ times the sum of

those homeowners who change their houses, Nt , and those people who are currently renters,
                                             H



N tR :

                           NtB  NtH  NtR                                        (7)

         To summarize, in equations (1) through (5) and (7) (a total of six equations), we
introduce nine endogenous variables, including the number of renters N tR , the number of owner-

occupied houses N tH , the number of unsold houses at the end of last period Ut-1 and at the end of
                                                                                             sales
the current period Ut, the number of sellers in the market N tS , the number of sales Nt             , the

expected probability of selling a house qt , the probability of changing houses t , and finally the
                                          S



number of buyers N tB . The exogenous variables so far include the number of households, M, the
unemployment rate, urate the probability of entering into the market as a buyer, γ, and the total
number of houses TH.. The unknown parameters that need to be estimated include the coefficients
 0   4 in equation (3), and 0  3 in equation (6). Next, we will introduce more endogenous
variables and more equations when we study the search and matching between sellers and buyers.


(b) The Seller’s Problem
         During each time period, seller i posts an advertisement to sell her house in the local
housing market. The advertisement describes the characteristics (and therefore the location of the
house on the unit circle). Buyers in the market make independent offers simultaneously to the
seller. It is assumed that the buyer who evaluates the house the most will make the best offer to
the seller. We denote this buyer as buyer j. Seller i then negotiates with buyer j for the sale price.
The outcomes of the negotiations between seller i and buyer j will be described in part (d). The



                                                 10
seller’s action set consists of two choices: “1” if she sells the house and “0” if she decides to wait
until the next time period. She has incentive to wait if the match between her house and the buyer
is poor. Her value function is as follows:
     J itS ( ijtS ; aSit (), atB ())  max aS  0,1  ijtS aitS   E ( J itS1; aSit 1 (), atB1 ())(1  aitS )   (8)
                                                 it



where aSit () represents other sellers’ decisions in the market at time t, atB () are buyers’

decisions and aitS is seller i’s decision. If seller i decides to sell her house ( aitS  1 ), her payoff is

 ijtS , defined in detail in part (d) of this section. If the seller decides to wait until next period (

aitS  0 ), her (discounted) payoff is E ( J itS1; aSit 1 (), atB1 ()) . The time discount rate is denoted as

β.
           The optimal decision rule of the seller is rather simple: seller i will sell her house if and
only if her payoff from selling is higher than the payoff of waiting. Namely,:,
                                                      
                             aitS  1  ijtS  E J itS1; aSit 1 , aitB1                                         (9)
           Let  itS denote the minimum payoff for which the seller will be willing to sell her house
at time t, with
                                      itS   E ( J itS1; aSit 1 (), atB1 ()) .                                       (10)

           Following the search literature, we call  itS the seller’s reservation payoff. If the seller’s

payoff from a transaction is at least as large as  itS , the seller will choose to sell her house.
Otherwise, the seller will choose to wait until the next period.


(c) The Buyer’s Problem
           Buyers are heterogeneous in their preferences. Each time period, a buyer, denoted as
buyer j, searches for houses in the market. Let the shorter arc distance between buyer j and house
i be dij. We let the utility flow or willingness-to-pay (wtp) per time period for any buyer to live in
                                                H
a perfectly matched-house be u0 . Further, we let the utility flow per time period of buyer j from

living in house i be:
                                                    uijH  u0H exp(c1dij ) .                                               (11)

We assume c1 > 0 and α > 0. Although we use a unit circle to characterize the preference space of
households for simplicity, the preference space could be multi-dimensional in reality. Therefore,




                                                                          11
we use a curvature coefficient α here to capture the possible multi-dimensionality.8 When d ij  0

, house i is the perfect match for buyer j. Let us define the utility discount ratio due to mismatch
as discountij  1  uijH / u0H  1  exp(c1dij ) . This discount ratio measures the matching quality.

            Later in part (f) we will demonstrate how the average distance is determined by the
number of buyers and the number of sellers in the market. In one word, a thicker market with
more buyers and sellers in the market has a shorter distance on average, which leads to better
matching quality reflected by smaller discount of utility flow and higher willingness to pay for
the house. This is referred to in the paper as the thick market effect. In our empirical part, we will
estimate c1 and  and check if they are indeed positive and significant. Another feature about

equation (11) is that the utility is bounded from above, which means that the thick market effect
through improving matching quality diminishes as the market gets thicker.
           The parameter c1 defines the marginal disutility from mismatch in a logarithm sense. Or it
reflects how easily a household can adjust her preference. This is the key parameter in the model.
When c1 is larger, the utility discount would be greater at any positive dij. When c1 gets very

small, the discount tends to be negligible. This means if households care little about mismatch, or
if households can easily adjust their housing preferences, then the mutual distance between
buyers and sellers determined by market size would have negligible effect on the utility flow of
housing services—hence households' willingness to pay. In such a case, the thick market effect
would not have much influence on housing prices. Therefore, a positive and substantial c1 is

crucial for the thick market effect to play an important role in the market.
            Buyer j’s action set consists of two choices: “1” if she purchases the house during this
time period and “0” if she does not purchase the house but rents an apartment for this time period.
She has an incentive to wait if the current match is not good enough for her. Buyer j’ s value
function is as follows:
       J Bjt ( ijtB ; a B jt (), atS ())  maxa B 0,1  ijB a Bjt 
                                                     jt


             utR        
                      E ( J    jt 1 ; a  jt 1 (), a t 1 ())  (1 
                                  B         B              S
                                                                               ) E ( J BO        B              S
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                        jt 1 ; a  jt 1 (), a t 1 ()) (1  a jt )
                                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                                         , (12)
where aB jt () represents other buyers’ decisions in the market at time t, atS () represent all

sellers’ decisions at time t, and a Bjt is the decision made by buyer j at time t. If the buyer

                                             
purchases the house a Bjt  1 , her payoff is  ijtB . If the buyer decides to wait until next period


8
    See Arnott (1989) and Zhang (2007) for more discussions.


                                                                                 12
a   B
     jt    0 , her payoff from waiting would consist of two parts, the net utility flow from renting
this time period and the discounted expected payoff next time. Next, we shall define these two
parts of payoffs.
             The first part is the net utility flow from renting, denoted as utR . We let the net utility be

the difference between the gross utility flow from renting, u0R , and the paid rent Rt:

                                                        c NR     
                              utR  u0R  Rt  u0R exp   2 t
                                                               M 
                                                                    .                        (13)
                                                       
             In (13), we let the net utility depend on the number of renters in the market N tR relative

to the total number of households. N tR is endogenous, first introduced in equation (1). By
rearranging (13), we can obtain the equation for Rt:

                                                c N R 
                              Rt  u0R 1  exp   2 t
                                                        M  
                                                                                             (14)
                                               
             Note that equation 14 shows that the rent is determined by two things. One is the gross
                   R
utility flow u0 from renting, which can be estimated through a hedonic regression as discussed

in detail later. The other is the relative rental demand to supply at time t. The demand side is
                       R
measured by N t , the total number of renters, while the supply side is approximated by M , the

total population, assuming that the total number of available rental apartments is proportional to
the total population. The parameter c2 measures the crowding effect of the number of renters in
the rental market. We assume c2 > 0. Then equation (14) suggests that a higher rental demand
relative to supply would lead to a higher rent. The rent Rt is an important endogenous variable.
      R
Both u0 and c2 will be estimated in our empirical part. We will check if c2 is indeed positive.

             The second part of the payoff from waiting is the buyer’s discounted expected payoff
next time period. Its calculation is slightly more complicated. We have to consider that if not
buying this time, the current buyer would have a probability (1-γ) of leaving the market and a
probability γ of remaining in the market as a buyer next time period, where γ is determined by
equation (6). If she remains to be a buyer next period, her expected payoff is
E ( J Bjt 1; aB jt 1 (), atS1 ()) . If she leaves the market next period, we denote her expected payoff as

  
E J BO      
    jt 1 . Note that in the latter case, she will have to rent a place to live at t+1 and wait until t+2


when she has a probability γ again of entering the market as a buyer. Therefore, E J BO
                                                                                     jt 1                   
consists of the net utility from renting at t +1, and the discounted expected payoff at t +2, which is:


                                                      13
                                                             
                         jt 1  ut 1   E J jt  2  1   E J jt  2
                     E J BO       R             B                    BO
                                                                                                                  (15)

           Thus, the optimal decision rule of buyer j at t is:

                                   
   a Bjt  1  ijB  utR    E  J Bjt 1; aB jt  , atS    1    E  J BO
                                                                                      jt 1 
                                                                                              .
                                                                                                      (16)

           Similar to the discussion in the seller’s case in part (b), the reservation payoff  jtB is the

minimum payoff at which a buyer will be willing to purchase a house. From equation (16),

                      jtB  utR    E  J Bjt 1; aB j  , a S    1    E  J BO
                                                                                              jt 1   .
                                                                                                                    (17)

           Note in this subsection, we introduce three additional endogenous variables in three
equations. They are the utility flow per time period from living in a house uijtH in equation (11), the
                                             R
net utility flow from renting an apartment ut in equation (13), and the rent Rt in equation (14).

The newly introduced exogenous variables are the utility flow per time period from living in a
                         H                                     R
perfectly matched house u0 and the utility flow from renting, u0 .


(d) Payoffs of Buyers and Sellers
           When a trade takes place between buyer i and seller j at time t, the buyer’s payoff from
buying a house is:
                                                ijtB  Aijt  Pijt ,

where Aijt is the valuation of buyer i of house j, and Pijt is the sale price. The seller’s payoff from
selling a house is simply the sale price:
                                                ijtS  Pijt .                                                 (18)

           Thus the total valuesurplus generated by the sale, which is the sum of the buyer’s payoff
and the seller’s payoff, is equal to the valuation of buyer i of house j, Aijt:
                                    Aijt   ijtB   ijtS                                           (19)

           The       buyer’s            valuation            of         the        house   is       written     in      equation

                                                                         
Aijt  u0H exp c1dijt   (1   ) E  Aijt 1    E J itS1; aSit 1  , aitB1    E J tB1  (1   ) E J tBO
                                                                                                                      1          
    (20)
           The first item in (20) is the utility flow from living in the house this time. The second
item is the (discounted) expected valuation of the house next time if the owner continues to live
in the same house, which has a probability (1-μ). The third item is for the scenario when the
owner moves out of the house next time, which has a probability  . It consists of three parts




                                                                     14
because the owner can be a seller and a buyer at the same time after moving out. The first part is

                                                                                         
E ( J Sjt 1 ) , which is the expected value of being a seller at t+1. The second is  E J tB1 , which is

the probability of being a buyer at t+1 times the expected value of being a buyer. The

                      
third is (1   ) E J tBO
                       1 , which is the probability of not being a buyer at t+1 times the expected

value of potentially being a buyer at some later time.
        The total value from the trade has to be larger than the sum of the reservation payoffs of
both the buyer  jtB and the seller  itS . The surpluses will be shared through bargaining. Thus, the

buyer’s payoff from the transaction is equal to:
                            ijtB   itB   ( Aijt   itB   jtS ),                 (21)

The seller’s payoff, which is also the sale price Pijt according to equation (18), is equal to:
                           Pijt   ijtS   itS  (1   )( Aijt   itB   jtS ) ,             (22)

where θ is the bargaining power of the buyer (correspondingly, 1-θ is the bargaining power of the
seller) which is exogenously given.


(e) The Market Equilibrium
        We focus on the symmetric and stationary equilibrium where all the buyers adopt the
same decision rule over time and all the sellers adopt the same decision rule over time. Thus from
now on, for expositional simplicity, we will omit the time subscript of each variable as long as it
does not cause any confusion.
        From equation (10), the seller’s reservation payoff in the equilibrium is:
                                       S  E J S                                    (23)
Similarly, according to equation (17), the buyer’s reservation payoff in the equilibrium is:
                                               
                            B  u R   E J B  (1   ) E J BO .                  (24)
        According to equations (11) and (20), the shorter the distance between the buyer and the
seller, the better the match between them and thus the higher the total value generated if they

reach a deal. By adding the seller’s reservation payoff  and the buyer’s reservation payoff  ,
                                                         S                                    B


we can see that a sale will be made if and only if the total value is above  S   B , which is

equivalent to say that a deal will be reached if and only if the mutual distance between the buyer

and the seller is short enough. Let us denote d as the maximum distance corresponding to the

minimum total value, denoted as A . According to equation (20), we have:



                                                            15
                u0H                    E J S                                 
                                                        E J B  (1   ) E J BO                     
A    
         B          S

           1  1    
                                  
                          exp c1d 
                                     1  1    
                                                              
                                                             1  1    
             (25)
             From (15), E(JBO) can be written as a function of E(JB):
                                                        u R  E ( J B )
                                       E ( J BO )                        .                     (26)
                                                         1   (1   )
             Finally, note in the stationary equilibrium, the number of unsold houses at the end of each
time period is the same over time. Namely,,
                                       U t  U t 1 .                                           (27)

             In equations (23) through (27), we introduce six new endogenous variables in addition to

part (a) in six equations: the seller’s reservation payoff,  S , the buyer’s reservation payoff,  B ,

the maximum mutual distance, d , to reach a deal, and the values E(JS), E(JB), and E(JBO). None
of these endogenous variables are likely to be observable in the data.


(f) The Solution of the Model
             The market equilibrium condition indicates that a buyer and a seller will trade if and only
if they are located close enough to each other on the circle. This means that each seller will only
accept offers from buyers who fall within her adjacent interval on the circle, which is 2d in
length. Consider a house that is located at point s0; only the buyers located in the interval
s0                     
       d , s0  d are matches good enough to the seller of the house.
             Remember we assume that all the houses for sale are evenly spaced around the circle.
                            S
Among the N                     sellers, the distance between any two adjacent sellers are 1/2NS. In addition,
according to our matching mechanism, every buyer visits only the house that she prefers most
during each time period. Thus, a house located at s0 will be visited only by those buyers who are

located in the interval [s0-1/2NS, s0+1/2NS). If 2d  1 / N , every buyer located in the interval
                                                           S


[s0-1/2NS, s0+1/2NS) are acceptable to the seller at s0 and every buyer outside this interval will

visit other sellers. Thus this case is equivalent to d  1/ 2 N . Therefore we only need to focus
                                                               S



                                                                                            
on the equilibrium where 2d  1/ N . For those buyers located in the interval s0  d , s0  d , the
                                  S
                                                                                                           
seller picks one who is the closest to him to negotiate with.



                                                                       16
           While sellers are evenly spaced around a circle, buyers are assumed to be uniformly
distributed on the circle. For a seller at s0, it is possible that no buyers are located in the interval
[s0-1/2NS, s0+1/2NS) at all. In this case, no buyers visit the seller’s house and the house is not sold
during this time period. If multiple buyers fall in the interval, the seller has multiple visitors, and
she will choose the one closest to herself to negotiate with during this period, and the rest of the
buyers will have to wait until next period9. Finally, if the closest buyer turns out to be within the
                                                           
seller’s acceptable interval of s0  d , s0  d , a sale will occur this time. Otherwise, the seller

will wait until next time. Therefore, given the minimum distance d and the NB buyers, the
probability of which the seller sells her house during this time period is:

                                         q S  1  1  2d  .
                                                                 NB
                                                                                            (28)
           The expected number of sales each time period is:
                                         N sales  N S q S                                  (29)
           For any seller, the expected value of searching for a buyer to sell her house is:
                              EJ S   E S |  S   S q S  EJ S 1  q S          (30)
                                                                             S       S
                                                                                           
Equation (30) is obtained by taking expectation of (8), and considering E J t  E J t 1  E J
                                                                                               S



in the stationary equilibrium. Re-arranging equation (30), we get:

                                 
                              E JS 
                                            
                                          E  S |  S   S qS                          (31)
                                             1    q S
           When there are more than one buyers interested in the seller’s house, the seller selects the
closest one to herself to negotiate with. Let the shorter arc distance between any buyer j and the
house located at s0 be Dj , j=1,2,…,NB. The shorter arc distance between the closest buyer and the
                                    
house, denoted D, is: D  min D1 ,..., DN B           .
           Because D is the first ordered statistic of a random variable uniformly distributed on [0,
1/2], the density function of D is given by:

                      f  D   2 N B 1  2 D 
                                                   N B 1
                                                            .

           As N   , D converges in distribution to an extreme value distribution, so that,
               B



                     f  D  
                              d
                                 2 N B exp  2 N B D  .

           Since D converges to the extreme value distribution very fast (the rate of convergence is
N), we use the extreme value distribution to approximate the distribution of D. Furthermore, the

9
    This is a coordination failure as noted by Burnet, Shi and Wright (2001).


                                                                17
density function of D conditional on the closest buyer falling in the seller’s acceptable interval

[s0  d , s0  d ) is:

                                                     
                    f d |  S   S  2 N B exp  2 N B d / q S .                       
         Therefore, according to equation (20), the expected total surplus conditional on the house
being sold, is calculated:

                                                u  x  f  x  dx    E  J            E  J   (1   ) E  J  
                                                  d


                                          1   1     q  1   1     
                                                          H                                      S                           B                  BO

              
         E A|    S               S            0
                                                                                S
                                                                                                1   1    
                                                                                                    E  J S               
                                                                                                                               E  J B   (1   ) E  J BO    
                        d

                  
                    0
                            u0H exp c1 x 2 N B exp 2 N B d dx
                                                                                                                        
                                                 1   1     q            S
                                                                                                     1   1                      1   1    
                   (32)
Note the first term in the above equation is divided by the probability of the house being sold,
which is qS. Taking expectation of the seller’s surplus, πS, defined in (22), conditional on the
seller’s house being sold, we have:

                                                         
                    E  S |  S   S   S  1    E A |  S   S   S   B                                           (33)

          
where E A |  S   S                is given by equation (32). Note equation (33) also gives the equilibrium
transaction price.
        For a buyer, the equilibrium probability of successfully buying a house, denoted as qB,
equals the number of houses sold and number of buyers in the market:

                                                              N sales
                                                 qB                                                                             (34)
                                                               NB
         The buyer’s expected value of searching for a house is obtained by taking expectation of

                                         
(12) and considering E J tB  E J tB1  E J B                                  in the stationary equilibrium:
                                                            u R  E ( J B ) 
                    E J B   E  B |  B   B  q B                      (1  q B ) . (35)
                                                             1   (1   )    
The second part of (35) comes from (26). Re-arranging the previous equation, we get:

                    EJ       B
                                    
                                                        1    q B
                                                                        
                                      E  B |  B   B q B (1   (1   ))  u R (1  q B )
                                                                                                                                 (36)

         Taking the expectation of the buyer’s surplus πB defined in equation (21), conditional on
the buyer purchasing a house, we have:

                                        
         E  B |  B   B   B  E A |  S   S  S  B                                                                (37)


                                                                                    18
        In equations (28)-(29), (31)-(34) and (36)-(37) (total eight equations), we introduce four
                                                                                    
new endogenous variables: the conditional expected payoff of selling the house E  S |  S   S        
(which is also the equilibrium price), the expected payoff of purchasing a house, E    B
                                                                                             |B  B   
                                             
, the expected total surplus E A |  S   S , and the probability of buying a house (qB ). Note

the probability of selling a house (qS ) was first introduced in equation (3). Only the probability of
selling a house, qS , may be observable in the data.
        In summary, part (a) introduces nine endogenous variables in six equations. Part (c)
introduces three endogenous variables and three equations. Part (e) introduces six endogenous
variables in five equations. Part (f) has four endogenous variables in eight equations. Therefore,
by solving this equation system of twenty-two endogenous variables and twenty-two equations,
we can solve for the endogenous variables as functions of the exogenous variables and parameters
of the model in the short rum equilibrium.


(g) Long-run equilibrium
        Notice that so far our model assumes the total number of houses is fixed in the short run.
By introducing the construction cost and assuming free entry, we can easily extend our model to
the long-run framework. More specifically, assume that it takes just one period to build house. A
builder has to invest a fixed amount F to build a house, but he also incurs an additional cost if he
cannot immediately sell the house he has just built. Given the real interest per period r, and the
probability of selling this house qS, the long run equilibrium requires one more condition to be
satisfied; that is, the expected sale price of a house equal the expected cost of building this house:
                                     r 
                       E P   1  S   F ,                            (38)
                                  q 
where E(P) is the expected sale price with P defined by equation (22). The right hand side is the
expected cost of building the house with the explicit consideration on the probability of selling
this house. With this additional equation, we can pin down the total number of houses, TH , which
is endogenously determined in the long run.
        The key insight of the model remains unchanged. Intuitively, the thick market effect
would be stronger in the long run. This is because the total number of houses would adjust to
demand shocks in the long run. For example, when there is a positive demand shock, the seller
side of the market would become thicker because new houses are likely to be built in the long run.


3. Estimation and Simulations



                                                  19
3.1 Estimation Strategy
         Since the model outlined in Section 2 is unlikely to have closed form solutions, it is
difficult to characterize its properties. An alternative way to find the solutions and properties of
the model is to conduct numerical simulations after the parameter values of the model are
estimated.
         The estimation strategy is to find a set of parameters that minimizes the difference
between some of the observed endogenous variables and the corresponding outcomes generated
from the model. In principle, we can use any subset of the twenty-two endogenous variables and
the corresponding observed outcomes. However, in reality, most of the endogenous variables are
not observable. Here we match the endogenous variables on which we do have data. They are the
rents R, the price of a house P, the number of sales transactions and the time-to-sale, which is the
inverse of the probability of selling a house qS. Therefore, we have four equations:
                           E Rk   R, X k  ,                                          (39.1)

                           E Pk   P, X k  ,                                          (39.2)

                           E  N sales k   N sales  , X k                             (39.3)

                           E TSk   1/ q S  , X k  ,                              (39.4)

where Rk in (39.1) is the observed monthly rent of city k, while R(Θ, Xk) is an implicit function
that can be used to obtain the equilibrium rent R, based on the information on city k, denoted as
Xk, and a given set of parameters Θ. Obtaining R(Θ, Xk) requires solving all twenty-two equations
of the model, which we do numerically.
         Similarly, Pk in (39.2) is the observed housing price in city k, and P(Θ, Xk) is the implicit
function that describes the equilibrium expected sale price of a house from the model conditional
                                                          
on Θ and Xk. Note P(Θ, Xk) and E  S |  S   S in equation (33) are equivalent. N ksales is the

observed transaction volume each month in city k, and N sales  , X k  is the equilibrium number

of sales from the model that appears in equation (29). Finally, TSk in (39.4) is the observed time-
to-sale of city k. Because we do not have the individual time-to-sale data averaged at the city-
level, we use inventory as proxy which measures the number of months it would take to sell all
unsold housing stock on the market10. qS(Θ, Xk) is the equilibrium probability of selling a house

10
  Diaz and Jerez (2012) and Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) use the average time-to-sale data at the national
level. For each city in Texas, we use inventory as proxy to time-to-sale. This proxy captures the expected
selling probability of a typical house during a month in a city. The implicit assumption is that ex-ante each
house in a city has the same expected selling probability, which is consistent with our model. We
understand the limitation of this proxy if there are heterogeneous housing markets within the same city.


                                                       20
from the model based on Θ and Xk. Remember qS(Θ, Xk) appears in equations (28) and (29). Like
R  , X k  , solving for P(Θ, Xk), N sales  , X k  and qS(Θ, Xk) requires solving all twenty-two
endogenous variables using the twenty-two equations described in the previous section.
        One can use the expectations in (39.1) through (39.4) to construct the moment conditions
and apply the GMM. However, the standard way of constructing the moment conditions requires
a rather difficult first derivatives of the implicit functions of R(Θ, Xk), P(Θ, Xk), N sales  , X k 

and qS(Θ, Xk) with respect to the parameter set. Instead, a consistent albeit less efficient weighted
nonlinear estimator will be used here.
        We write equations (39.1) through (39.4) into the following form:
                          Rk  R, X k   1 ,                                              (40.1)

                          Pk  P, X k    2 ,                                             (40.2)

                          N sales k  N sales  , X k    3                              (40.3)

                          TSk  1/ q S  , X k    4 .                                 (40.4)

where we assume E(εi|Xk) = 0 for i = 1, 2, 3,4 and covariance matrix of the error term (ε1, ε2, ε3, ε4)
is Σ=Var (ε1, ε2, ε3, ε4). Here we allow Σ to be flexible to capture the possible heteroscedasticity
Var(εi) ≠ Var(εj) and the correlation Cov(εi, εj) ≠ 0. A weighted nonlinear least square estimator
is given by:
                                                                 '
                                    Rk  R  , X k                     Rk  R  , X k         
                                                                                                  
                            K  P  P  , X                       P     P  , X               
                         1
                                                                1
                                   k           k
                                                               
                                                                       k               k
                 min             sales                                                             , (41)
                        K k 1  N k  N sales  , X k          N k N
                                                                         sales      sales
                                                                                           , X k  
                                                                                                  
                                 TSk  1/ q S  , X k          TSk  1/ q S  , X k   
                                                                                            
where K is the total number of cities. Note the usual identification condition for the non-linear
least square applies here. This estimator is consistent and has an asymptotical normal distribution.
To implement this estimator, we first estimate equation (41) with Σ being the identity matrix and

use the residuals to construct an estimate of ̂ . The final estimate of (41) is conducted using the

estimated ̂ .
        The set of parameters Θ includes  i for i=0, 1, …, 4, in equation (3), i for i=0,1,2 and 3,
                  H                                   R
in equation (6), u0 , c1 and α in equation (11), and u0 and c2 in equation (14). It also includes

the time discount rate β and the bargaining power parameter θ in equations (33) and (37). We let
monthly time discount rate β = 0.997, which corresponds to a yearly time discount factor of


                                                      21
0.965. We also let θ=.50 for simplicity, assuming the buyers and sellers equally share the surplus.
These two parameters are not our focus, so we choose to set them to be constants. The rest of the
parameters will be estimated in the paper.
         Before we discuss the data to be used in the estimation, we consider a slight complication
of the model. So far the model ignores the quality aspects of the houses or apartments and
suggests that the difference in housing prices across different cities may only be due to the market
size and unemployment rates. We are able to collect some information on the housing and
neighborhood characteristics for different cities. Empirically we allow the utility from living in

perfectly matched houses u0H and the gross rental utility u0R to be dependent on these housing

and neighborhood characteristics. To determine what characteristics to use, we first conduct
auxiliary hedonic price regressions of average housing prices and average rental prices on
characteristics of house and apartments11. In order to reduce the number of parameters to be
estimated, only those regressors that are statistically significant in the auxiliary regressions are
                                                           H               R
kept in the structural estimation. In particular, we let u 0 in (11) and u 0 in (13) be:

         ln u0H  a0  a1HouseRooms  a2 HouseAge  a3WhitePct  a4 D2000  a5 D2010  a6income
           (42)

         ln u0R  b0  b1 AptRooms  b2Crime  b3WhitePct  b4 D2000  b5 D2010  b6income
           (43)
         In equations (42) and (43), WhitePct is the percentage of white population. HouseRooms
in (42) is the city average number of house rooms and HouseAge in (42) is the city average
number of years since construction of houses. AptRooms in (43) is the city average number of
rooms in rental apartments and Crime in (43) the city crime rate. D2000 is the dummy for the year
2000 and D2010 is the dummy for the year 2010. The coefficients for this two dummy variables in
both equations capture changes in the aggregate environment that affect the markets of all cities
in this two years, such as changes in mortgage markets and in demographics.
         Notice that we also include city average income in both equations (42) and (43) for two
reasons. First, the hedonic housing price and rental price regressions aim to estimate people's
willingness to pay. A standard bid-rent model that incorporates internal urban structure and
commuting cost would suggest that urban income influences people's willingness to pay for living
within the city because opportunity cost for commuting is higher for higher income people (see


11
  In the simple linear hedonic regressions, we regress log(housing prices) and log(rental prices) on
characteristics such as crime rates, average number of rooms in a house or in an apartment (rental
property), average age of houses, the percentage of population who is white, etc.


                                                    22
Duranton and Puga (2004)). Thus higher urban income would make people willing to pay higher
housing or rental price. The search-matching model developed in this paper basically seeks to
capture the variations that are not captured in the hedonic price regressions.
            In sum, the total parameters to be estimated are: the hedonic parameters include ai for i
= 0, 1, …,6 in equation (42) and bi, i = 0, 1, .., 6 in equation (43),  i for i=0, 1, …, 4 in equation

(3), i for i=0,1,2 and 3 in equation (6), c1 and α in equation (11), and c2 in equation (14). The

total number of parameters to be estimated is twenty-four. The estimation is carried out by the
nonlinear least square estimation procedure described in equation (41).


3.2 Data and the Estimation Results
3.2.1 The Data
            The data set is the city-level data that covers 28 cities in 1990, 38 cities in 2000, and 37
cities in 2010 in Texas for which we can find complete information. City-level total number of
houses sold, average prices and inventory are produced from various multiple-listing service
markets by Texas Real Estate Center12. Other information is obtained from censuses. All cities of
1990 show up again in 2000 and 2010 except for the city of Texarkana, which has information in
1990 but not in later years. Four cities that appeared in the year 2000 do not appear in 2010,
while three cities appear in 2010 but not in 2000. It is also noted that the definitions of a city may
vary across these three years due to changes from the multiple-listing service markets. Other
variables are constructed based on information from censuses. It is important to point out that this
paper does not utilize the panel aspect of the data. Instead, it treats a city in 1990, in 2000 and in
2010 as three different cities. The construction cost of a city is the average cost of new houses in
the city.
            Table 1 lists the summary statistics of the variables used in estimation. Several
observations are noted here. First, there are substantial differences across cities. The ratio of the
number of households between the biggest city and the smallest city is 35.0 in 1990, 120.3 in
2000 and 128.3 in 2010. The difference between the first ratio and the other two ratios is mostly
because the smallest city in the sample of 2000, San Marcos, is not included in the sample year
1990.13 The ratios of the unemployment rates between the highest city and the lowest city are
5.89 in 1990, 8.07 in 2000, and 3.11 in 2010. This paper exploits these variations. It suggests that
part of variations in housing prices are due to the variations in factors such as the total number of


12
     http://recenter.tamu.edu/
13
     The dataset includes San Marcos as part of Austin in 1990.


                                                      23
households and the unemployment rates. These factors may also affect transaction volumes,
rental prices, time-to-sale and other housing market outcomes simultaneously.
        Second, there is substantial difference across three years. The economy in general and the
housing market in particular were not doing well in 1990 in the state of Texas. However, in 2000,
both the economy and the housing market have significantly improved. In 2010, similar to the
national economy, Texas economy had barely come out from the worst recession since World
War II. The variable in this paper used to describe the overall economy is the unemployment rate.
The average unemployment rate dropped from 7.08% in 1990 to 5.04% in 2000, but rose to 8.06%
in 2010. The housing market improved between 1990 and 2000. For example, although the
samples in 1990 and 2000 are not directly comparable, the average housing price increased by
28.5%, from $70,648 (in 1990 dollar) for the 28 cities in 1990, to $89,316 (in 1990 dollar) for the
37 cities in 2000. The average housing price increased by just 6.7%, from $89,316 in 2000 to
$95,303 in 2010. The time-to-sale was 14.3 months in 1990, 6.48 months in 2000, and 9.15
months in 2010. The average rent also went up by 15.5% from $375 per month in 1990 to $433.3
per month in 2000. Similar to the average housing price, average rent only has a slight increase
between 2000 and 2010. Note a significant part of the differences in housing prices and in rental
prices among the three years would be captured by the coefficients for the dummy variable D2000
and D2010 in equations (42) and (43).
        It is important to point out that this paper assumes all houses and households in each city
to be a single market because of data constraint or each city has the same number of housing
markets. Both assumptions are obviously not accurate. Cities such as Houston, Dallas, San
Antonio and Austin will probably have more locality-based markets than a small city such as
Bryan-College Station. Houses of different types or at different price ranges may belong to
different markets. However, without detailed house-level information, defining markets within a
city is impossible. In fact, the maintained assumption in this paper is that a local market in a
larger city would have more houses than a local market in a smaller city. An alternative definition
of market sizes will be discussed later as a robustness check.


3.2.2 Estimation results
        We estimate both the short run model and the long run model. They produce qualitatively
the same results. Next, we first present the short run results.


a. Estimation results from the short run model




                                                  24
        Before we proceed to the results, there is one issue worth noting; that is, in the short run,
we assume the total number of houses in each city is exogenously given. However, the total
number of existing houses TH is not always observed in data. In this case, we use a simple
method to impute its value.      According to the census, 64% of households are homeowners in
Texas. Also, the average housing vacancy rate is 2%. For each city, we apply the homeowner
ratio of 64% and the housing vacancy rate of 2% to obtain its TH for our short-run model
estimation. Let M be the total number of household of a city; the imputed number of houses of
the city is thus calculated as M *64% / (100%  2%) .
         Table 2 reports the estimates of the parameters of the short run model. The first panel of
table 2 lists two constants: β, the monthly time discount rate and θ, the bargaining power of
buyers. As discussed before, the time discount rate is not a focus of this paper. Thus we let β
equal 0.997, which is a commonly used value in the literature and corresponds to a yearly time
discount rate of 0.965. The real interest rate is derived consistently with the time discount rate,
namely, r = 1/β – 1=0.003. The bargaining power of buyers is also set to be a constant at 0.5.
        The second panel in table 2 reports the weighted non-linear least square estimation results
of the short-run model. Part A lists the estimates of the parameters in a household’s probability
equation of entering the market to buy, as in equation (6). In addition to the direct financial
constraint effect as discussed earlier, the unemployment rate has an additional negative effect on
a household’s probability of entering the market to buy, which may reflect concerns about the
household’s future employment uncertainty. This additional effect is captured by 1 in equation

(6) and is estimated at -9.997 (0.3359) 14 , which is statistically significant. Furthermore, a
household’s income level has a positive and significant effect on the household’s probability of
entering the market to buy; specifically,  2 in equation (6) is estimated at 0.47 (0.1258). If we

take all the other variables of equation (6) at the 2010 sample mean income level, when the
unemployment rate increases from 5% to 7%, the probability of entering the market to buy would
drop from 0.439 to 0.384 15 . When the unemployment rate decreases from 9% to 7%, the
probability would rise from 0.332 to 0.384. So an increase in the unemployment rate would
reduce the number of buyers.
         Part B reports the estimates of the parameters in equation (3), which determines a
household’s probability of changing house per month.           The effect of the unemployment rate,

14
  Standard errors are in parentheses.
15
  Note in doing calculations here, we do not consider the possible income change caused by the change in
the unemployment rate. If we do, the calculated changes in the probability of entering the market to buy
will be even larger.


                                                   25
denoted 1 , is estimated at -0.0081 (0.0024), which is negative and significant. The effect of

household income, denoted  2 , is estimated at 0.013 (0.0005), which is positive and significant.

The parameter  3 that measures the effect of the expected selling probability per month is

estimated at 0.0026 (0.0016). This suggests that there would be fewer homeowners who would
like to change houses (and thus move out of their current houses) when the expected probability
of selling16 their current houses is lower. However, it is just marginally significant. Finally, the
household size has a positive and significant effect on the probability of changing house, and  4

is estimated at 0.0004 (0.0001).        If we take all the other variables at the 2010 sample mean
income level 17 , when the unemployment rate increases from 5% to 7%, the probability of
changing houses drops from 0.0114 to 0.0113. When the unemployment rate decreases from 9%
to 7%, the probability rises from 0.0111 to 0.011318. So an increase in the unemployment rate
would reduce the number of sellers as well as the number of buyers and lead to a thinner market.
         Part C reports the estimates of the parameters in the housing utility equations (11) and
(42). The key parameters in this paper are the coefficients in equation (11): the coefficient for
utility discount from mismatch c1 and the curvature coefficient α that reflects the multi-
dimensionality of housing characteristics.         While c1 defines the marginal disutility due to
mismatch in a logarithm sense,         d α measures the degree of mismatch. The estimate is 98.59
(9.5540) for c1 and 0.4212 (0.0092) for α; both are at more than 1% significance level. As
discussed earlier, since both c1 and α are positive, more buyers and sellers in the market would
result in higher matching qualities on average and higher transaction prices. The economic
significance of these parameters will be discussed more in the simulation section.
         For the hedonic parameters in the housing utility equation (42), the coefficient for the
number of rooms in a house is positive and significant as expected. The coefficient for the age of
a house is negative but insignificant. The coefficient for the percentage of whites in the city is
negative but insignificant.19 The dummy variables for year 2000 and year 2010 are both positive
and significant.    The household income coefficient is also positive and significant, which
indicates that higher income generates higher willingness to pay for houses as discussed earlier.

16
   The probability of selling per month is equal to the inverse of time-to-sale in months.
17
   Note the only exception is the selling probability, which is endogenously determined. For this, we use
the equilibrium selling probability 0.1724 corresponding to the unemployment rate of 0.07, calculated
based on our estimations and simulations discussed later in this paper.
18
   Note in doing calculations here, we do not consider the possible changes in either income or expected
selling probability caused by the change in the unemployment rate. If we do, the calculated changes in the
probability of changing houses will be even larger.
19
   The hedonic regression of log(housing price) on housing characteristics also shows a negative coefficient
for the percentage of whites.


                                                    26
        The crowding out of parameter c2 in the rental price equation (14) is estimated at a
positive value of 6.906 and is statistically significant. This suggests that more renters would
increase the rental price given the number of apartments. For the hedonic parameters in the rental
utility equation of (43), it may initially look surprising that the coefficient for the number of
rooms is negative. However, from table 1, apartments in 1990 have 4.047 rooms while apartments
in 2000 have 3.895 rooms. This shows older apartments have more rooms than newer apartments,
and hence the number of rooms in an apartment may negatively affect the prices. The coefficient
for the percentage of whites in a city is positive and significant while the coefficient for the crime
rate in a city is negative and significant as expected. The dummy variables for years 2000 and
2010 are both positive and significant. The household income coefficient is also positive and
significant.
      To check the goodness of fit, we calculate the R 2 for the three matched endogenous
variables. They are 0.34, 0.74, 0.77 and 0.09 for housing price, transaction volume, rental price
and time-to-sale, respectively.    For comparison, we also run OLS regressions of the three
outcome variables on all the exogenous variables in our short-run model. The R 2 is 0.839, 0.762,
0.886 and 0.537 for housing price, transaction volume, rental price and time-to-sale, respectively.


b. Estimation results from the long run model
        There is one extra equilibrium condition in the long run, as discussed in part (g) of
section 2, where the total number of houses is endogenously determined. We introduce one more
exogenous variable in the estimation; that is, the construction cost, of which the data is available.
        Table 3 reports the estimates of parameters of the long run model.             The long-run
estimates are qualitatively the same as the short run ones. In particular, the key parameter of the
marginal disutility from mismatch is c1 = 90.27 (7.54) and the curvature parameter that defines
the mismatch magnitude is α = 0.4499 (0.0092). Both are statistically significant. Note the
estimated utility discount is a bit smaller than that in the short run. This may reflect that in the
long-run households can adjust their preferences. Moreover, the estimated coefficient for
expected selling probability in the equation that determines the probability of changing houses is
3  0.0024 (0.0006) in the long run model and becomes significant. Again, the economic
significance of these parameters will be discussed in the following simulation subsection.
      To check the goodness of fit of the long-run model, we calculate the R 2 for the three
matched endogenous variables. They are 0.27, 0.29, 0.76, and 0.09 for housing price, transaction
volume, rental price and time-to-sale, respectively. For comparison, we also run OLS regressions



                                                 27
of the three outcome variables on all the exogenous variables in our long-run model. The R 2 is
0.841, 0.789, 0.891 and 0.540 for housing price, transaction volume, rental price and time-to-sale,
respectively.


3.3 Simulations
        In this subsection, we conduct simulations utilizing the above estimated parameters to
fully understand how changes in unemployment rates influence housing market outcomes in the
presence of the thick market effect. Unless specifically noted, our simulations are conducted at
the 2010 sample mean level for all exogenous variables except the household income.
       Because at the aggregate level, the unemployment rate would affect the income level, we
use the simple Okun’s law to capture their relationship; that is, growth rate of income=-
2.86*(urate-0.05).   Here we assume the growth rate of income is zero at the natural
unemployment rate of 0.05. Let the income level corresponding to the natural unemployment
rate be y0 . A one-percentage point increase in the unemployment rate above the natural rate

would lower the income level by 2.86%. In our simulations, we set the 2010 sample mean
income of $73,000 per household as the income level at the natural unemployment rate.
     At any given unemployment rate, we numerically solve for the equilibrium set of housing
market outcomes such as average sale price, sales volume, and time-to-sale from the model. At
different unemployment rates, we obtain different sets of outcomes. Next, we discuss the
simulations of the short-run model.


a. Simulations of the short run model
        First, we apply the parameter estimates from the short run model. Figure 2 shows
housing market outcomes (sale price, volumes, and time-to-sale) at various unemployment rates.
Consider the case where the unemployment rate drops from 7% to 5%, corresponding to the
average unemployment rate change in Texas between 1990 and 2000. From figure 1, the average
sale price increases by 5.14%, from $159,700 to $151,700; the sales volume increases by 6.51%,
from 1932 houses to 2062 houses; and the time-to-sale decreases by 7.64%, from 5.8 months to
5.37 months.
      We also did the case of opposite movement where the unemployment rate increases from 5%
to 8%, corresponding to the average unemployment rate change in Texas between 2000 and 2010.
The average sale price decreases by 7.74%; the sales volume decreases by 9.98%; and the time-
to-sale increases by 11.69%.



                                                28
      For comparison, we use the OLS estimates to predict the percentage changes in the housing
price, sales volume and time-to-sale. When the unemployment rate decreases from 7% to 5%20,
the housing price would go up by 2.7%, the sales volume would go up by 2.6% and the time-to-
sale would decrease by 3.2%. When the unemployment rate increases from 5% to 8%, the
housing price would go down by 4.1%, the sales volume would go down by 3.8% and the time-
to-sale would increase by 4.7%. In either case, the predicted percentage changes by OLS are
much smaller than those by the structural model. This suggests the OLS estimation may not fully
account for the amplifying effect of the thick market effect on the impact of the unemployment
change while the structural estimation does.
     Note that both the transaction volumes and prices are endogenous variables in this model.
They change in the same direction in response to a change in unemployment rates or other
exogenous shocks. To understand the correlation between transaction volumes and prices, we
calculate the price elasticity and the transaction volume elasticity with respect to the
unemployment rate for each city at the unemployment rate of 7.0% and then calculate the
weighted average of the two elasticity with weights being the number of households in each city,
divided by the total number of households of all cities. The weighted average price elasticity is -
0.1680 while the weighted average transaction volume elasticity is -0.2249. Therefore, the ratio
of the transaction volume elasticity to the price elasticity is 1.34. This is smaller than the 4
roughly estimated by Stein (1995).
        To compare our estimated ratio with the ones from Genesove and Mayer (1997, 2001),
we consider a scenario where the expected overall housing price index is lowered by 1 percentage
point due to some exogenous factors. In this case, the total reduction in the transaction volume for
both the loss aversion effect and liquidity constraint effect is 0.375 percentage points,21 which is
also smaller than the Stein estimate.



20
  We also let the income change with the unemployment rate according to Okun’law in the OLS prediction.
21
  We calculate the elasticity using Tables VI and VII from Genesove and Mayer (2001), who consider both
the down-payment hypothesis and the loss-aversion hypothesis. Table VI presents the effect of two
hypotheses on prices. Consider the loss-aversion hypothesis first. Assume that half of the houses incur
losses (i.e., Pr(LOSS > 0) = 0.5). A one percentage drop in expected prices would increase the expected
value of LOSS by 0.5 percentage points. Therefore, the loss-aversion effect would increase the price by
0.5%*0.10 = 0.05%, where the coefficient 0.10 is the average of the two estimates, as suggested in the
paper. Now consider the effect of the down-payment hypothesis. With a one percentage point drop in
expected prices, the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio would increase by 1 percentage point. This leads to an
increase of 0.07 percentage points in prices. Therefore, overall prices would decrease by 1-0.05-0.07 =
0.88% percentage points. Table VII lists the results on time-to-sell. Similarly, one percentage drop in
expected prices would result in a 0.50*0.50 = 0.25 percentage point increase in time-to-sell because of the
loss aversion hypothesis, and a 0.08 percentage point increase in time-to-sell due to the down-payment
hypothesis. If the total number of houses on the market remains the same (a very strong assumption), then


                                                   29
         One may concern our measurement of the potential market size (not the actual market
size, which is endogenously determined). Due to the data limitation, we assume that each
metropolitan area consists of one single market or that all metropolitan areas consist of exactly
the same number of local markets. Therefore, differences in city size are used to map the
differences in potential market size. To the extent that our measure of potential market size is
biased, it is more likely that using city-level household numbers would overstate the difference in
potential market sizes between big cities and small cities. For example, consider two metropolitan
areas, Bryan-College Station with total households of roughly 60,000 and total number of houses
at 38,400, and the Houston metropolitan area with 1.4 million households and a total number of
houses at 896,000. The current model assumes that the housing market size in Houston is 23.3
times the one in Bryan-College Station. While this is unlikely to be true, we think that the
difference in total households across cities overstates the difference in potential market size, since
a large city may consist of a disproportionally larger number of housing markets.
         For a robust check, we consider a somewhat arbitrary transformation of city size to
potential market size: the square root of city size. In particular, we consider the following

transformation: M in  a M i , where Mi is the city size for the i-th metropolitan area, and M in is

the new potential market size for the i-th city we use in this robustness check. The scale a is

determined     such that M  a M , where M is the mean city size across all cities. This
transformation ensures that the transformed city size is equal to the original city size at the mean
level. Note after the transformation, the market size in Houston is 4.83 times the one in Bryan-
College Station.
         With this newly constructed potential market size, we re-estimate our model22. All the
key results remain qualitatively the same. The key coefficient is c1=100.011. The weighted
average price elasticity is -0.1787 while the weighted average transaction volume elasticity is -
0.2499. Therefore, the ratio of the transaction volume elasticity to the price elasticity is 1.40, a bit
higher than the previous 1.34. It is likely that using city size as a proxy of the potential market
size probably underestimates the elasticity of transactions with respect to prices. More
importantly, the basic qualitative conclusions of our paper remain valid.
         Figure 3 illustrates how market thickness and the matching quality vary with the
unemployment rate. Market thickness is measured by the average mutual distance between a


the number of transactions would be reduced by 0.33 percentage points. Therefore, the elasticity of
transactions with respect to prices is 0.375.
22
   In this estimation, we only match three variables: housing price, rental price and time-to-sale while
dropping the sales volume because the total number of households has been arbitrarily changed.


                                                     30
seller and a buyer, which is determined by the number of buyers and sellers. The thicker the
market, the shorter is the mutual distance on average. Suppose there are NS sellers and NB buyers.
Sellers are evenly spaced around a unit circle and buyers are uniformly distributed around the
same circle. Each seller has an adjacent interval of length 1/NS. According to our matching
mechanism, a seller can only be matched with the closest buyer who is located within her
adjacent interval. Therefore, we define the average mutual distance between a seller and a buyer
as the average distance between a seller and the closest buyer who is located within her adjacent
interval. Specifically,
                                                            1 
                                   ave _ dist  E  D | D                      (44)
                                                           2N S 
where D is the distance between the seller and her closest buyer among the total NB buyers. Its

density function is f D   2 N B 1  2 D N       1
                                                 B
                                                          . Note that the thickness measure thus defined is
determined by both the number of buyers and the number of sellers.
    When the housing market gets thicker, what would happen to the matching quality reflected
by the discount in the utility flow of housing services? We calculate the average discount ratio of
utility flow due to mismatch as follows:

                                                                1 
                     ave _ discount  1  E  exp(c1D ) | D                           (45)
                                                               2N S 
    At the 2010 sample mean level of total number of households (i.e., 276,460) we obtain the
equilibrium number of buyers and sellers and then calculate the average mutual distance between
sellers and buyers as well as the average discount ratio under different unemployment rates.
Figure 3 shows that both the average mutual distance and the average discount ratio increase as
the unemployment rate rises, which suggests when the market is getting thinner with the
unemployment rate, the average matching quality is worsening at the same time. According to
panel 2 of Figure 3, when the unemployment rate increases from 5% to 8%, the average discount
ratio in the utility flow increases from 0.48 to 0.51.
       As discussed in our model in Section 2, when the marginal disutility from mismatch is
smaller, there would be less room for the market thickness to play through improving the
matching quality in the housing market. In order to understand how different values of c1 affect
market outcome, we arbitrarily use c1 = 5 as a comparison. Figure 4 illustrates the elasticity of
outcome variables (i.e., average sales prices, transaction volumes, and time-to-sale)with respect to
the unemployment rate at two different values of c1. The dotted curve in the first panel of Figure
3 is drawn at the estimated value of c1 = 98.5891, while the starred curve is drawn assuming c1 =



                                                           31
5. Other parameters used are the same as our structural estimates of the short-run model. Panel
2 of Figure 3 shows that at a small marginal disutility value of c1 = 5, the average utility discount
ratio is 0.0037 at 5% unemployment rate—very small compared to the discount ratio 0.48 when
c1 = 98.5891—and it changes little with the unemployment rate.               Specifically, when the
unemployment rate increases from 5% to 8%, the average discount ratio in utility flow increases
from 0.0037 to 0.0041.
       From Figure 4, when the thick market effect is negligible at c1 = 5, the elasticity of sale
price, sales volume and time-to-sale at the unemployment rate of 7% are -0.129, -0.1761 and
0.0001, respectively, which is much smaller compared to -0.1738, -0.2257, and 0.2636 when
c1=98.5891 as estimated. Therefore, our simulation demonstrates that the thick market effect
significantly strengthens the impact of the unemployment rate.
       Notice our setup does not consider the effects of liquidity constraint as in Genesove and
Mayer (1997) or loss aversion as in Genesove and Mayer (2001). If those two effects are
incorporated, the thick market effect would be even stronger through interactions with them. This
is because those two effects would likely lead to further shrink in the number of sellers in the
market when there is a negative demand shock.
       Finally, figure 5 shows the elasticity of average sales price with respect to the
unemployment rate for two different city sizes, measured by the total number of households M.
The dotted curve is drawn at M = 276,460, the sample mean level, while the starred curve is
drawn at M = 14,976, the sample minimum level. From the figure, a smaller city is more
responsive to changes in the unemployment rate. For example, at the unemployment rate of 7%,
the price elasticity with respect to the unemployment rate is about -0.2082 when M = 14,976,
which is higher than -0.1738 in abstract value when M = 276,460. The reason behind this is that
the thick market effect diminishes and its amplifying function gets weaker as the market gets
thicker, while a larger city is more likely to generate a thicker housing market in equilibrium.
Smith and Tesarek (1984) show that prices of more expensive houses rose by larger percentages
during the housing market boom while dropping by larger percentages during the bust. For
example, high-quality houses (with a market value above $150,000 in 1970) increased in value at
an annual rate of 9.0% during the period of 1970-1985, while losing 30% of the value during
1985-1987. In the meantime, low-quality houses (with a market value below $50,000 in 1970)
increased in value by 8.3% per year over 1970-1985 while losing 18% in value from 1985-1987.
Our model simulation result is consistent with this phenomenon since high-price range houses are
typically in a thinner market with a smaller number of buyers and sellers.




                                                 32
b. Simulations of the long run model
         Figure 6 through Figure 9, corresponding to Figure 2 through Figure 5, are simulation
results using estimates from the long run model. All qualitative results from the short run model
remain the same in the long run. Figure 6 shows how market outcomes (sale price, volumes, and
time-to-sale) vary with the unemployment rate. Consider the case where the unemployment rate
drops from 7% to 5%. From Figure 6, the average sale price increases by 5.25%, from $144,600
to $152,400; the transaction volume increases by 6.87%, from 1883 houses to 2017 houses; and
the time-to-sale decreases by 7.74%, from 5.67 months to 5.24 months. In the case of opposite
movement where the unemployment rate increases from 5% to 8%,the average sale price
decreases by 7.91%; the transaction volume decreases by 10.49%; and the time-to-sale increases
by 11.77%. Note that compared to the short run case, the percentage changes in price, sales
volume and time to sale are slightly larger in the long run.
          As with the short-run model, we also calculate the percentage changes in the housing price,
sales volume and time-to-sale predicted by the OLS estimation23. When the unemployment rate
decreases from 7% to 5%, the housing price would go up by 2.9%, the transaction volume would
go up by 2.3% and the time-to-sale would decrease by 2.9%. When the unemployment rate
increases from 5% to 8%, the housing price would go down by 4.3%, the transaction volume
would go down by 3.5% and the time-to-sale would increase by 4.3%. Again, the percentage
changes predicted by OLS estimation are much smaller than those by the structural estimation.
           The weighted average price and volume elasticity with respect to unemployment rate at
7.0%, calculated in the similar way as in the short run case, are -0.1744 and -0.2367,
respectively—very close to the ones in the short run. The ratio of the transaction volume elasticity
to the price elasticity is 1.36, slightly larger than that in the short run case.
           Comparing Figure 3 and Figure 7, it remains true in the long run that an increase in the
unemployment rate enlarges the average distance between a buyer and a seller and therefore
worsens the matching quality on average. Note the average discount ratio in the long run model is
smaller than in the short run. This is because the estimated marginal disutility from mismatch is
smaller in the long run.
            Like Figure 4, the two curves in Figure 8 correspond to two different values of
parameter c1. The dotted curve is drawn at the estimated value of c1 = 90.2645 based on the long-
run model, while the starred curve is drawn assuming c1 = 5 (note the thick market effect is
negligible when c1 = 5 as shown in the second panel of Figure 7). Other parameters used are the
same as our structural estimates of the long-run model. From figure 8, when c1=5, the elasticity

23
     The long-run OLS regression adds in one more explanatory variable: construction cost.


                                                      33
of sale price, sales volume and time-to-sale at the unemployment rate of 7% are -0.1408, -0.1810,
and 0.0001, respectively, which is much smaller compared to -0.1798, -0.2376, and 0.2726 when
c1=90.2645. Therefore, as with the short run model, the long run model demonstrates that the
thick market effect strengthens the impact of the unemployment rate significantly.
       Finally, the long run price elasticity with respect to the unemployment rate at different
city sizes is shown in figure 9. The two curves are drawn at the sample mean and the sample
minimum level of city size, respectively. From the figure, a smaller city is much more responsive
to changes in the unemployment rate. For example, at the unemployment rate of 7%, the price
elasticity is about -0.2061 when the city size is 14,976, higher than -0.1798 when the city size is
276,460. The pattern is the same as in the simulation of the short run model. Again, the idea
behind this is the diminishing thick market effect as the market gets thicker.


4. Conclusions
        In this paper, we develop a search-matching model to study how changes in the
unemployment rate affect housing market transactions in the presence of the thick market effect.
According to the model, the average matching quality between buyer and sellers is better in a
thicker market. A higher unemployment rate prevents more renters from entering the housing
market as buyers. It also reduces current homeowners’ probability of of changing houses due to
increased job insecurity. Therefore, the housing market becomes thinner with fewer buyers and
sellers, which leads to poorer matching quality on average. As a result, both the housing price
and sales volume would decline more than in the absence of the thick market effect.
        Our structural estimations and simulations based on Texas city-level data show that an
increase in the unemployment rate lowers the sales price, reduces the transaction volume, and
increases the time-to-sale in the housing market. The thick market effect significantly strengthens
the impact of unemployment on housing market outcomes. At our estimated value of the marginal
disutility from mismatch, the short run elasticity of housing price, sales volume and time-to-sale
at the 7% unemployment rate is -0.1738, -0.2257 and 0.2636, respectively. A three percentage
increase in unemployment rate (from 5% to 8%) would lower the sale price by 7.74% in the short
run and 7.91% in the long run, reduce the sale volumes by 9.98% in the short run and 10.49% in
the long run, and increase the time-to-sale by 11.69% in the short run and 11.77% in the long run.
In addition, a larger city with typically more buyers and sellers experiences a smaller percentage
change of price in response to a change in the unemployment rate. The short run price elasticity is
-0.1738 at the sample mean city size (total number of households = 276,460), smaller than -
0.2082 at the sample minimum city size (total number of households = 11,578).



                                                 34
        In addition, an increase in the unemployment rate reduces both the sales volume and the
housing price, generating a positive correlation between them. The ratio of the sales volume
elasticity to the price elasticity is 1.34 in the short run and 1.36 in the long run.
        Our model helps understand the interaction between housing markets and aggregate
demand shocks.      Simulations of this paper demonstrate that the thick market effect is an
important amplifying channel of the impact of unemployment on housing market outcomes.
Moreover, our model provides a micro-foundation of the thick market effect. It sheds light on
how the thick market effect facilitates the matching process through improving the average
matching quality between buyers and sellers.




References:
Arnott, Richard, “Housing Vacancies, Thin Markets, and Idiosyncratic Tastes.” Journal of Real
         Estate Finance and Economics, 2 (1989): 5-30.
Burdett, K., S. Shi, and R. Wright, “Pricing and Matching with Friction.” Journal of Political
         Economy, 109(5), (2001), 1060-85.
Coles, M. and E. Smith, “Marketplace and Matching.” International Economic Review, 39(1),
         (1998), 239-54.
Diamond, Peter, “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium.” Journal of Political
         Economy 90(5), (1982): 881-94.
Diaz, A. and B. Jerez B., “House prices, sales, and time on the market: A search-theoretic
          framework”.International Economic Review, forthcoming.
Engelhardt, G. V., “Nominal Loss Aversion, Housing Equity Constraints, and Household
         Mobility: Evidence from the United States,” Journal of Urban Economics, 53, 171-195.
Gan, Li and Qinghua Zhang, “The Thick Market Effect of Local Unemployment Rate
         Fluctuations.” Journal of Econometrics 133 (2006):127-152
Gan, Li and Qi Li, “The Efficiency of Thin and Thick Markets.” NBER Working Paper #10815,
         (2004).
Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, “Equity and Time to Sale in the Real Estate Market.”
         American Economic Review, 87(3) (June 1997): 255-269.
Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, “Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence from the
         Housing Market.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4) (November 2001): 1233-
         1260.
Head, A., and H. Lloyd-Ellis, “Housing Liquidity, Mobility, and the Labour Market.” Review of
        Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,”
         Econometrica, 47(2) (March 1979): 263-292.
Krainer, J., “A Theory Of Liquidity in Residential Real Estate Markets.” Journal of Urban
          Economics, 49 (1) (2001): 32—53.
Lagos, R, “An Alternative Approach to Search Frictions.” Journal of Political Economy (108) (5),
         (2000), 851-73.
Liu, Z., J. Miao, and T. Zha, “Land Prices and Unemployment.” NBER Working Paper #19382,
         (2013).




                                                   35
Mayer, Christopher, “Taxes, Income Distribution, and the Real Estate Cycle: Why All Houses Do
        Not Appreciate at the Same Rate”, New England Economic Review, May/June 1993, 39-
        50.
Mayer, Christopher, “A Model of Negotiated Sales Applied to Real Estate Auctions,” Journal of
        Urban Economics 38(1) (1995): 1-22.
Ngai, L. R. and S. Tenreyro, “Hot and Cold seasons in the Housing Market.” Working Paper,
        London School of Economics, (2013).
Novy-Marx, R. , “Hot and Cold Markets.” Real Estate Economics 37 (2009), 1-22.
Ortalo-Magne, Francois, and Sven Rady, “Housing Market Dynamics: One the Contribution of
        Income Shocks and Credit Constraints.” Review of Economic Studies, 73 (2006): 459-
        485.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider, “Momentum traders in the housing market: survey evidence and
         a search model”. American Economic Review P&P, V99 (2) (2009): 406-411.
Pissarides, C.,Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, second edition (2000). Cambridge, MA: The
        MIT Press.
Porterba, James, “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset-Market Approach.” The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4) (November, 1984): 729-752.
Rupert, P., and E. Wasmer, “Housing and the Labor Market: Time to Move and
        Aggregate Unemployment.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59 (2012), 24-36.
Smith, Barton and William Tesarek, “House Prices and Regional Real Estate Cycles: Market
        Adjustments in Houston.” AREUEA Journal, 19(3) (1991): 396-416.
Stein, Jeremy, “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with Down-
        Payment Effects.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(2) (May, 1995): 379-406.
Wheaton, William C., “Vacancy, Search, and Prices in a Housing Market Matching Model.” The
        Journal of Political Economy, 98(6) (1990): 1270-1292.
Williams, J. T., “Pricing Real Assets with Costly Search.” Review of Financial Studies,
         8 (1) (1995): 55—90.
Zhang, Qinghua, “A Micro-foundation of Local Business Cycles,” Regional Science and Urban
         Economics, 37(5) (September, 2007):568--601




                                             36
Table 1: Summary Statistics for Texas Cities
Variable descriptions          Year      Mean      Std dev   Min      Max         No of cities
Rents per month ($)            1990      375       38.1      282      453         27
   (in 1990 price)             2000      426.0     79.6      308.5    613.8       38
                               2010      441.3     60.1      341.6    617.4       37
House prices ($)               1990      70,648    16,426    43,800   111,400     27
   (in 1990 price)             2000      89,316    26,154    58,846   153,462     38
                               2010      95,303    23,696    67,267   153,354     37
Sales volume per quarter       1990      3577      6958      319      33617       27
                               2000      5854      11081     308      52459       38
                               2010      5756      11577     317      56804       37
Inventory (in months)          1990      14.3      5.16      6.5      27.1        27
                               2000      6.48      4.12      1.9      27.3        38
                                2010     9.15      3.96      5.6      26.4        37
Total number of households     1990      205,626   304,605   24,563   1,201,494   27
                               2000      235,397   336,421   14,585   1,527,081   38
                               2010      276,460   436,875   14,976   1,922,909   37
Unemployment rate              1990      7.08      2.82      2.8      16.5        27
                               2000      4.76      2.37      1.5      12.1        38
                               2010      8.06      1.92      5.3      16.5        37
Household income ($)           1990      37,166    5,210     24,602   46,641      27
  (in 1990 price)              2000      46,666    8,757     27,881   72,453      38
                               2010      45,888    6,652     32,043   64,186      37
Household size                 1990      3.38      0.34      2.84     4.65        27
                               2000      3.35      0.31      2.70     4.48        38
                               2010      3.26      0.27      2.69     4.17        37
Rooms in a house               1990      5.840     0.186     5.557    6.288       27
                               2000      5.926     0.336     5.3      7.3         38
                               2010      5.839     0.389     5.3      7.7         37
Age of a house                 1990      21.1      5.451     12       34          27
                               2000      27.2      6.675     10       38.7        38
                               2010      34.5      7.855     18       47          37
Rooms in an apartment          1990      4.0       0.198     3.695    4.401       27
                               2000      3.9       0.242     3.4      4.4         38
                               2010      4.0       0.410     3.4      5.8         37
Percentage of white            1990      59.0%     16.3%     21.9%    83.3%       27
                               2000      50.4%     17.3%     7.7%     81.4%       38
                               2010      47.8%     16.9%     13.7%    80.2%       37
Crime                          1990      1062.6    417.3     226.1    1977.8      27
                               2000      627.9     262.5     53.3     1193.7      38
                               2010      411.6     94.8      246.5    665.3       37

Construction cost ($)         1990      85,963     22,475    41,400   118,300     27
  (in 1990 price)             2000      93,070     22,319    41,479   134,475     38
                              2010      104,385    28,805    47,423   188,650     37




                                             37
Table 2: Parameter Estimates of the Short-run Structural Model

Parameters                                                       Value        Standard
                                                                              Errors
Constants
     Monthly Time discount rate β                            .997
     Bargaining power of buyers θ                            .5
Estimated Coefficients
A.     Coefficients in a household’s probability equation of
entering the market to buy a house:
        Effect of the unemployment rate  1                  -9.9970          0.3359.
                                                             0.0470           0.0126
        Effect of household income  2

B. Coefficients in a homeowner’s probability equation of
changing house:

       Intercept  0                                             0.0010       0.0004
       Effect of the unemployment rate 1                        -0.0081      0.0024
       Effect of household income  2
                                                                 0.0126       0.0005
       Effect of the expected selling probability  3            0.0026       0.0016
       Effect of household size  4                              0.0004       0.0001


C. Coefficients in the house utility flow equation:
     Curvature parameter α                                           0.4216   0.0092
     Percentage of utility discount from per unit mismatch c1    98.5891      9.5540
     Hedonic parameters: intercept a0                            1.7172       0.0498
                            rooms in a house a1                  0.5423       0.0075
                            Age of the house a2                  -0.0004      0.0004
                            white percentage a3                  -0.0026      0.0202
                            dummy for year 2000 a4               0.8351       0.0154
                            dummy for year 2010 a5               1.1022       0.0185
                            household income a6                  0.9679       0.0341

D. Coefficients in the rental equation:
        Crowding out parameter c2                                6.9065       3.3999
        Hedonic parameters: intercept b0                         5.9290       0.0245
                               rooms in an apartment b1          -0.0191      0.0052
                               Crime rate b2                     -0.0001      0.0000
                               white percentage b3               0.1492       0.0071
                               dummy for year 2000 b4            0.2648       0.0035
                               dummy for year 2010 b5            0.4494       0.0049
                               household income b6               0.3250       0.0139




                                                38
Table 3: Parameter Estimates of the Long-run Structural Model
Parameters                                                      Value        Standard
                                                                             Errors
Constants
     Monthly Time discount rate β                            .997
     Bargaining power of buyers θ                            .5
Estimated Coefficients
A.     Coefficients in a household’s probability equation of
entering the market to buy a house:
        Effect of the unemployment rate  1                  -9.9906         0.2992.
                                                             0.0508          0.0153
        Effect of household income  2

B. Coefficients in a homeowner’s probability equation of
changing house:

       Intercept  0                                            0.0021       0.0003
       Effect of the unemployment rate 1                       -0.0083      0.0012
       Effect of household income  2
                                                                0.0102       0.0003
       Effect of the expected selling probability  3           0.0024       0.0006
       Effect of household size  4                             0.0000       0.0001


C. Coefficients in the house utility flow equation:
     Curvature parameter α                                          0.4499   0.0092
     Percentage of utility discount from per unit mismatch c1   90.2645      7.5328
     Hedonic parameters: intercept a0                           1.3516       0.0515
                            rooms in a house a1                 0.5635       0.0073
                            Age of the house a2                 -0.0000      0.0004
                            white percentage a3                 -0.0000      0.0179
                            dummy for year 2000 a4              0.9077       0.0173
                            dummy for year 2010 a5              1.1754       0.0217
                            household income a6                 1.0597       0.0307

D. Coefficients in the rental equation:
        Crowding out parameter c2                               8.4319       1.3654
        Hedonic parameters: intercept b0                        5.8869       0.0252
                               rooms in an apartment b1         -0.0000      0.0052
                               Crime rate b2                    -0.0001      0.0000
                               white percentage b3              0.1226       0.0075
                               dummy for year 2000 b4           0.2545       0.0035
                               dummy for year 2010 b5           0.4198       0.0047
                               household income b6              0.3151       0.0106




                                                39
            Figure 1-a. Housing price (in 1990 dollars) vs. Unemployment rate across Texas cities
                                     (Three years 1990, 2000 and 2010 pooled together).
       12
11.5
       11
10.5




             0                5                 10                15           20
                                         unemployment rate

                                  log(price)          Fitted values




                    Figure 1-b. Sales volume vs. Unemployment rate across Texas cities
                                    (Three years: 1990, 2000 and 2010 pooled together).
       10
        8
        6
        4




             0                5                 10                15           20
                                         unemployment rate

                                  log(sales)          Fitted values




                                                       40
                             Figure 2. Short run market outcomes as unemployment rate varies


                             5
                          x 10
                    1.8

                    1.7
    Average price




                    1.6

                    1.5

                    1.4

                    1.3
                      0.02       0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06    0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12



              2400


              2200
Sales




              2000


              1800


              1600
                 0.02            0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06    0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12



                    7.5

                     7

                    6.5
    Time-o-sale




                     6

                    5.5

                     5

                    4.5
                      0.02       0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06    0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12
                                                        Unemployment rate




                                                             41
Figure 3. Short run market thickness and matching quality as unemployment rate varies
                                Dotted curve: c1=98.59
                                 Starred curve: c1=5
                                        -5
                                     x 10
                               1.5

                               1.4
 Ave. mutual distance




                               1.3

                               1.2

                               1.1

                                1

                               0.9
                                 0.02        0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06      0.07      0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12



                               0.6
 Ave. utility discount ratio




                               0.5

                               0.4

                               0.3

                               0.2

                               0.1

                                0
                                0.02         0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06     0.07       0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12
                                                                     Unemployment rate




                                                                                      42
Figure 4. Short run elasticity of market outcomes with respect to unemployment rate
                                Dotted curve: c1=98.59
                                  Starred curve: c1=5



                                   0
Average price elasticity




                                 -0.1


                                 -0.2


                                 -0.3


                                 -0.4
                                   0.0250.03   0.04   0.05   0.06       0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12



                                   0

                                 -0.1
Sales elasticity




                                 -0.2

                                 -0.3

                                 -0.4

                                 -0.5
                                   0.0250.03   0.04   0.05   0.06       0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12



                                 0.8
       Time-to-sale elasticity




                                 0.6


                                 0.4


                                 0.2


                                   0
                                  0.0250.03    0.04   0.05   0.06       0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12
                                                                    Unemployment rate




                                                                         43
                            Figure 5 Short run elasticities of sale prices with respect to unemployment rate
                            Dotted curve: M= 276,460 (2010 sample mean of total number of households)
                              Starred curve: M= 14,976 (2010 sample min of total number of households)


                           -0.05




                            -0.1




                           -0.15
Average price elasticity




                            -0.2




                           -0.25




                            -0.3




                           -0.35




                            -0.4
                              0.0250.03   0.04   0.05    0.06       0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1    0.11    0.12
                                                                Unemployment rate




                                                                     44
                                 Figure 6 Long run market outcomes as unemployment rate varies



                             5
                          x 10
                    1.7

                    1.6
    Average price




                    1.5

                    1.4                                             X: 0.07
                                                                    Y: 1.446e+005
                    1.3

                    1.2
                      0.02         0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06    0.07      0.08      0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12



              2400

              2200

              2000
Sales




              1800

              1600

              1400
                 0.02              0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06    0.07      0.08      0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12



                    7.5

                     7
    Time-to-sale




                    6.5

                     6

                    5.5

                     5

                    4.5
                      0.02         0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06    0.07     0.08       0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12
                                                          Unmployment rate




                                                               45
Figure 7: Long run market thickness and matching quality as unemployment rate varies
                                    Dotted curve: c1=90.26
                                     Starred curve: c1=5
                                            -5
                                         x 10
                                   1.5

                                   1.4
     Ave. mutual distance




                                   1.3

                                   1.2

                                   1.1

                                    1

                                   0.9
                                     0.02        0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06      0.07      0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12



                                   0.6
     Ave. utility discount ratio




                                   0.5

                                   0.4

                                   0.3

                                   0.2

                                   0.1

                                    0
                                    0.02         0.03   0.04   0.05   0.06     0.07       0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12
                                                                         Unemployment rate




                                                                                                 46
Figure 8 Long run elasticities of market outcomes with respect to unemployment rate
                               Dotted curve: c1=90.26
                                  Starred curve: c1=5



                                   0
Average price elasticity




                                 -0.1

                                 -0.2

                                 -0.3

                                 -0.4
                                   0.0250.03   0.04   0.05   0.06       0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12


                                   0
Sales elasticity




                                 -0.2

                                 -0.4

                                 -0.6

                                 -0.8
                                   0.0250.03   0.04   0.05   0.06       0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12


                                 0.8
       Time-to-sale elasticity




                                 0.6

                                 0.4

                                 0.2

                                   0
                                  0.0250.03    0.04   0.05   0.06       0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11   0.12
                                                                    Unemployment rate




                                                                         47
                            Figure 9 Long run elasticities of sale prices with respect to unemployment rate
                            Dotted curve: M= 276,460 (2010 sample mean of total number of households)
                             Starred curve: M= 14,976 (2010 sample min of total number of households)


                           -0.05




                            -0.1




                           -0.15
Average price elasticity




                            -0.2




                           -0.25




                            -0.3




                           -0.35




                            -0.4
                              0.0250.03   0.04   0.05    0.06       0.07     0.08   0.09   0.1   0.11    0.12
                                                                Unemployment rate




                                                                     48
