                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SMALL HIGH SCHOOLS AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT:
                  LOTTERY-BASED EVIDENCE FROM NEW YORK CITY

                                        Atila Abdulkadiroğlu
                                             Weiwei Hu
                                          Parag A. Pathak

                                        Working Paper 19576
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19576


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We thank Jennifer Bell-Ellwanger, Neil Dorosin, Stacey Gillett, Saskia Levy-Thompson, Jesse Margolis,
Michelle Paladino, and officials at the New York City Department of Education for providing access
to the data used in this study. We are grateful to Elizabeth Kelly and school officials at The Urban
Assembly and MAK Mitchell for helpful discussions. A special thanks to Dick Murnane for encouraging
us to pursue this work. Josh Angrist, Annice Correira, Sameer H. Doshi, Esther Duflo, and Peter Hull
provided helpful comments. Pathak is grateful for the hospitality of Graduate School of Business at
Stanford University where parts of this work were completed and the National Science Foundation
for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19576.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Atila Abdulkadiroğlu, Weiwei Hu, and Parag A. Pathak. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Small High Schools and Student Achievement: Lottery-Based Evidence from New York City
Atila Abdulkadiroğlu, Weiwei Hu, and Parag A. Pathak
NBER Working Paper No. 19576
October 2013
JEL No. H52,I21,I28,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

One of the most wide-ranging reforms in public education in the last decade has been the reorganization
of large comprehensive high schools into small schools with roughly 100 students per grade. We use
assignment lotteries embedded in New York City's high school match to estimate the effects of attendance
at a new small high school on student achievement. More than 150 unselective small high schools
created between 2002 and 2008 have enhanced autonomy, but operate within-district with traditional
public school teachers, principals, and collectively-bargained work rules. Lottery estimates show positive
score gains in Mathematics, English, Science, and History, more credit accumulation, and higher graduation
rates. Small school attendance causes a substantial increase in college enrollment, with a marked shift
to CUNY institutions. Students are also less likely to require remediation in reading and writing when
at college. Detailed school surveys indicate that students at small schools are more engaged and closely
monitored, despite fewer course offerings and activities. Teachers report greater feedback, increased
safety, and improved collaboration. The results show that school size is an important factor in education
production and highlight the potential for within-district reform strategies to substantially improve
student achievement.


Atila Abdulkadiroğlu                                Parag A. Pathak
Duke University                                     Department of Economics, E17-240
Department of Economics                             MIT
Durham, NC 27708                                    77 Massachusetts Avenue
atila.abdulkadiroglu@duke.edu                       Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                    and NBER
Weiwei Hu                                           ppathak@mit.edu
Department of Economics
Duke University, NC 27708, USA
weiwei.hu@duke.edu
I    Introduction
One of the most signiﬁcant trends in US public education in the last half-century has been the
emergence of large comprehensive high schools, which teach a range of students a wide variety
of curricula. In 1950, there were about 24,500 high schools educating 5.7 million students
across the United States. Even though the total high school population increased more than
2.3 times, by 2000 there were only about 1,900 more high schools, implying that average high
school size increased from about 230 to just over 500. In the past ﬁfty years, the percent of
high schools enrolling more than 1,000 students grew from 7 to 25 percent and from 1990 to
2000, the number with more than 1,500 students doubled (Lawrence, 2002; NCES, 2010). The
postwar consolidation and growth in high school size represents the culmination of aggressive
eﬀorts by advocates including Harvard University’s President James Conant who called for the
“elimination of the small high school” and for the extension of the high school curriculum beyond
traditional academic areas (Conant, 1959; Toch, 2003).
    Proponents of school consolidation see large comprehensive high schools as realizing scale
economies by educating more students with the same facilities, staﬀ, and resources. They also
point to a greater diversity of curricular and extra-curricular oﬀerings and the potential for in-
teraction across a range of socioeconomic groups. At the same time, in large schools, there may
be challenges in monitoring students. Resources spent maintaining order and discipline could
otherwise be used to educate students. Moreover, teachers may face diﬃculties providing per-
sonalized instruction and developing long-term relationships with students. More individualized
attention and frequent interaction may improve students’ sense of belonging and provide focus
in schools’ curricula and culture (Toch, 2003; Iatarola, Schwartz, Stiefel and Chellman, 2008).
    In the last decade, perhaps the most wide-ranging reform in public K-12 education involved
the restructuring of large, underperforming high schools into small schools. Since the 2001-
02 school year, about 1,600 new small schools have been created in the United States (Toch,
2010). More than half of the nation’s largest urban school districts have transformed some
large high schools into smaller ones and the Gates Foundation has pushed small school eﬀorts
in 275 districts nationwide (Brynes, 2003; Robelen, 2005). Some are entirely new schools, while
others involve the conversion of formerly large high schools into several small schools. The most
signiﬁcant changes have taken place in New York City (NYC), the nation’s largest school district
where more than 150 new unselective small high schools with 9th grade have opened since 2002.
    The purpose of this paper is to assess the causal eﬀects of attendance at new small high
schools in New York City on student achievement, graduation, and college. Aside from size,
the common features of NYC’s small schools are “academic rigor, personalized learning environ-
ments, and partnerships with non-proﬁt organizations, cultural institutions, and businesses that


                                                2
bring additional resources to enhance learning” (Klein, 2005). Schools formed as part of the New
Century High School Initiative commit to educational principals, but are free to make choices
about curricula and principals operate with more autonomy (Hemphill and Nauer, 2009). Many
have speciﬁc themes or career focus, including science and technology, arts and humanities, ca-
reer and professional training, or leadership and service. A unique feature of the New York City’s
small school initiative is that it has been implemented in partnership with the NYC’s Depart-
ment of Education (DOE), the United Federation of Teachers, and the Council of Supervisors
and Administrators (NVPS, 2006). In particular, teachers and principals at small schools have
their salaries and beneﬁts set based on district-wide collective bargaining agreements. Therefore,
our study not only provides evidence of the role of school size in education production, but also
whether eﬀective secondary school reform can take place within the existing traditional public
school system.
   The evaluation of small schools is made diﬃcult by the fact that the schools may select
motivated students with involved parents, by giving preference to those who attend information
sessions or open houses (see, e.g., Gootman (2006b)). As a result, just as in any study of
school models, selection bias is the major empirical challenge in studying the eﬀects of the
new small high schools. To obtain a seat at a small high school a student must apply via the
New York City high school match, a centralized process that assigns all entering high school
students to city schools (Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak and Roth, 2005; Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak and
Roth, 2009). Unlike other NYC public high schools (many of which screen applicants), if there
are more applicants than seats, then assignment to an unselective small school involves a random
component. If two students rank a particular school as their most preferred choice and are in
the same school priority group, then the student with the more favorable lottery number will
be oﬀered the seat before the student with a less favorable lottery number. Using this random
variation, we are able estimate causal eﬀects free of selection bias for 108 out of 151 new, small
unselective high school programs.
   Students who attend the schools in our study would otherwise attend traditional New York
City public high schools, though predominantly in the Bronx and Brooklyn neighborhoods where
small schools were created. NYC public schools serve a disproportionately black and Hispanic
student population. Like many urban school districts, NYC students have lower test scores
and high school graduation rates, and are less likely to go to college than students from nearby
districts. Relative to this group, NYC small schools serve an even higher fraction of black
and Hispanic students, with below-average baseline scores. Though our paper focuses on more
than 70% of oversubscribed schools, it’s worth noting that we cannot use our methodology to
study schools that are not oversubscribed. We therefore see our lottery estimates as providing
unusually clean evidence about possibilities for urban small schools reform, rather than an


                                                3
overall small school treatment eﬀect. The eﬀects of small schools in urban populations are of
special interest given the paucity of examples of successful interventions for this population, in
particular for outcomes related to college choice and enrollment.1
       Lottery-based estimates show large and consistent score gains for students who attend a
small high school on New York State Regents tests, statewide high-stakes exams required for
graduation. Students score higher on all ﬁve of the major Regents tests: Mathematics, English,
Living Environment, Global History, and United States History. Small school attendance causes
an increase in credit accumulation, attendance, and graduation rates. Though small school
students perform no better on the PSAT or SAT, they are considerably more likely to enroll in
college and are less likely to require remediation in reading and writing. A signiﬁcant fraction
of small school students are pushed to four-year public institutions and those within the City
University of New York (CUNY) system. The evidence, so far, indicates that they are more
likely to matriculate for at least two academic semesters.
       New York City’s Department of Education enlisted the support of several intermediary orga-
nizations in designing and supporting new small schools. Although they were established around
a common set of principals set by the Gates Foundation, the intermediaries diﬀered in their im-
plementation of those principals. Seven out of the 18 intermediaries – New Visions, Replications,
Urban Assembly, NYC Academies, Institute for Student Achievement, College Board, and Out-
ward Bound – established more than 90 percent of the schools during the time of our study.
We also report on an investigation of achievement diﬀerences across these intermediaries. With
a few exceptions, we ﬁnd broadly consistent eﬀects for the main outcomes though usually with
reduced statistical precision. This pattern suggests that idiosyncratic implementation details in-
troduced by intermediaries are trumped by larger changes associated with signiﬁcantly smaller
school size.
       After documenting small school eﬀects, we turn to an investigation of school practices using
detailed information from the NYC Learning Environment Survey, the nation’s largest annual
school survey. This survey has unusually widespread coverage; it is completed by roughly three-
quarters of students and teachers, and upwards of 45% of eligible parents during our time period.
Following other studies that use survey information to complement quasi-experimental school
evaluations (see, e.g., Angrist, Pathak and Walters (2013a), Dobbie and Fryer (2013a), Pop-
Eleches and Urquiola (2013)), we utilize survey responses to investigate mechanisms for the
small school eﬀects. Students in our small schools experiment are at schools associated with
   1
       Cullen, Levitt, Robertson and Sadoﬀ (2013) provide a recent review of high school reform. Although lauding
the eﬀects of high-performing “No Excuses” charter schools studied by Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, Dynarski, Kane
and Pathak (2011b) and Dobbie and Fryer (2011), they remain skeptical that such “Herculean” (quoted in original)
eﬀorts can be scaled.



                                                         4
higher levels of engagement, safety and respect, academic expectations, and communications
compared to those who do not obtain oﬀers. In particular, students report that they are more
closely monitored and have more frequent interactions with teachers. On the other hand, small
schools have substantially fewer activities and course oﬀerings. Teachers report greater feedback,
increased safety, and improved collaboration at the schools in our experiment.
       New York City’s experience with small schools stands out not only because it was a signature
part of Bloomberg-era reforms, but also because it involved the largest number of new small
high schools created in any district. Between 2002 and 2008, the number of high schools in
NYC increased from just over 250 to nearly 450 (shown in Figure 1). Gates Foundation-funded
policy reports and briefs by MDRC (Bloom, Thompson and Unterman (2010), Bloom and
Unterman (2012), and Bloom and Unterman (2013)) also study the eﬀects of small high schools
on progression towards graduation and high school graduation using the high school match,
though with a diﬀerent econometric approach and sample.2 Other studies of small school eﬀorts
that do not use lotteries in NYC and elsewhere generally ﬁnd positive results. Foley and Reisner
(2009) present an observational analysis of the New Century High Schools, while Schwartz,
Stiefel and Wiswall (2013) use an instrumental variables strategy based on proximity. Both
papers report positive graduation results for new small schools. Similarly, Barrow, Claessens
and Schanzenbach (2013) also use distance as an instrument to study Chicago’s new small
high schools and ﬁnd that students are more likely to graduate. Kuziemko (2006) uses shocks
to school enrollment to study Indiana’s small schools and ﬁnds positive math and attendance
eﬀects.3 This paper also contributes to a growing literature exploiting random variation in
student assignment processes to study school eﬀects (see, e.g., Angrist, Dynarski, Kane, Pathak
and Walters (2012), Angrist et al. (2013a), Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2006), Deming, Hastings,
Kane and Staiger (2011)), though lottery-based studies tracking student to college choice and
enrollment are still relatively rare.4
       The next section describes New York City’s small schools in more detail and schools in our
study. Section III describes our lottery-based estimation framework based on the centralized
   2
       Other reports that study NYC’s small high schools include Hemphill and Nauer (2009), which provides a
descriptive account of the expansion of small schools and choice in NYC, Foley, Arcaira, Coleman, Reisner, Scott,
Turner and Woods (2010), which describes intermediary organizations, and Shear, Means, Mitchell, House, Gorges,
Joshi, Smerdon and Shkolnik (2008), which reports on surveys of implementation issues with Gates Foundation
supported small schools.
   3
     While small schools have fewer students per grade, they do not necessarily have smaller class sizes. Studies
of class size reductions generally report positive achievement eﬀects (Angrist and Lavy, 1999; Krueger, 1999;
Dynarski, Hyman and Schanzenbach, 2011; Fredriksson, Öckert and Oosterbeek, 2013).
  4
    Deming et al. (2011) show that attending a higher value-added school in Charlotte increases college enrollment
for girls, while Angrist, Cohodes, Dynarski, Pathak and Walters (2013b) and Dobbie and Fryer (2013b) ﬁnd that
high-performing charter schools signiﬁcantly increase college enrollment.


                                                        5
high school match, while Section IV presents data and descriptive statistics. Section V presents
the lottery estimates for Regents, credits, attendance, and high school graduation. Section
VI presents results for college enrollment and choice. Section VII reports on results split by
student groups and by school intermediaries, while Section VIII contains further information on
diﬀerences in the small school learning environment. Section IX examines what can be learned
more generally about the role of school size in education production from our analysis. The
paper concludes in Section X.


II     Small Schools in New York City

II.1    Background

There has been experimentation with small high schools in New York City for a number of
decades. An important antecedent to the large-scale changes in the 2000s that we study here
took place in the 1980s, when Chancellor Anthony Alvarado reorganized East Harlem’s District
4 and empowered Deborah Meier, an education reformer often described as the founder of the
modern small schools movement, to establish 15 small schools in New York City (Toch, 2003).
In 1994, the Annenberg Foundation gave a $25 million grant to encourage small school creation,
but these schools were not seen as central to Chancellor Rudy Crew’s reform agenda (UFT,
2005; Gootman, 2006a). Small school reform rose to the top of the reform agenda with the 2001
election of Michael Bloomberg as Mayor of New York City, the imposition of mayoral control,
and the subsequent appointment of Joel Klein as Chancellor in 2002. The DOE, together with
the United Federation of Teachers and Council of Supervisors and Administrators, launched
the New Century High School Initiative with $31 million in ﬁnancial support from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation, Carnegie Corporation, and the Open Society Institute.
     At the beginning, there was a fertile landscape for school development with the DOE hosting
workshops on school design, budgeting, hiring, and building partnerships with local organiza-
tions. Intermediary organizations submitted applications to the DOE to start new schools
describing their vision, curriculum and instructional model, teacher evaluation practices, lead-
ership and governance structure, and proposed budget. The Gates Foundation identiﬁed rigor,
relevance, and relationships (“the three Rs”) as the key to high school reform. They envisioned
small schools as allowing teachers and staﬀ to create an environment where students could be
more easily monitored and feel safer; this would in turn increase motivation and attendance,
and ultimately high school graduation and college enrollment rates. Underserved low-income
and minority students, in particular, were expected to beneﬁt from the personalized academic
and social support at small schools (Gates, 2005). The New Visions for Public Schools, an edu-
cation reform organization in NYC, played a major role in directing new school creation. They

                                                6
identiﬁed ten principles of school design: a rigorous instructional program, personalized instruc-
tional relationships, a clear focus on teaching and learning, instructional leadership, school-based
teacher-driven professional development and collaboration, meaningful continuous assessment,
community partners, family/caregiver involvement, youth participation and development, and
the eﬀective use of technology (Foley et al., 2010).
   To supervise new school creation, the DOE established a designated development/advocacy
oﬃce with direct reporting to the chancellor (Bloomﬁeld, 2006; Foley and Reisner, 2009). The
strongest proposals were granted, and Gates distributed planning grants to new school organizers
of $400,000 over four years and $200,000 to assist with school implementation (Foley et al.,
2010). Approved schools typically started in 9th grade with 100 students and grades were
added as classes were promoted. To focus on struggling students, many small schools opened in
economically disadvantaged areas of New York City. Figure 2 shows that Bronx and Brooklyn
were home to the greatest number of new small high schools. A total of 61 new small high
schools with 9th grade entry opened in the Bronx, 44 in Brooklyn, 22 in Manhattan, 15 in
Queens, and 1 in Staten Island.
   By 2003, the Gates Foundation granted an additional $58 million to New Visions and other
intermediary organizations. Mayor Bloomberg and the DOE announced ambitious plans to
expand the New Century initiative and create numerous additional small schools. The new
centralized high school admissions process also allowed students to access the increased number
of school options (Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2005). The peak year of Gates-supported small high
school creation was 2004, when 49 new unselective small high schools opened, with 18 in the
Bronx and 17 in Brooklyn. Figure 3 shows that new small school creation tapered afterwards.
In 2007, there were 12 newly created small schools, while in 2008, there were only 4. At least
60,000 students enrolled in a new small high school in our study between school years 2004-05
through 2009-10.
   After jumpstarting small school creation in New York City, the Gates Foundation has since
turned its attention away from small schools. Foundation president Bill Gates concluded that
small schools did not have the eﬀect on college readiness and graduation rates that he expected
(Gates, 2009). However, since high small school creation peaked in 2004, it has only recently
become possible to systematically examine these outcomes in NYC. Even without the Gates
Foundation’s on-going support, New York’s dramatic and unprecedented small school reform
continues to leave a large imprint throughout city’s public schools. As of 2013, 13 new high
small school programs have been closed and the new small schools continue to be an integral
part of the district’s school portfolio strategy (DOE, 2012a).
   Aside from initial foundation support, another important ingredient for small school ex-
pansion was a collaborative partnership between the DOE, the United Federation of Teachers


                                                 7
(UFT), the union representing most NYC teachers, and the Council of School Supervisors, a
collective bargaining unit for school administrators. For instance, a 2005 UFT Taskforce report
expressed support for the creation of small schools, seeing them as a “chance for innovation
and experimentation” and way to provide “opportunities for teacher voice in a personalized,
collegial, collaborative and professional work space” (UFT, 2005).
   The UFT also played a role in hiring teachers by serving on personnel committees at all
new or redesigned schools (DOE, 2007b). Labor agreements required that if new school creation
impacted another school, then 50% of the teaching staﬀ at the impacted school should be
selected among the “appropriately licensed most senior applicants from the impacted school staﬀ
who meet the new school’s qualiﬁcations” (DOE, 2007b). To be hired, small school principals
asked teachers to present teaching portfolios, demonstrate lessons, and often have small school
teaching experience. Given each school’s unique requirements, the deﬁnition of qualiﬁed staﬀ
set by personnel committees could diﬀer by school, and the 50% requirement did not imply that
half of the phased-out school’s staﬀ was necessarily rehired at the new school. As soon as a
phase-out was completed, teachers were hired in the same way as at all other NYC public high
schools using the “Open Market System.” Throughout, teacher work schedules and salaries were
determined according to the collective bargaining agreement.
   The growth in New York City’s small schools took place during a period of system-wide
changes in governance at the DOE. All schools could elect for a “school-based option” in their
labor agreement, which involved deviations from UFT requirements on staﬃng, class sizes, and
rotations; these proposals must be approved by 55% of the staﬀ and predominantly were used
to increase learning time for students. Goertz, Loeb and Wyckoﬀ (2011) state that from 2004 to
2006, 35% of all schools adopted a school-based option. In 2005, the DOE launched the Empow-
erment Zone, where schools (small or not) signed contracts exchanging deviation from city-wide
curriculum requirements and rules governing the allotment of some district-level funding for
performance-based accountability (Nadelstern, 2005). As of September 2005, 30 schools joined
the zone, 14 of which were new small schools and by the following year, 331 schools throughout
the district became empowerment schools (Nadelstern, 2005; Klein, 2006). While maintaining
union contracts, principals had more authority over educational decisions and budgets, greater
voice in the selection and evaluation of administrative teams, and fewer reporting requirements
(DOE, 2007a). Around this time, progress reports with letter grades began playing an impor-
tant role in accountability decisions and lower performing schools could be subject to leadership
changes or closure. By 2007-08, principals were able to chose among three classes of school
support organization and empowerment zones were the most popular choice (Hemphill and
Nauer, 2010). Even with these district-wide changes in governance, the auxiliary organizations
mostly provided instructional support and oversight. All employment decisions remained with


                                               8
the DOE and the collective bargaining agreement, which was renegotiated for 2007, continued
to apply (DOE, 2009).


II.2   Small Schools Studied

We compile the list of new small high schools created between 2002-2008 from several sources.
First, we use NYC’s Supplementary High School Directory for New Schools. Second, we append
any schools listed in the 2005 DOE Guide to NYC’s Small Schools. Third, we add any schools
listed in New Visions from Public Schools reports. Fourth, we use the list of small school
intermediary organizations contained in Foley et al. (2010) and collect the names of small schools
from intermediary websites. Finally, we include any small schools listed in Bloom et al. (2010).
Our sample of small schools includes all new unselective small high schools created between
2002 and 2008 with 9th grade entry. The data appendix provides additional details on the
construction of the eligible small high school list.
   Table 1 shows that 151 high school programs meet our eligibility criteria. To be in our lottery
study, a school must be oversubscribed for at least one year between application years 2003-04
and 2007-08, and there must be a set of applicants who are subject to a lottery in New York
City’s high school match. Of the 151 eligible school programs, 108 are in our lottery sample.
Occasionally, there is more than one program at a high school. For example, at the Bronx
Theatre High School, a New Visions performing arts school, there is a separate theatre design
and technology program and a performance and production program, each of which is ranked
separately by applicants. The 151 eligible school programs correspond to 143 eligible schools, of
which 101 schools are in the lottery sample.
   Table 1 also reports the coverage of school programs by intermediary organizations, where
a school may be placed into more than one category if it supported by multiple groups. New
Visions aﬃliated schools represent 62% of eligible small schools, with Institute for Student
Achievement, Urban Assembly, and Replications forming the three next largest intermediaries.
We have near complete coverage for Urban Assembly and NYC Academies in our lottery study,
and we cover more than half of the schools for all other intermediaries except for the Institute
for Student Achievement. 13 newly created small high school programs eligible for our study
have been closed, and among those currently open, 72% are in the lottery study. Table A1
provides a complete list of school programs, schools, intermediaries, years in the lottery sample
for the eligible schools in study. Table A2 reports the breakdown of applicants by application
cohort and the grades we can observe. Variation in coverage reﬂects year-to-year ﬂuctuations in
student demand and school capacities.




                                                 9
III     Empirical Framework

III.1   Estimating Equations

We are interested in the causal eﬀect of attending a new small high school on student achieve-
ment. We ﬁt equations for educational outcomes, yigt , of student i in grade g, tested in year t,
of the following form:
                                            
                         yigt = αt + βg +       δj dij + γ  Xi + ρSigt + igt ,              (1)
                                            j

where Sigt is our measure of exposure to small schools. The terms αt and βg are year-of-
test and grade-of-test eﬀects, Xi is a vector of demographic controls such as gender and race
indicators and baseline test scores with coeﬃcient γ, and igt is an error term that reﬂects
random ﬂuctuation in test scores. We cluster standard errors by school-test year for Regents test
outcomes. For outcomes involving repeat observations per student like credits and attendance,
we additionally cluster by student. The dummies dij are indicators for lottery-speciﬁc “risk
sets,” which will be described in Section III.2. The coeﬃcient of interest is ρ.
   For Regents test outcomes, the variable Sigt is the years spent in a small school as of test
date, counting any repeat grades and any time in a small school listed in Table A1 (not just
those subject to lottery). This means if a student transferred to another small school after an
initial assignment, we count time spent at both schools. For each test, we compute the implied
years of small school attendance based on the test date and enrollment status. We assume the
enrollment date is September 1st of each year and count how many days students stay in a small
school from the application date to the test date. Since students can determine when they take
a Regents exam, scaling small school exposure by years allows us to interpret estimates as per-
year eﬀects. For outcomes such as graduation and college attendance, we measure small school
exposure by whether a student attends a small school following application in 9th grade. We
focus on attendance as the endogenous variable for these outcomes to avoid confronting issues
related to timing and reverse causality.
   Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of equation (1) would capture the average causal
eﬀect of years or enrollment at a small school in the sample if Sigt were randomly assigned.
However, students selectively choose schools, and their choices may be related to unobserved
variables such as family characteristics and motivation, which potentially bias OLS estimates.
Our econometric approach is based on an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that exploits the
partial random assignment of Sigt embedded in the NYC high school match.
   The ﬁrst stage equation for the IV estimation of ρ is given by
                                        
                       Sigt = λt + κg +     μj dij + Γ Xi + πZi + υigt ,
                                            j


                                                  10
where λt and κg are year-of-test and grade eﬀects. The excluded instrument is the random
oﬀer indicator Zi . The coeﬃcient π captures the eﬀect of the instrument on either time spent or
enrollment at an eligible small high school. IV estimates of ρ in equation (1) adjust for diﬀerences
between oﬀers and enrollments for those oﬀered and not, and capture the causal eﬀect for those
who comply with (that is, enroll in a small school) with an oﬀer (Imbens and Angrist, 1994).
For Regents outcomes, the IV estimates of ρ can be interpreted as the weighted-average causal
response of each year at a small school.
   In practice, the use of a lottery instrument is complicated by the fact that students obtain
school oﬀers through a centralized mechanism where their choices interact with their school
priority and the choices of other students. To implement our IV strategy, it is necessary to
determine how random oﬀers are generated by the high school match.


III.2   Extracting Assignment Lotteries from the High School Match

Admissions to New York City high schools are administered centrally by the NYC DOE. Ev-
ery eighth-grader submits up to 12 schools in order of preferences. At schools, students can
also be explicitly ranked in a strict order or ranked within coarser priority groups where a
lottery number breaks ties. The student-proposing deferred acceptance algorithm (DA) then
computes assignments taking student preferences, school priorities, and lottery numbers into
account (Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2005; Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2009). When two students apply to
a school program for which they are in the same priority group, the lottery number determines
which student is oﬀered. After DA has been run, if a student prefers another school to her
assignment, it must be the case that all of the seats at the other school are assigned to students
with higher priority or with the same priority, but better lottery numbers. Therefore, whether
a student is rationed by lottery at school s is determined by whether she ranks school s above
or below the school she is assigned, her priority at school s, where other applicants rank school
s compared to their assignments, and other applicants’ priorities at school s. To operational-
ize our econometric strategy, it is necessary to identify groups of students who, conditional on
information contained in their preferences and priorities, face the same risk of assignment.
   Figure 4 illustrates the steps we use to identify applicants subject to lottery at a given school
program. We ﬁrst identify students who rank a small high school program anywhere on their
preference form. For many of these students, the decision to rank a small school does not play
any role in the assignment under the student-proposing deferred acceptance algorithm. For
instance, a student who ranks a small school second, but has a guaranteed priority at her ﬁrst
choice will not be considered for her second choice because she’ll obtain an oﬀer at her ﬁrst
choice. To focus on students for whom the small school choice is relevant, we identify applicants
who did not receive an assignment more preferred to the highest ranked small school on their

                                                11
preference list. Applicants who are admitted at schools preferred to their highest ranked small
school (shaded in Figure 4) do not contribute to the lottery sample.
       The remaining marginal applicants can diﬀer in the priority group they receive at the school.
Many small schools give priority to students who live in particular geographic regions or who
express interest by visiting high school fairs or open houses. The random number orders the
marginal applicants students within these priority groups lexicographically. For instance, at the
Bronx Theatre High School, there are four priority groups:

   1) Priority to Bronx students or residents who attend an information session,

   2) Then to New York City residents who attend an information session,

   3) Then to Bronx students or residents,

   4) Then to New York City residents,

and the random number orders students within each priority group. Among the marginal ap-
plicants, we identify the lowest priority group for which some students are oﬀered and other
students are not. In the Figure 4 example, every marginal applicant in the ﬁrst priority group is
admitted and no applicant in third priority group is admitted. Lottery-based rationing therefore
takes place only among applicants in the second priority group. If there is no priority group
where marginal applicants are oﬀered and others are not, then the school is not oversubscribed.
An oversubscribed school contributes applicants to our lottery study in a given year if there are
marginal applicants and among the marginal applicants in the lowest priority group, some are
oﬀered and some are not.5 The random oﬀer indicator Zi is 1 for students who are oﬀered a
seat at that small school program choice, and 0 otherwise.
       The assignment of a student to a small school not ranked ﬁrst depends on the student
preferences and priorities at higher-ranked schools in a complex way.6 For this reason, we focus
only on students who rank a small school as their top choice, as in other studies using data
   5
       In principle, every marginal applicant with a priority higher than the lowest priority to obtain an oﬀer should
obtain an oﬀer. There are some school program-years where this property does not hold, and we do not include
these school program-years in the lottery sample. Based on conversations with the NYC DOE, some of these
schools may have slot-speciﬁc priorities, where priorities apply for a certain fraction of school seats. For more on
slot-speciﬁc priorities, see Kominers and Sönmez (2012) and Dur, Kominers, Pathak and Sönmez (2013).
   6
     Bloom et al. (2010) consider all preferences ranked by students, and for their sample, 24 percent of students
are in more than one lottery. They acknowledge that the possibility a student could face non-zero probability of
assignment at a higher choice school creates complications, and therefore pursue an alternative approach. They
state that “the probability of prior assignment can vary from just above 0 to just below 1, and this variation can
pose a threat to randomization” (italics in original, page 76), but later argue that this may not be an issue in their
setting. Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, Narita and Pathak (2013) analyze econometric issues associated with eﬃciently
extracting random assignment from centralized matching mechanisms.


                                                           12
from centralized assignment mechanisms (Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2011b; Deming et al., 2011).
Small school risk sets are deﬁned by the identity of the ﬁrst choice small school program and
the application year. The restriction to ﬁrst choices creates two possible drawbacks. First, if a
student ranks multiple small schools and is assigned to a lower ranked small school, we’d code the
instrument as zero, since the student did not obtain an oﬀer at her ﬁrst choice. This potentially
weakens the power of the instrument, but does not compromise our research design.7 Second,
the exclusion of students who do not rank a small school ﬁrst, but rank it second or lower results
in a potentially smaller lottery sample size, though the number of possible additional students
in our application is relatively small.8


IV         Data and Descriptive Statistics

IV.1        Sources

We obtained registration and demographic information for New York City from 2002-03 through
2009-10. Registration data are used to determine whether and for how many years a student is
enrolled at a small high school. Demographic information in the NYC ﬁle includes borough of
residence, race, sex, subsidized lunch, limited English proﬁciency, and special education status.
Baseline (i.e., pre-treatment) test scores are based on 8th grade standardized exams in Math
and English Language Arts. Baseline scores are normalized by grade and year to have mean
zero and unit variance in the population of New York City students.
       NYC demographic and registration information were merged with Regents test scores us-
ing student identiﬁcation numbers. Regents exams are mandatory state examinations where
performance determines whether a student is eligible for a high school diploma in New York.
There are Regents examinations in English, Global History, US History, and multiple exams in
Mathematics and Science.9 A Regents exam typically has a multiple choice section and a long
   7
       In contrast, in the context of DA without school priorities, Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist and Pathak (2011a)
identify a “sharp sample” where oﬀers are a deterministic function of preferences and school rankings.
   8
     Among students who did not rank a small school ﬁrst, but ranked an oversubscribed school second, if we
require that students have the same choices and priorities at their ﬁrst choice, we’d add at most 1,404 students
in 326 additional risk sets, for an average about 4.3 students per risk set. Among students who only rank an
oversubscribed small school third, the requirement that students have the same ﬁrst and second choice with the
same priorities results in 99 additional students in 40 additional risk sets. Virtually no students are added if we
continue further down rank order lists with these restrictions.
   9
     Starting in 2005, the Board of Regents started to modify the Mathematics exams. At the beginning of
our sample, the two Mathematics examinations were Elementary Algebra and Planar Geometry (Math A) and
Intermediate Algebra and Trigonometry (Math B). Two new mathematics examinations, Integrated Algebra I
(Math E) and Geometry (Math G), have since been phased in. Since students typically either take Math A or
Math E, we focus on the score on the test taken ﬁrst, taking the Math A score when both are contemporaneous.



                                                        13
answer or essay components and each exam usually lasts for three hours. The English exam,
however, consists of two three-hour pieces over two days. Regents scores are standardized to the
city score distribution by grade, test-date, year, and subject.
    Most Regents exams are oﬀered in January, June, and August, and June is the most common
test date. Our ﬁle only indicates the term of test taking, and not the exact month. Using the
DOE’s translation of terms to dates, we compute years assuming the exam date is January 31st
or June 1st. Some students retake Regents tests, and in those cases, we use the ﬁrst-time score.
Table B2 presents the number of students who take each exam more than once among the lottery
sample as well as the fraction of tests taken on the most common test date.
    Other outcomes including credits, grade progression, attendance, and high school graduation
are all provided by the DOE. Data on Preliminary SAT (PSAT), SAT Reasoning, and Advanced
Placement (AP) tests come from the College Board via the DOE. Data on college enrollment
come from the National Student Clearinghouse, as reported to the DOE for their students.
Diﬀerent outcomes generate diﬀerent follow-up horizons, depending on the point at which they
are collected for students. Table B3 provides a complete account.
    Our analysis ﬁle combines student registration, test scores, credit, attendance, and gradua-
tion outcomes, and college outcome ﬁles with the NYC small school applicant ﬁle. The small
school applicant ﬁle records grade, year, applicants’ preference ranking in the high school match,
and each student’s priority at each ranked school. Our analysis sample includes students who
applied for small school seats in one of the ﬁve school years between 2003-04 through 2007-08
for fall 9th grade enrollment. We focus on applicants enrolled in NYC at the time of applica-
tion because we’re interested in how an small high school education compares to a NYC public
fallback.


IV.2        Student Characteristics

Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for New York City 8th graders and for students enrolled at
small schools. Small school students are more likely to be black or Hispanic and somewhat more
likely to qualify for a subsidized school lunch than NYC’s 8th graders. The fraction of students
at small schools in the Bronx is higher than the fraction of NYC 8th graders from the Bronx.
There are relatively fewer students from Queens and Staten Island. Small school students have
signiﬁcantly lower baseline scores than New York City students. The diﬀerence is roughly one
quarter of a standard deviation (hereafter, σ).
    Since our research design is based on the high school match, we also tabulate student at-
There are Regents science exams in Earth Science, Living Environment, Chemistry, and Physics. The science
outcome we focus on is Living Environment because it is the most common Regents science exam taken by
students.


                                                   14
tributes based on their preferences. Table 2 reports on students who apply to small schools
by ranking them anywhere on their preference form, students who rank small schools and were
not oﬀered a higher choice, students who rank a small school as a ﬁrst choice, and students
subject to lottery at a small school. Across these columns, the make-up of applicants expressing
a preference for small schools is more similar to those enrolled at small schools than to the NYC
8th grade population. Comparing the lotteried applicants to students enrolled at small schools,
there is a higher fraction from the Bronx and relatively more black and Hispanic students (more
than 90% of the students we study). The baseline scores of lottery applicants are also lower,
averaging about 0.19σ below the city population for Math and 0.10σ below for English. The
baseline score diﬀerence between lotteried applicants and enrolled students emerges when we
compare those ranking small schools ﬁrst to applicants subject to lottery (in column (5) and
(6)), and may be due to the fact that higher priority is given to students who attend small school
open houses or information sessions.
   Because small high schools did not have resources needed to serve special education students
requiring self-contained classes and English-language learners adequately, they were allowed to
be added over a three-year time span when the new small schools opened (Bloomﬁeld, 2006;
Gewertz, 2006b; Gewertz, 2006a). Students who were special education and limited English
proﬁcient were manually placed into programs that could accommodate them and were therefore
not always subject to assignment based on lotteries. As a result, no students who are special
education and limited English proﬁcient are in the lottery sample.
   As a measure of our ability to construct randomly generated oﬀers, in columns (7) and (8),
we report on diﬀerences in demographic characteristics and baseline scores between students
who were oﬀered and not oﬀered a seat. If oﬀers are randomly generated, then they should be
independent of student demographics or baseline scores within risk sets. The numbers reported
are regression-adjusted diﬀerences by oﬀer status within risk set. The regressions only control
for application year-ﬁrst choice dummies. If we are able to successfully extract random assign-
ment, oﬀers should be randomly assigned conditional on these covariates. The diﬀerences across
demographic characteristics and baseline scores are small and none are statistically signiﬁcant.
This conclusion is supported by high p-values in a joint test of the hypothesis that all diﬀer-
ences in demographic characteristics and baseline scores are equal to zero. These ﬁndings give
us conﬁdence that we have successfully isolated the random variation embedded in the NYC
high school match.


IV.3    Small School Environment

Before presenting our main estimates, we ﬁrst present an investigation of objective measures
of the school environment experienced by students who are in our experiment. Section VIII

                                               15
contains additional information about school environments based on reports of students, parents,
and teachers from New York City’s Learning Environment Surveys.
   Table 3 reports estimates of school enrollment rates by borough, per-pupil expenditure from
city-level school budget data, school and teacher characteristics from New York State school
report cards, and peer characteristics for the relevant group of compliers. Loosely speaking,
compliers are the subpopulation of students who are induced to enroll in a small school given
the random oﬀer. More formally, let D1i denote small school enrollment status when the in-
strument Zi is switched on and D0i denote small school enrollment status when the instrument
Zi is switched oﬀ. Compliers are deﬁned as those where D1i = 1 and D0i = 0. Although the
compliant population cannot be enumerated, their characteristics are non-parametrically iden-
tiﬁed, and estimated using the IV strategy described in Abadie (2003). We focus on diﬀerences
as experienced by compliers to precisely describe the variation induced by our experiment.
   Oﬀered and non-oﬀered compliers are similar along many dimensions, and in many cases
their diﬀerences are swamped by diﬀerences with non-enrollees. Panel A shows that only 15%
of students not enrolled in a small school are at other Bronx high schools, while roughly 40%
of the students in our experiment enroll in a Bronx school. This fact is consistent with fallback
schools being located in neighborhoods similar to those where new small schools were created.
Panel B shows that the level and composition of average per-pupil expenditure for both oﬀered
and non-oﬀered compliers is similar. The absence of expenditure diﬀerences may be somewhat
surprising given that small schools had access to additional funds in start up years. Start up
grants on the order of $400,000 are relatively small compared to the total expenditure on direct
services of $6.2 million at schools attended by oﬀered compliers. It’s also worth noting that some
aspects of school resources are not captured by information in school budgets, such as auxiliary
support donated by outside organizations.
   Panel C illustrates important diﬀerences in school size and teacher characteristics between
oﬀered and non-oﬀered compliers. Non-oﬀered compliers attend schools with 863 9th grade
classmates and 2,249 students across all high school grades. These numbers are similar to those
not enrolled at small schools, suggesting that in terms of size, the counterfactual fallback for
those in our experiment is like a typical NYC high school. Oﬀered small school compliers are at
considerably smaller schools, with just over 161 9th grade classmates and 443 students across
all high school grades. That is, small school compliers attend schools that have ﬁve times fewer
classmates both in 9th grade and across all high school grades. This sharp diﬀerence in school
size motivates the analysis in Section IX, which uses our experiment to estimate the role of
school size in education production. Consistent with reduced school size, fewer core classes are
taught at small schools. However, the class sizes experienced by the two complier groups are
similar to one another and to those faced by non-enrollees.


                                               16
   Small school size is also associated with fewer teachers, assistant principals, and non-teaching
staﬀ. DOE oﬃcials encouraged the new small schools to create cross-functional interdisciplinary
teams responsible for cohorts of students, rather than the traditional high school with teachers
organized into subject area departments (Nadelstern, 2005). Goertz et al. (2011) report that
in 2003-04, 34% of NYC’s newly hired teachers were from the New York City Teaching Fellows
program, an alternative certiﬁcation program where teachers take graduate classes at night, and
about 5% were Teach for America (TFA) members. Hemphill and Nauer (2009) state that many
teachers at the new small high schools came from these two sources. Consistent with these
claims, oﬀered compliers’ teachers have less experience and are less likely to be highly educated,
as measured by having a master’s degree plus 30 hours or a doctorate. Small school teachers often
had to take on administrative roles given the reduced staﬃng at small schools, and additional
work requirements may have lead to higher turnover rates (Hemphill and Nauer, 2009). The
estimate in Table 3 implies that 28% of teachers were not teaching at schools attended by oﬀered
complies in the following year, while 19% of teachers were not teaching at schools attended by
non-oﬀered compliers in the following year.
   Panel D shows that the study body for those oﬀered and not in our small school experiment
is similar in terms of minority status, subsidized lunch eligibility, and gender. Both non-oﬀered
and oﬀered compliers attend schools with more minorities than students who are not at small
schools. The proportion of peers who are special education or limited English proﬁcient is
somewhat lower for oﬀered compliers, but the diﬀerences are relatively small given what might
have been expected with the discretion associated with enrolling these two groups in small
school start-up years. For instance, the proportion special education at schools attended by
oﬀered compliers is 0.08, for non-oﬀered compliers it is 0.11, and for non-enrollees it is 0.10.
   The fallback peer environment as measured by achievement for those in our experiment
is well below the typical NYC high school. Non-oﬀered compliers attend schools where the
average baseline peer math score is −0.28σ, while non-enrollees are at schools with average peer
baseline math score of 0.11σ, a diﬀerence of 0.39σ. The diﬀerential when we compare the peer
environment for those in our experiment is not as large. Oﬀered compliers attend school where
the average peer math baseline score is −0.07σ, which is a diﬀerence of 0.21σ compared to non-
oﬀered compliers. Given that small schools were established to replace underperforming high
schools in disadvantaged areas of New York City, it is perhaps not surprising that both oﬀered
and non-oﬀered compliers attend schools with weaker peers than those at other NYC schools.
The diﬀerence in peer baseline scores among the two groups of compliers may also be related to
school closure eﬀorts and the consequent shifts of remaining students to the extant high schools
in neighborhoods where small schools were established.



                                                17
V        Lottery Estimates

V.1        Regents

Applicants spend 0.46 years longer in a small school if they were randomly oﬀered a seat than
those who do not before taking Regents Math, an exam typically taken in 9th or 10th grade.
This fact can be seen in column (1) of Table 4, which shows the “ﬁrst stage.” The ﬁrst stage
indicates the relationship between lottery oﬀers and years at a small school before test-taking.
The size of the ﬁrst stage depends in part on whether oﬀered applicants accept their oﬀer or opt
for other schools. Moreover, some students who do not receive an oﬀer end up at small schools
either by re-applying in 9th grade or via the Appeals round of the HS match, which occasionally
allowed unassigned students to transfer to small schools after the main round. Regents Living
Environment is typically taken around the same time as Regents Math and therefore has a similar
ﬁrst stage size. English and US History are usually taken in 11th grade and have correspondingly
larger ﬁrst stage estimates. The size of the ﬁrst stage is similar to those reported for other urban
high school populations participating in school lotteries, such as Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011b)’s
study of Boston’s charter high schools.10
       The reduced form eﬀects of winning an oﬀer at a small high school, reported in column (2),
indicate that those randomly oﬀered score higher in all major subject areas: 0.06σ in Math,
0.08σ in English, 0.08σ in Living Environment, 0.07σ for Global History and 0.07σ for US
History. The two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimate of the eﬀect of an incremental year in a
small school, in column (3), is the ratio of the reduced form estimate to the ﬁrst stage estimate.
The 2SLS estimates show per-year gains on the order of 0.14σ for Math, 0.11σ for English, 0.18σ
for Living Environment, 0.11σ for Global History, and 0.09σ for US History. The addition of
controls for demographic characteristics and baseline scores does little to change the estimates,
as can be seen in columns (4) and (5), except for some small changes in precision.
       Though these estimates are based on randomized lotteries, a potential threat to our study
design is that we are more likely to observe follow-up scores for some students than others. In
our sample, over 70% of students take Regents Math, and the follow-up rates hover around 65%
for the other Regents exams, shown in Table A4. However, if the tendency to drop out diﬀers
by lottery status, it is possible that selective attrition biases our estimates. Table A4 reports on
follow-up diﬀerentials by oﬀer status estimated using regression models that parallel the reduced
form estimates in Table 4. Positive estimates indicate that lottery winners are more likely to
  10
       For example, in Table IV of Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011b), the ﬁrst stage estimate on the 10th grade math-
ematics examination is 0.54. In general, the size of ﬁrst stages must be judged relative to the fact that the
urban high school population is highly mobile. See Angrist et al. (2013b) for further discussion of these issues for
Boston’s charter high schools.



                                                         18
have valid outcome test scores post-assignment. The estimates in column (2) show that there
are no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in Regents Math follow up. There are some statistically
signiﬁcant, but small diﬀerences, on the order of 2.3-4.6 percentage points for the other Regents
test outcomes. The addition of controls for demographic characteristics and baseline scores does
little to change on these estimates.
       Motivated by concerns on diﬀerential attrition, we report on a simple approach to see whether
selective attrition is responsible for the positive Regents estimates in Table 4. Since we have
pre-treatment test scores for applicants, we simply treat the baseline score as the outcome score
for students for whom it is missing. The baseline tests are taken in 8th grade statewide, like
the Regents, and are used to decide in middle school grade promotion decisions. This approach
assumes that the test score for both missing treated and untreated students is unaﬀected by
school assignment. While likely unrealistic, it provides a convenient benchmark to investigate
the role of attrition. As expected, the estimates are somewhat smaller in column (6) than in
column (5), but are similar overall.
       Regents is a focal outcome for New York City’s high schoolers because it is taken widely and
is required for graduation. However, the Regents outcome is not necessarily ideal because of
allegations that it may have been compromised by selective re-grading at certain schools. Dee,
Jacob, McCrary and Rockoﬀ (2011), for instance, identify clumping of Regents test scores at
65, with very few students scoring just below 65. These issues led to recent system-wide data
audits across schools, including a report by the Auditor General (Fleischer, 2012). This report
examined academic data for 460 high schools and identiﬁed 60 with the most troubling patterns
on Regents scoring and credits. Table A1 shows that 19 of the high schools in our eligible school
list were on the audit list, and 12 of these schools are part of the lottery sample. To identify
whether selective regrading is driving our results, in Table A6, we report on Regents Math
and English estimates excluding these audited schools. The Regents Math estimate remains
statistically signiﬁcant at 0.11σ, while the English result is an insigniﬁcant 0.05σ.11


V.2        Credits, Grade Repetition, and Attendance

To graduate, students must meet credit requirements in addition to passing Regents thresholds.
Credits can be earned from either Regents course-taking or from courses without Regents assess-
ments such as Economics, Participation in Government, Visual Art, Music, Dance and Theatre,
and Health and Physical Education. Students entering 9th grade in our sample period must
earn at least 44 credits to graduate (NYSED, 2010; DOE, 2012c).
       Small school attendance causes students to earn more credits and progress more rapidly
  11
       Although not reported in the table, the Living Environment estimate is 0.165σ (with se=0.057), the Global
History estimate is 0.076σ (with se=0.049), and the US History estimate is 0.059σ (with se=0.030).


                                                        19
through high school. The estimates in Panel A of Table 5 show that small school students earn
an additional 1.37 credits per year. Students are considered “on track” for graduation if they
earn at least 10 credits per year or “on track for four-year graduation” if they earn at least 11
credits per year. 56% of non-oﬀered students earn 10 or more credits per year, while 50% earn
11 or more credits per year. On-time progression, measured either way, increases due to small
school attendance. Students are 10 percentage points more likely to either earn 10 or more or
11 or more credits per year. Another way to measure on-time progression is by grade repetition.
Panel B reports on the eﬀects of small schools on starting grade 10, 11, and 12 on time. For
each measure, small schools substantially increase the proportion of students who start their
sophomore, junior, or senior years on time.
       In recent years, data on credits have come under some scrutiny amidst charges that not
all credits are equal. Students typically earn credits by taking (or retaking) courses or via
summer school. Gootman and Coutts (2008) report anecdotes from several New York City school
administrators suggesting students are increasingly obtaining or “recovering” credits outside of
these two main routes, and Epstein (2013) alleges the practice was particularly widespread at
some small schools. Students are allowed to recover credits by doing extra work or supplementary
projects at the discretion of school administration. It is possible that credits accumulated this
way are poor substitutes for credits obtained via more traditional routes, making the eﬀects
on credit accumulation hard to interpret. On the other hand, some DOE oﬃcials argued that
credit recovery is an important way for students to learn outside of traditional routes.12 Credit
recovery may be valuable in particular for students who have become homeless, pregnant, or
experienced other schooling interruptions.
       Aside from some anecdotes, there is no systematic evidence that credit recovery is more
widespread at small high schools than at traditional high schools. In the Auditor General’s
report, 19 out of the 60 suspicious high schools are small schools (Fleischer, 2012). If credit
recovery eﬀorts were more commonplace outside of small schools, we’d expect our estimates of
credit eﬀects to understate the true eﬀect of small schools. We investigate whether our results
on credit are driven by the scrutinized schools that may have engaged more aggressively in credit
recovery eﬀorts. In Table A6, we report estimates on credits excluding any applicants to the 12
audited small schools that contribute lottery cohorts. The results conﬁrm the ﬁndings in Table
5, and suggest that our results on credit accumulation are not driven by systematically more
credit recovery at small schools.
  12
       For instance, Chancellor Klein defended credit recovery as a “legitimate and important strategy for working
with high school students” (Gootman and Coutts, 2008). Nadelstern (2005) viewed giving schools the “greatest
possible ﬂexibility to grant credit for project-based work and non-seat time school experiences” as an important
component of school autonomy.



                                                        20
   Small school proponents argued that increased interaction and engagement at school would
reduce truancy. Panel C of Table 5 reports on the eﬀect of small schools on absenteeism. The
number of days a student is absent is relatively high for this population. Students who are not
oﬀered miss a total of 27 days on average. Consistent with the engagement hypothesis, small
schools decrease days absent by a statistically signiﬁcant 4 days.
   Finally, we report on PSAT and SAT outcomes from the College Board in Appendix Table
A4. Though these outcomes are often important college yardsticks nationwide, students in
our population can meet admissions requirements for many of New York City’s local colleges,
including those in the CUNY system, without taking the SAT. Nearly two-thirds of New York
high schoolers in our sample take the PSAT, and small school attendance increases this rate by
signiﬁcant 13 points. However, there is relatively little evidence that PSAT scores increase among
test-takers, though this result may reﬂect a change in the composition of test-takers. About a
third of NYC’s high schoolers take the SAT, but small schools neither increase taking rates,
nor do they increase SAT scores among test-takers. Roughly 9% of students take an Advanced
Placement exam, which are supposed to allow students exposure to college-level material courses
and even earn college credit. Here, too, small school attendance has little eﬀect on AP test-
taking. However, it’s worth noting that the taking rate on SATs and APs is relatively small for
students in our sample. By comparison, in the Angrist et al. (2013b) sample of Boston charter
high schools, nearly two-thirds of students take the SAT and more than a quarter of students
take an AP exam.


V.3    Graduation

Creators of small schools emphasized a college-preparatory curriculum for all students, which
most interpreted as meeting high school diploma requirements (Foley et al., 2010). Given that
small schools increase Regents scores and credit accumulation, we’d expect that small schools
increase high school graduation rates. However, this is not immediate because during our sample
period credit requirements for graduation stayed the same, but Regents requirements did not.
For students entering 9th grade in 2004, the minimum graduation requirement was to score 55
or higher on at least ﬁve Regents exams. Each year, the Regents requirements became more
stringent. For entering 9th graders in 2007, students needed to score 65 or higher on four Regents
exams and also score 55 or higher on another Regents test (DOE, 2012b).
   In Table 6, we consider the eﬀects of small school attendance on high school graduation.
Just over half of the students in our study receive a high school diploma. During our sample
period, students in New York City were eligible for three diﬀerent levels of diplomas. Local




                                               21
diplomas are oﬀered for students who do not pass Regents diploma requirements.13 Regents
diplomas require passing at least ﬁve Regents exams, while Advanced Regents require passing
at least eight Regents exams (DOE, 2012c). The Regents diploma is the most common diploma
type for students in our sample.
       Table 6 shows that small schools increase the high school graduation rate by over 9 percentage
points, an eﬀect almost entirely driven by an increase in the fraction of students awarded Regents
diplomas for which the eﬀect is 10 percentage points. Relative to the mean proportion for non-
oﬀered, the 10 point increase in Regents diplomas represents nearly a 30% increase. Small
schools do not have any eﬀect on the awarding of either local or Advanced Regents diplomas.
When we exclude audited high schools in Table A6, the eﬀects on graduation are, if anything,
higher. The overall graduation rate increases by 10 percentage points and the fraction who
obtain Regents diplomas increases by 12 percentage points.
       Though the Table 6 estimates show that small schools caused graduation rates to increase,
the overall graduation rate in New York City also increased during our study’s time period.
As a result, there is a concern that increased graduation does not mean students are in fact
college-ready. In particular, the city’s local colleges have seen increases in the size of their
remedial classes and some view this as a consequence of a relaxation of graduation requirements
(Foderaro, 2011). A criticism like this would impact all high schools, and not necessarily only
the new small high schools. However, we can employ our lottery design to study whether small
school students are meeting the requirements to avoid remediation once they arrive at college
       Our deﬁnition of remediation is based on requirements at CUNY institutions, which enroll
the largest fraction of students in our study. CUNY students can avoid remedial coursework
either by taking the CUNY Assessment Test (CAT) or by scoring above certain thresholds on the
SAT, ACT, or Regents exams. These requirements diﬀer across CUNY campuses. For instance,
at CUNY Baruch, a student who scores 510 or higher on SAT Math, 21 or higher on the ACT, or
75 or higher on Regents Math to skip mathematics remediation, while at CUNY Queensborough
a student needs a 480 on the SAT, 20 on the ACT, or 75 or higher on Regents Math. There are
similar thresholds for reading and writing. During our sample period, the CUNY remediation
thresholds have changed over time.14
       Even though we do not have access to either CAT or ACT scores, we code a student as not
remedial if they score above a 75 on the Regents or above a 510 on the SAT portion. We use
Regents English for both reading and writing. If students do not take either exam, then under
  13
       Local diplomas have since been phased out by the New York State Department of Education.
  14
       Starting in Fall 2012, students are required to score at least 80 on any of the new Regents examinations
and for Mathematics, they must complete Algebra 2 & Trigonometry or a higher-level course. These thresholds
do not apply to our sample period. For additional details, see http://www.cuny.edu/academics/testing/cuny-
assessment-tests/faqs.html, last accessed: September 2013.


                                                       22
this deﬁnition, they are coded as remedial. Table 6 shows that in our sample, only about 20%
of students are not remedial for Math while about 30% of students are not remedial for English.
These numbers are low partly because they include students for whom we do not have either
Regents or SAT outcomes. Even absent this consideration, the low numbers are perhaps not
surprising given that small school students enter high school with substantially lower baseline
scores than other NYC 8th graders. Small schools do reduce remediation for writing and reading,
but not for math. The eﬀect size is a statistically signiﬁcant 9 percentage points, which is
relatively large compared to the 31 percentage point mean for non-oﬀered students.


VI         College Enrollment and Choice
Small school advocates conjectured that personalized attention and frequent interaction would
increase student motivation, encouraging them to stay in school, and ultimately graduate and go
to college. Increasing college attendance was an explicit goal of the Gates Foundation, and this
was reﬂected in intermediaries’ intense focus on college-going expectations and supplementary
student advising (Foley et al., 2010). Even though more than half of the students in our sample
graduate high school, 28% of our non-oﬀered applicants enroll in college four years after starting
9th grade and about 37% enroll within six years.15
       Small schools have a large and signiﬁcant eﬀect on college enrollment. Table 7 shows that
students are 7 percentage points more likely to attend college, which represents nearly a 20%
increase relative to the attendance rate for non-oﬀered students. Some interventions which
successfully reduce dropout rates no longer have signiﬁcant eﬀects when outcomes are measured
over a longer window (see, e.g., Rodriguez-Planas (2012)). Here, the eﬀect on college attendance
within four years after starting high school is similar to the estimate for attendance within
six years, suggesting that non-oﬀered students are not simply delaying college enrollment and
catching up to oﬀered students. Table 7 also reports estimates on attendance at two- or four-year
colleges, using the classiﬁcations in the National Student Clearinghouse. It’s worth noting that
attending a four-year college does not necessarily imply that a student is in a four-year degree
program, because schools which oﬀer both two- and four-year degrees are coded as four-year
institutions. In our sample, the fraction who attend a two-year college is about the same as
the fraction who attend a four-year college (if a student attends both a two-year college and a
four-year college, they are counted twice in this calculation).
       Small schools boost attendance at four-year institutions by a statistically signiﬁcant 6 per-
centage points, while leaving the eﬀect on two-year colleges unchanged. Gains at four-year
  15
       The six-year enrollment rate is greater than the fraction who ever attend college reported in the ﬁrst row of
Table 7 because we only report on attendance within six years for cohorts we can follow six years post-assignment.



                                                          23
colleges are almost entirely driven by gains at four-year public colleges. Moreover, the largest
college gains come from a shift of the fraction of students attending CUNY institutions. The
most commonly attended CUNY colleges are Borough of Manhattan, Bronx Community College,
New York City College of Technology, and Lehman College. There is no evidence of increases
at four-year private colleges.
      Data from the National Student Clearinghouse also allow us to investigate college persistence.
Persistence is measured by the likelihood of attempting at least 2 or 4 academic semesters in
college.16 Looking further out in a student’s schooling career reduces the size of the persistence
sample compared to the sample use to study college enrollment. Small school attendance in-
creases the fraction of students who attempt college for at least 2 academic years by 5 percentage
points, an eﬀect which is marginally signiﬁcant. The estimates for at least academic 4 semesters
are positive, but not precise enough to rule out a zero eﬀect.


VII        Other Results

VII.1       Subgroups

The new small schools were launched with the goal of serving struggling students across all
demographic groups (Foley et al., 2010). While the students who enroll are more likely to belong
to a minority group, are poorer, and have lower baseline scores than typical NYC 8th graders,
the fact that applicants obtain priority for some small schools by attending high school fairs
generates some important diﬀerences between small school enrollees and the lottery applicants,
as shown in Table 2. Therefore, it is natural to study whether certain student subgroups beneﬁt
more or less from small school attendance.
      Table 8 reports estimates for subgroups based on student demographic characteristics and
baseline achievement levels for several of our key outcomes of interest. Test score results tend
to be higher for girls than boys, but graduation and college results are similar for both groups.
The similar eﬀects by sex on four-year college enrollment are noteworthy given evidence that
girls usually outperform boys in other related studies (Anderson, 2008; Deming et al., 2011).
      Across racial groups, there is a large 0.34σ eﬀect on Regents Math for black students, which
is much larger than the corresponding estimate for Hispanics. On the other hand, there is no
diﬀerence in the estimates between blacks and Hispanics for Regents English, both of which are
positive but relatively imprecise. The eﬀects for high school graduation, Regents diplomas, and
college attendance are similar in magnitude for blacks and Hispanics, though as expected given
smaller sample sizes, the estimates are no longer statistically signiﬁcant in many cases. One
 16
      We treat an academic semester as enrollment in January-May or August-December.



                                                     24
interesting pattern is that black students are 8 percentage points more likely to attend four-year
public colleges; this eﬀect is larger than our overall eﬀect and has the same signiﬁcance level.
   The eﬀects for students who obtain a subsidized lunch are similar to the eﬀects from our
overall population, which is perhaps unsurprising given than more than 70% of our sample is
eligible. However, small schools push these students to attend four-year public colleges, a notable
ﬁnding given evidence that poor students often do not matriculate at four-year institutions
(Deming and Dynarski, 2010; Bowen, Chingos and McPherson, 2009; Hoxby and Avery, 2012).
   Small school critics allege that the new schools did not serve students who were harder to
educate (see, e.g., Bloomﬁeld (2006)). They point to the fact that some small schools were
allowed to exclude some special education and limited English proﬁcient students for their ﬁrst
three years. To investigate diﬀerences by students’ prior levels of achievement, we split our
sample into two groups based on having a baseline score above or below the median among
lottery applicants, which is already a lower-scoring population. For Regents outcomes and
graduation, there is no evidence that small schools were less eﬀective with low baseline students.
The high school graduation eﬀect for low baseline students is 7 percentage points, it is not
statistically signiﬁcant, while the eﬀect for high baseline students is a signiﬁcant 11 percentage
points. However, we cannot reject that these two estimates are diﬀerent given our precision
levels. Small schools cause high baseline students to earn more Regents diplomas, but not low
baseline students. The diﬀerence here is statistically signiﬁcant.
   The ﬂip side of the argument that small schools are ineﬀective for hard-to-educate students
is that their focus on these students detracts from those entering with higher achievement levels.
For instance, Hemphill and Nauer (2009) write that “small schools, by pouring resources into
helping needy students catch up, may shortchange students who have stronger academic skills.”
At least for outcomes related to college, Table 8 presents evidence for the exact opposite pattern
since the eﬀects are larger for students with higher baseline scores. High-baseline students are 9
percentage points more likely to attend college and 10 percentage points more likely to attend
four-year public colleges. The eﬀects on college enrollment outcomes for low-baseline students
are positive, but are not precise enough to rule out zero eﬀects.


VII.2    Schools Over Time and Closed Schools

Given changes in the school landscape after the initial big push for small school creation, it is
natural to ask whether schools opened after the last pledge of major support from the Gates
foundation in 2005 perform diﬀerently than schools opened beforehand. In particular, some have
worried that after small schools became more established, their student population changed and
this reduced achievement levels (Ravitch, 2011). In Table A6, we report estimates where we
sample into two groups: schools opened between 2002-05 and those opened between 2006-08.

                                                25
Our lottery design allows us to consider 95 our of 118 programs opened from 2002-2005 and 13
out of 33 programs opened from 2006-2008. We see a consistent pattern of eﬀects across these
two groups of schools, and in many cases the eﬀects are larger for schools opened in 2006-2008,
even though the coverage of the lottery sample is considerably smaller for 2006-2008, so it’s
possible that new undersubscribed schools fare diﬀerently.
   While establishing new schools, the NYC DOE also phased out or closed schools during our
time period citing lackluster performance. Through 2012, 13 small high school programs eligible
for our study have been closed, 9 of which are in the lottery sample. In Table A6, we also report
our main estimates excluding these schools. Each point estimate for Regents, graduation, and
college is larger when we exclude closed schools, though given that only a handful of schools have
been closed, we do not have the precision to conﬁdently assert these estimates are statistically
diﬀerent from those including the closed schools.


VII.3    Intermediaries

Each small school model can be seen as a set of preferred practices and features that aﬀect
school performance. Intermediaries, typically nonproﬁt organizations that operate between pol-
icymakers, funders, and entities charged with implementing new programs and practices, played
an important and continuing role in small school development. Intermediaries often distributed
grant funds to schools and provide advice on creating, incubating, and operating small schools
(Foley et al., 2010). Eight intermediaries– New Visions, Urban Assembly, Replications, NYC
Academies, Institute for Student Achievement, College Board, Outward Bound – were involved
in creating and supporting more than 90% of the schools in our study. The customization
provided by these intermediaries is at the heart of the small school reform idea.
   To provide examples of the heterogeneity across intermediaries, we describe a few patterns.
New Visions supports the largest number of schools, each of which focuses on college-readiness
and support for individualized instruction. Urban Assembly’s themes range from law and govern-
ment, media, and the arts to wildlife conservation, maritime studies and green careers. Repli-
cations scales up small schools, by identifying the essential features of successful schools and
supporting new school leaders during start up. NYC Academies are career academies supported
by the National Academy Foundation. These schools train students for careers in industries with
strong growth and employment potential. The Institute for Student Achievement specializes in
turnaround eﬀorts in New York City and elsewhere. They have their own college preparatory
program, which features a trademarked “distributed counseling” system of personalized instruc-
tion. College Board has a proprietary curriculum aimed at increasing diversity of students in
Advanced Placement courses that focus on inquiry, problem solving, collaboration and persua-
sive writing. NYC Outward Bound schools emphasize hands-on activities and expeditions; all

                                               26
students go on a weeklong wilderness trip intended to teach teamwork and perseverance. The
schools also have a “crew” system where a group of students have daily meetings with one
teacher throughout high school.
   Another motivation for studying eﬀects by intermediaries is to examine whether some small
school models are more eﬀective than others. Cullen et al. (2013) conjecture that career and
technically-focused high schools may be more successful than other thematic schools. It is also
worth noting that the trajectory of expansion and contraction has diﬀered by intermediary.
For instance, 3 new Urban Assembly high schools were opened between 2006-08, while only 1
school in the Replications and NYC Academies network opened during the same time period.
In 2011, the NYC DOE terminated their contract with Replications, stating that while they
were successful in launching schools, they were not as successful in managing them afterwards
(Phillips, 2011).
   While small school operators have been seen as pursuing a diverse array of school visions,
some expressed skepticism about the resulting heterogeneity in the small school portfolio. For
instance, Ravitch (2011, p. 81) writes:

      “Most of the new small schools were theme schools, centered on a speciﬁc profession
      or speciality. This produced some oﬀbeat results, such as a high school for future
      ﬁreﬁghters; a school for the hospitality industry; a school for urban planners; a
      school for architecture; a school for the business of sports; a school for the violin;
      several schools for social justice, peace, and diversity; and other schools for the health
      professions, writers, leaders, the arts, law, technology, communications, journalism,
      and media. Adults like the idea of themes, but few children starting ninth grade are
      prepared to select a profession or career speciality.”

On the other hand, the Department of Education did not place ﬁrm requirements on how themes
were fulﬁlled, and adherence to theme does not seem to have played a role in accountability
decisions (Gootman, 2005).
   The non-oﬀered and oﬀered complier school environments, for the variables examined in
Table 3, are similar on many dimensions when split by intermediary. Table A5 shows that
oﬀered small school compliers face signiﬁcant diﬀerences in school sizes relative to the untreated.
Teachers at their schools are also somewhat less experienced and less highly educated, while
baseline peer achievement is higher.
   Table 9 reports on lottery estimates by intermediaries. The estimates come from models like
equation (1), but estimated separately for schools classiﬁed by intermediary. (Table A2 presents
information on application patterns by intermediary.) With this approach, some students who
are not treated at a particular intermediary nonetheless enroll in a small high school in our study.


                                                 27
This can be seen in Table A5, which shows complier small school enrollment rates for each of the
intermediaries. For instance, 46% of non-oﬀered Urban Assembly compliers enroll at another
small school outside the Urban Assembly family. That table also shows that this exercise not only
captures the eﬀect of diﬀerent intermediaries, but it also captures the consequence of diﬀerent
fallback positions. For instance, non-oﬀered compliers at schools supported by Replications
attend schools with peer achievement levels about 0.2σ below New York City’s average in math,
while students who attend schools supported by the NYC Academies attend schools more than
0.4σ below. Finally, the sample size shrinks, especially at Institute for Student Achievement,
College Board, and Outward Bound, making any conclusions for these intermediaries tentative.
   There are large and signiﬁcant eﬀects on Regents Math for ﬁve intermediaries: New Visions,
Urban Assembly, Replications, NYC Academies, and College Board. The eﬀect on obtaining a
Regents Diploma is also large and positive for New Visions and Urban Assembly; though it is not
negative for any other intermediary, the signiﬁcance levels vary and most eﬀects are not precise
enough to be useful. Urban Assembly schools increase PSAT taking and scores, SAT taking,
and AP test taking (shown in Table A4). Eﬀects on college, measured either by attendance,
four-year college attendance, or four-year public college attendance are mostly positive, with the
most consistent pattern for New Visions schools.
   It bears emphasis that the sample of applicants from New Visions is the largest, and the
absence of signiﬁcant results for other intermediaries may simply reﬂect the small sample sizes.
Still, none of the estimates on four-year college are negative, though some are too imprecise to
be meaningful. Given the fact that diﬀerences in eﬀects across intermediaries may be due to
diﬀerences in fallback options, diﬀerences in students, and diﬀerences in school practices, it is
hard to draw ﬁrm conclusions about the relative performance of particular intermediaries from
this analysis alone (see, Angrist et al. (2013a), for a similar discussion of the interpretation
of heterogenous charter school eﬀects). The most noticeable pattern from Table 9 is that no
single intermediary seems to be universally poor-performing on all outcomes. Understanding
diﬀerences across intermediaries seems worth additional investigation.


VIII      Mechanisms and Changes in School Environment
The common denominator across the 108 schools in our sample is their small size. We’d also
like to know more about other diﬀerences in the small schools’ learning environment. However,
deﬁning and measuring changes in school environment tends to be a diﬃcult task. Fortunately,
starting in the 2006-07 school year, the New York City Department of Education launched the
nation’s largest survey eﬀort to describe the school learning climate. The survey is completed
by students, parents, and teachers, and by 2009, 80% of eligible students and 73% of eligible


                                               28
teachers completed the survey (see the data appendix for more details).
   We use information from these surveys to characterize the school environment based on stu-
dent, parent, and teacher responses. In particular, we focus on describing changes in the school
environment for those in our experiment. Although we do not have the survey responses made
by the students in the sample, we report on the mean survey response at schools attended by
the non-oﬀered and oﬀered compliers. In 2003, small schools advocate Thomas Toch articulated
a vision for small school success (Toch, 2003, p. 13):

     “Smaller schools encourage bonds between students and teachers and generate a
     level of genuine caring and mutual obligation between them that’s found far less
     frequently in comprehensive high schools. Students and teachers, as a result, tend
     to work harder on each other’s behalf. Student and teacher attendance and stu-
     dent involvement in extracurricular activities are higher in smaller schools. Teacher
     turnover and disciplinary problems are lower. [...]
     The best schools have a clear sense of what they hope to achieve with their students.
     They are “focused.” Their curricula, their teaching strategies, the way they organize
     their school day, even, in many instances, the design of their buildings, are aligned
     with their educational aims. [...]
     Successful schools also have high academic expectations for every student. That is
     their deﬁning characteristic.”

   We investigate several aspects of the small school environment motivated by this quote. The
survey contains multiple questions about the school environment organized into four categories:
1) engagement, 2) safety and respect, 3) academic expectations, and 4) communications. Each
response is awarded a score between 0 and 10 by the DOE, with 10 reﬂecting the most favorable
for a school’s learning environment. We use data from 2006-07 through 2008-09, which covers the
most relevant years for students in our sample. To have a normalized benchmark, we standardize
responses across schools to have mean zero and unit variance.
   For each category, we compute the diﬀerence for the survey-reported characteristics for our
enrollment compliers using methods in Abadie (2003). Researchers working with similar survey
datasets often construct indices to combine multiple outcome variables and have developed
inferential methods to deal with correlation across them (see, e.g., Kling, Liebman and Katz
(2007)). Though this approach is parsimonious, we instead report the answers to a few speciﬁc
questions to highlight the richness of the survey. For each category, we rank the survey questions
by the greatest diﬀerence between the answers for non-oﬀered and oﬀered compliers. To illustrate
the range of responses, we report the two questions for which the diﬀerence in favor of small
schools’ learning environment is largest and the two questions for which the diﬀerence against

                                               29
small schools is largest. We also report the fraction of questions for which the small school
learning environment is favored over the counterfactual fallback school environment for those in
our experiment.
   Small schools are rated higher on the overwhelming majority of questions on engagement,
safety and respect, academic expectations, and communications. This can be seen in Table 10,
which reports survey questions based on student responses. (Parent survey responses are similar
to student responses in that small schools are rated higher for the most questions in each of the
four categories. They are reported in Table A7.) Small schools employ numerous strategies to
increase engagement in addition to thematic programs and external partnerships. For instance,
at some Urban Assembly schools, teachers make home visits (Santos, 2011). These strategies
are reﬂected in the fact that the small school environment is associated with higher levels of
engagement on 10 out of 11 questions.
   The largest diﬀerence in the engagement category in favor of small schools is for the question
about whether the adults that students see at the school know students. Here, non-oﬀered com-
pliers are at schools that are 1.0σ worse than the typical NYC high school (which is normalized
at zero). On this metric, oﬀered small school compliers are at schools roughly 0.5σ better than
the NYC average, resulting in a 1.5σ diﬀerence in the environment faced by non-oﬀered and of-
fered compliers. The second largest diﬀerence in engagement is for the question about whether
adults look out for students. Here, oﬀered compliers’ schools are at 0.2σ, while non-oﬀered
compliers’ schools are at −0.8σ. These survey answers are consistent with greater monitoring
and increased interaction at small schools.
   Toch’s quote expresses the idea that small schools will involve students in more extracur-
riculars. While the surveys do not capture extra-curricular participation, the largest diﬀerence
against the small schools environment is for the question about the variety of classes and activ-
ities. The variety of classes and activities experienced by non-oﬀered compliers is much greater
than the NYC average, and 0.8σ greater than that experienced by oﬀered compliers. This
ﬁnding, instead, is consistent with the view stated by Ravitch (2011, p. 205) who laments that
“because of their size, they seldom have enough students or teachers to oﬀer advanced courses in
mathematics and science, elective, advanced placement courses, career and technical education,
choir, band, sports teams, and other programs that many teenagers want.”
   The description of the small school environment is also more favorable for the three other
categories. On safety and respect, oﬀered small school compliers are at schools with a greater
sense of community (measured by disagreement with the statement that most students in my
school just look out for themselves). Small schools are also associated with less gang activity
and outrank the untreated counterfactual school environment on 19 out of 20 questions on safety
and respect. This ﬁnding is important given concerns about placing new small schools on the


                                               30
same campuses as struggling schools vulnerable to safety concerns (Miller, 2005). On academic
expectations, oﬀered compliers are at small schools that regularly complete essays and where
high-achievers are treated with respect. There is little diﬀerence on college counseling, however.
On communication, the environment experienced by non-oﬀered compliers dominates by a wide
margin on all ﬁve questions. Students consistently work in groups, feel comfortable talking to
their instructors, and participate in hands-on activities.
   Table 11 reports the results of a similar exercise based on teacher survey responses. The
higher rates of teacher turnover shown in Table 3 might suggest a poor work environment at
new small schools. However, based on teacher survey responses, on a large fraction of questions,
oﬀered small school compliers are at schools where teachers report greater engagement, safety
and respect, academic expectations, and communication. Among the many questions, we high-
light a few where the diﬀerences are most stark. First, the contrast in the fraction of teachers
who report reacting to feedback and using data to improve instructional decisions is large, but
the mean level for oﬀered compliers is near the NYC average. Second, the positive teacher’s as-
sessments on safety and respect are nearly identical to those reported in student surveys. Third,
teachers report their schools have a clear vision and that there is eﬀective communication with
parents when students misbehave. For our experiment, the one dimension where the small school
environment is unfavorable (as reported by teachers) is on issues related to principal supervision
and management.
   Overall, a consistent picture emerges about the small school environment, whether as de-
scribed by student or teacher survey responses. Together with the results on truancy, many
of the mechanisms present in the Toch quote appear to be validated (except extracurricular
activities and teacher-principal interaction). Interestingly, many of these features where the
small school environment dominates, including use of data to guide instruction, frequent teacher
feedback, and high academic expectations, are shared by the high-performing charter schools
studied by Angrist et al. (2013a) and Dobbie and Fryer (2013a).


IX     School Size in Education Production
The estimates here show remarkably consistent gains for small school attendance on test scores,
graduation, and college enrollment. These estimates speak to questions about the impact of
Bloomberg-era reforms in the nation’s largest school district. They are also relevant for policy
questions such as the expansion of small schools and closing underperforming schools.
   We’d also like to investigate whether there are more general lessons from our analysis of
small schools. The role of school size in education production is an important question in the
economics of education. Conant’s (1959) original argument for large comprehensive high schools


                                                31
was mostly based on scale economies. A subsequent literature has tried to characterize optimal
school sizes, with some claiming that high schools with about 600-900 students balance scale
economies with the negative eﬀects of large schools (see, e.g., Andrews, Duncombe and Yinger
(2002)). Many arguments for small schools parallel those made in similar debates on small class
sizes. For instance, Lazear (2001) develops a disruption-based model of learning and shows that
optimal class size is larger for better-behaved students. It is possible to interpret his model
as one of school size with the same underlying mechanism, with the implication that a smaller
school size is preferred for harder-to-educate students. Understanding the role of school size for
achievement also seems important as school choice expands, causing many traditional district
schools to become smaller.
   The evidence from school surveys suggests that small schools diﬀer from other schools on
many dimensions. It is clear from Table 3, however, that students who attend small schools
are at schools with considerably smaller student bodies, whether measured by the number of
9th grade classmates or the number of students at the school across all high school grades. To
turn this fact into a more general statement about the eﬀects of school size requires stronger
assumptions. In particular, we must assume that small school oﬀers aﬀect achievement solely
through changes in school size. In their context, Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011a) describe two sets
of assumptions which justify using exam schools to study the causal eﬀects of peers. We brieﬂy
review their arguments in a parallel eﬀort to explore how our small school experiment identiﬁes
causal school size eﬀects.
   We begin by positing a simple model of education production, where mi denote a vector of
education inputs measured in the small school entry grade:

                                          yi = π  mi + ηi .

The mediators in mi include school size, measures of school quality, and teacher eﬀects. If we
partition mi into measures of school size si and other unobserved inputs wi :

                                           mi = [si wi ] ,

then
                                      yi = β  s i + γ  w i + η i .
   The ﬁrst argument is based on a 2SLS version of the omitted variables bias formula (see,
e.g., Angrist and Krueger (1992)). If small schools have better unmeasured inputs, then 2SLS
estimates of si omitting wi tend to be too big. The descriptive patterns in the Learning Envi-
ronment Surveys described in Section VIII suggest that small schools are associated with higher
levels of engagement, safety and respect, academic expectations, and communication. It is there-
fore plausible that the omitted variables in wi are beneﬁcial for student achievement. Under
this interpretation, our estimate provides an upper bound on the eﬀect of school size.

                                                   32
       The second argument is based on the idea that any school input correlated with small school
oﬀers is itself caused by diﬀerences in size. That is, the relationship between unobserved school
inputs wi is a consequence of the aﬀect of school size (e.g., students are monitored more closely
because small schools have smaller size; the ability to have frequent interactions with pupils
aﬀects teaching styles; improved communication is the result of fewer students). If we assume
that the randomly generated oﬀer aﬀects school size, and school size in turn aﬀects these other
unmeasured inputs (i.e. a triangular structure), then 2SLS estimates treating si as endogenous
combine both the direct and indirect eﬀects to capture the total eﬀect of randomly assigned
school size.
       Table 12 reports estimates of two versions of 2SLS models where school size is measured
either by the size of the 9th grade class or by the number of high school classmates. The ﬁrst
stage estimates, shown in Panel B, are large and precise for both measures, consistent with
the sharp diﬀerences in school size shown in Table 3. The estimates imply that a small school
oﬀer leads to 269 fewer 9th grade classmates or 701 fewer high school classmates. Though these
estimates come from a linear model, they do not impose a linear relationship, since the 2SLS
estimates can be interpreted as the weighted-average causal response to school size.17
       The 2SLS estimate shown in Panel A imply that a 100 student reduction in 9th grade size
causes a 0.024σ increase in Regents math. In particular, the standard error on this estimate
is 0.007, implying that we have the power to detect small eﬀects. For the other outcomes, the
precision of the 2SLS estimates of school size are similar to that of the 2SLS estimates treating
small school enrollment as endogenous reported earlier. For instance, a 100 student reduction in
the number of 9th grade classmates causes a statistically signiﬁcant one point increase in college
attendance. Estimates of the causal eﬀect of school size measured by grade 9-12 classmates are
similar, but roughly three times smaller, as expected given the diﬀerences in the magnitude of
the ﬁrst stage.
       Taken together, these estimates indicate that incremental changes in school size are likely
to have very small eﬀects on student achievement. Instead, dramatic changes in school sizes,
such as those that occurred in New York City, would be necessary to have a signiﬁcant impact
on racial and socioeconomic gaps. In this context, it also helps to draw a comparison to the
debates of the importance of input-based schooling policies (Hanuschek, 2003; Krueger, 2003). In
particular, there are now a number of well-controlled estimates of class size eﬀects (Angrist and
Lavy, 1999; Krueger, 1999; Chetty, Friedman, Hilger, Saez and Schanzenbach, 2011; Dynarski
et al., 2011; Fredriksson et al., 2013). Estimates of the eﬀect of class size reductions of roughly
7 fewer students from Krueger (1999) imply a 0.18 standard deviation increase in Stanford
  17
       The weights are proportional to the eﬀect of the instrument on the cumulative distribution function of the
endogenous variable (Angrist and Imbens, 1995).


                                                        33
Achievement Tests. Here, too, one or two fewer students in a class seem likely to have small
eﬀects. On the other hand, incremental changes to either class or school size may be less policy-
relevant than larger-scale changes.


X     Conclusion
The reconstitution of large high schools into smaller ones in New York City and elsewhere has
left a lasting legacy on America’s public high schools. The random variation created by NYC’s
high school match provides a unique opportunity to estimate the causal eﬀects of NYC’s small
schools free from selection bias. We ﬁnd consistent evidence that small schools boost student
achievement on important graduation milestones, including on ﬁve diﬀerent Regents exams,
grade progression, and credit accumulation. Small school students are more likely to graduate
high school and earn Regents diplomas, and are less likely to require remediation in reading and
writing when they enter college. A large fraction of small school students are pushed to four-year
public institutions and those within the CUNY system. The evidence, so far, also indicates that
they are more likely to persist in college, as measured by matriculation for at least two academic
semesters. As the cohorts in our study age, it will be possible to study longer-term measures of
college persistence and college graduation.
    The estimates reported here are best seen as indicating possibilities for urban small schools
reform. Our lottery design necessarily requires that schools be unselective and oversubscribed.
It is worth noting, however, that our sample is not isolated to a handful of schools nor do we
have idiosyncratic coverage of particular schools assisted by only some intermediaries. The 108
school programs in our study represent over 70% of those eligible. Oversubscribed schools are of
considerable policy interest, especially in light of Mayor Bloomberg’s stated goal in 2010 to phase
out the lowest performing 10 percent of city schools over the next four years (Otterman, 2010).
The requirement that students are subject to lottery-based rationing also implies that special
education and limited English proﬁcient students are excluded from our lottery sample. Still,
it is worth emphasizing that the students in our sample are disadvantaged by most traditional
measures. More than 90% of students in our lottery sample are black or Hispanic, at least
70% obtain subsidized school lunches, and the majority have lower baseline scores than typical
NYC 8th graders. Our investigation of eﬀects across subgroups indicates that small schools are
eﬀective for a broad set of students.
    Proponents argue that students are more easily monitored and safer at small schools; this
in turn increases their motivation and attendance, and ultimately graduation and college at-
tendance. The evidence on these mechanisms is borne out in our investigation of incredibly
detailed data from New York City’s School Learning Environment Surveys. Small schools cause


                                                34
a signiﬁcant decrease in truancy. Survey respondents associate small schools with greater lev-
els of engagement, safety and respect, academic expectations, and communication. Moreover,
the consistency of the results across intermediaries, though sometimes imprecise, suggests that
school size is an important common ingredient. When we channel the school eﬀects through
school size, the estimates imply that incremental changes in school size will be insuﬃcient to
have signiﬁcant eﬀects on achievement gaps, whereas large-scale changes like those that took
place in New York City may be necessary.
   Our ﬁndings stand out when compared to a literature with relatively few examples of success-
ful interventions for inner-city public school students, especially for college choice and enrollment.
Given this, some have argued that high school may be too late to reduce skill gaps and eﬀorts
should therefore be concentrated earlier or even before the start of a student’s schooling career
(see, e.g., Cunha and Heckman (2007) and Cunha, Heckman and Schennach (2010)). Moreover,
interventions showing the greatest promise for urban populations have so far come from high-
performing charter schools such as KIPP or Harlem’s Promise Academies, which operate outside
traditional district boundaries (Angrist et al., 2012; Dobbie and Fryer, 2013a). Even though the
small high schools studied here had auxiliary support from foundation grants and advocacy ef-
forts, they still operate with the same school calendar and under the same collectively-bargained
work rules as other New York City high schools.
   The common features of these high-performing charter schools and the small schools studied
here include high expectations, close monitoring, frequent interaction, and the use of data-
driven instruction. While the “No Excuses” style charter schools with these practices embody
a relatively well-deﬁned model, NYC’s small schools are horizontally diﬀerentiated with themes
designed to engage low-performing students. Cullen et al. (2013) and Murnane (2013) argue that
increasing the variety of educational oﬀerings at high school is a worthwhile pursuit, especially
if it increases the match quality between students and schools. In future work, we intend to
further explore heterogeneity across small school models and examine issues related to how the
new small schools aﬀect student sorting.




                                                 35
                                       '#      ! (&&($(&&)


                                                                                                                                         


                                



                                



                                

                                                                                                                                !
                                
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                
                                
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                
                                
                                                                                                                                




      
                                                                                                                                
                                
                                                                                                                                 

                                



                                 



                                  
                                                                                   !
                                                                           


    !        ! (&&'$&((&&)$&*#
    *"'&"'''(#
                  ")$  !    !!#)'')%)''*

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Long Island
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sound
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Huntington
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Harbor
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Huntington
                                                                                                                                                                                                Huntington Harbor
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Harbor

                                                                                                                                                                                    Huntington                        Long
                                                                                                                                                                                      Harbor                         Island
                                                                                                                                                                                   Titus                             Sound
                                                                                                                                                                                 Millpond
                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                                                                    "               #
                                                                                                                                                                    *       Huntington
                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                          "     #
                                                                                                                                                * )"     #
                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                                                         "         #
                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                                                                                   )         Harbor
                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                                                     "         #
                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                               )
                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                    )      )
                                                                                                                                           "           )
                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                     Hudson                                   #
                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                                                "                                       Bronx                                                  Hempstead
                                                                                                                      River                   "
                                                                                                                                              ) #         )
                                                                                                                                                          "             )
                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                          ) #  ** #                     #
                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                              * )   #
                                                                                                                                                    **
                                                                                                                                                    "                                                                            Harbor
                                                                                                                                                      " "
                                                                                                                                                      )  )                                                    Manhasset
                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                       *     #
                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                             )#
                                                                                                                                             " *#
                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                               )            "
                                                                                                                                            )"  )          )
                                                                                                                                                           "     #
                                                                                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                                                 "*
                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Motts
                                                                                                                                             )"         #
                                                                                                                                                        *                                                         Bay
                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                        )"#
                                                                                                                          *       #
                                                                                                                                  *)
                                                                                                                                  )"
                                                                                                                                  "   )
                                                                                                                                      " ) #
                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                          "     #
                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                "                   )
                                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                       * )
                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                                       "    "
                                                                                                                            )       #
                                                                                                                                    *#*
                                                                                                                                      ) "
                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                ) "   )                                                                               Cove
                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                          )")
                                                                                                                              )
                                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                       * "
                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                                       "   )                                                                    Little
                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                  "              )
                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                                         )"
                                                                                                                          )  )   )
                                                                                                                                 "                                                           Neck    Bay
                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                           )"
                                                                                                                            )"
                                                                                            Manhattan          )
                                                                                                               "       "
                                                                                                                       ) " )")                                                      )
                                                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                          "                        )
                                                                                                                                                   "          Flushing          )
                                                                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                           Hudson "       #
                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                         )"                                       )
                                                                                                                                                  ")
                                                                                                                                                   "                                           )
                                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                      # "
                                                                                                        )"
                                                                                                         ) ")        "           )                              Bay                         #
                                                                                            River "   )
                                                                                                      *"
                                                                                                       )"
                                                                                                                     ) East "                                               )
                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                                            "               *
                                                                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                                                            "                   )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                                        ))
                                                                                                         "         )
                                                                                                                   "                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                          ")
                                                                                                           "                              )
                                                                                                                                          "                                                       )
                                                                                                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                      River "  )                      )
                                                                                                                                                      "                        #
                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                               )
                                                                                                                                                                               "                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                                         "            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                     )"
                                                                                                     " ) "                     #
                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                  )"
                                                                                                   )      ))
                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                          "                    ") "
                                                                                                                               )"  )
                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                                                   "                        #
                                                                                                                                                            *                                                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                               #
                                                                                               *       )
                                                                                                       "  )
                                                                                                          "                                               )
                                                                                                                                                          "                   )
                                                                                                                                                                              "            )
                                                                                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                     ) " )                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                  "                       )
                                                                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                           )
                                                                                                           "                                                      "            )
                                                                                                                                                                               "                              )
                                                                                                                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                )
                                                                                                "          #
                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                           )
                                                                                                           "                                                      ) ")
                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                 "                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                       )"               "
                                                                                                                        )"                                         )
                                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                              )
                                                                                              "       # #
                                                                                                          ))              )
                                                                                                      *")
                                                                                                        *# "           #
                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                       )                                                               "
                                                                                                   )     )
                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                         *"
                                                                                                          )          #"
                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                     "        )            )
                                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                                       )")
                                                                                              ) "
                                                                                              "                             #
                                                                                                                            *"                                                       )#
                                                                                                                                                                                     " *
                                                                                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                       *                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                                          "               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                           Port Newark                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                          )#
                                                                                                          " *") "          #
                                                                                                                           *             #
                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                          "                               )
                                                                                                                                                                          "                                 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                          "      ) # *            #
                                                                                                                                  *)
                                                                                                                                   "    )
                                                                                                                                        "                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                             Channel                                                   "
                                                                                                       )"
                                                                                                        ) "   )                                             )
                                                                                                                                                            "          #
                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                      )"
                                                                                                       ) "  "
                                                                                                            ))
                                                                                                            )             )
                                                                                                                          "                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                            Elizabeth                                                       )"
                                                                                                            "
                                                                            Upper New            #*
                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                 *#                 )
                                                                                                                    "            )
                                                                                                                                 "                        )
                                                                                                                                                          "             )
                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                              )
                                                                                                                              "          #
                                                                                                                                         *   )
                                                                                                                                             "   "                               )
                                                                                                                                                                                 "            "
                                                                                                                                                                                              ) ")
                                            Channel                                                                                      )
                                                                                                                                         "       ) "  )
                                                                             York Bay                        )
                                                                                                             "      #
                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                                    "                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                                         "
                                                                      Kill                                               )
                                                                                                                         "                #
                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                          "       #
                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                  "
                                              Newark
                                                                      Van        Upper New                                   #
                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                             )
                                                                                                                             "     #
                                                                                                                                   *                 )
                                                                                                                                                     "
                                                Bay                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                                            "                    Hawtree Basin
                                                                                  York Bay      Brooklyn             #
                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                     "               #
                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                      Kull                                                           )
                                                                                                                                     "
                                         Newark                            "
                                                                           )"
                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                                        Queens
                                                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                                                                "
                                          Bay                                              )
                                                                                           "                )
                                                                                                            "                     Paerdegat                                                            Head of
                                                 )
                                                 "                                                                      )
                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                                                        "              #
                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                       )
                                                                                       "                                             Basin                                                           Bay Basin              Hewlett
                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                            "        )
                                                                                                                     "                East Mill Jamaica                                              Motts           Broswere Bay
                                                                       )
                                                                       "                         )
                                                                                                 "                                                 Mill                                              Basin              Bay
                                                 #
                                                 *                  )
                                                                    "                                     )               )
                                                                                                                          "             Basin            Bay
                                                                                                     ) "
                                                                                                     "                                           Basin                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                      )
                                                                                                                                                                                                      "                             Middle
                                                          )
                                                          "                                               #                                                                                             East
                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                          "                    )
                                                                                                                               "                                               Barbadoes
                                                                                             Gravesend"     )     "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bay
                                                                                                                  ) Sheepshead                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                               ) Basin              Rockaway
                          Great                                                                 Bay             #
                                                                                                                *")
                                                Staten                                                                     Bay"  )Rockaway                                                              Inlet
                          Fresh                                 )
                                                              ) "
                                                              "                                                                         Inlet
                                                Island
                           Kill                                                        Lower New
                                                                                        York Bay
                                                     Great
                                                      Kills
                                  )
                                  "                  Harbor
                 Authur
                  Kill
                                      Raritan                                                                                                                                              Atlantic
                                       Bay                                                                                                                                                 Ocean


                                          Raritan                                                                Atlantic
                                           Bay                                                                   Ocean


                          Newport                              Sandy                     Sandy
                          Harbor                              Hook Bay                  Hook Bay
                                                                                                      Spermaceti
                                                                                                        Cove                                                                                                                                  
  #!! !!  #! " $ !!"
 !)'''%'( # !!! $ #    ! ($ !   !
  $
                                  Figure3.GrowthofEligibleNewYorkCitySmallHighSchools


                                                                                                                                       




NumberofnewsmallhighschoolsinNewYorkCityeligibleforthestudycreatedbetween2002and2008.Thedataappendixprovides
additionaldetailsontheschoolsample.
                         *"      !


                                                                   
       '                     '                   


      (                       (   
                                              

      )                       )   
                                                                               !'          


       *                     *
                                     *  
                                             

       +                     +
                                     +  
                                             
                                                                                !(        
       ,                     ,
                                     ,  
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                      !#  
                                                                                                         
       -                     -
                                     -  
                                             

       .                     .
                                     .  
                                                                                  
                                                                                                             
       /                     /
                                     /  
                                                                                                             


      '&                    '&
                                    '&  
                                             
                                                                             
      ''                    ''
                                    ''  
                                                                               


      '(                    '(
                                    '(  
                                             


                
                     
        !              
      
                             
                                                                     &#!!!
                                          ."" '!*.
                                                             ."" '!*.
                                                                               
                                                   ,2-                         ,3-
                                             219*262                    ::*249

  "  !
%!!                                     83*:5                      76*95
 !!'                                   23*24                      23*23
 "!                                     9*23                       9*22
!                                    6*6                       6*6
!""#"  "#"$"                8*26                       8*26
                                     6*:                        6*:
#"% #                                    6*9                        4*7
" !                                      22*26                      22*26
"!( !"  "!"# !!  !% "'
 "!"#'"# % """ '!)  " #"!
"""" '!"!$ !#! !#"" "$"" '"!"
' ' 3114+15"%3118+19)!  !!" 
 !"3123+24! " ')"  '!!"! ! 
""&)  !'" ""  ' #)
                                                                  
                                                                                        %%!#)(                                  $+')!#
                                                                           # "!!
                                                             # "!! $$!#
                                                                $$!        $)                                                           $))'
                                                             #.,'$# + $' # "!!          %%!#)(                     %%!#)(
                                 A)      #'$!!# ''#     '''  $$!(          *))$        $))'   ,)(!#
                                ''(       "!!$$!       $'"            '    '()$            $))'.          %%!#)(      $'(
                                  5:6             5;6             5<6           5=6           5>6                 5?6               5@6            5A6
"!                           92=B            92>:            92>:          92>9          92=A                92><             49299?         49299A
                                                                                                                                  5929::6        5929::6
!                              92<=            92=?            92=;            92=;            92=;            92==             929::          9299B
                                                                                                                                  5929::6        5929:;6
(%#                          92<B            92=>            92=A            92=B            92>9            92=@            49299A         49299?
                                                                                                                                  5929:;6        5929:;6
)                             92:=            929=            929=            929=            929>            929>            49299>         49299@
                                                                                                                                  59299>6        59299>6
 )'3# #$,#                     92:<            929>            929>            929=            929=            929=             9299:          9299=
                                                                                                                                  59299=6        59299=6
*(/!*#                  92?B            92@<            92@;            92@;            92@;            92@:             929::          929:9
                                                                                                                                  5929::6        5929::6
%!*)$#                 92:9            929A            929B            929B            92:9            9299              #2            #2

 ")#!(%'$#.       92::            92:9            92::            92::            92::            9299              #2            #2

  #))#                        92:;            92::            92:=            92:<            92:9            929@             49299;         49299;
                                                                                                                                   59299>6        59299>6
'$$ !.#                          92<;            92<9            92;A            92;>            92;<            92:B             49299:          92999
                                                                                                                                   59299>6        59299>6
*#(                            92;@            92:?            92:<            92::            929B            929@              92999          92999
                                                                                                                                   59299=6        59299=6
'$#-                             92;<            92=;            92==            92>9            92>?            92?;              9299<          9299;
                                                                                                                                   59299>6        59299>6
))# (!#                     929?            929:            929:            929;            929;            929=              92999          92999
                                                                                                                                   59299;6        59299;6
(!# )($'               9299           492;A            492;=          492<:           492<;           492:B                            4929;9
                                                                                                                                                  5929:@6
(!##!(($'            9299           492;<            492;:          492;?           492;@           492:9                            49299>
                                                                                                                                                  5929:?6

%4+!*                                                                                                                               92B?<          92A>?
                                 =:>0>:>           ?:0=9?         :>B0:@A          A;0ABB         =;0=>=          :90=:A            :90;9=         B0B;>
  $)(1()!'%$')(('%)+())()($')("%!$%*!($$!()*#)(# #%%!#)()$("!!($$!(#$!*"#(5:645?62
"$'%#$'")$##(!#($'(') #'$"'A2(!# )##!(($'(''$") A)' )##!(
 #*')(-"0'(%)+!.2 A)''(#$!*"#5:6'A)'%%!#)(#)")'$"#$#4%'+)($$!(2)*#)(#'$!!
#("!!($$!')$(,$'#("!!($$!#'B#)($$!.')').%')%)#)$$!")2%%!#)(#$!*"#
5<6'# ("!!($$!"$#$#$)':;$($#)($$!"(($#(%''#$'"2%%!#)(#$!*"#5=6#$)$)##$')
($$!"$'%''')$)'()'# ("!!($$!0#')'$'$#('$'"(($#())("!!($$!2%%!#)(#$!*"#5>6
'# ("!!($$!()''()$0,!%%!#)(#$!*"#5?6'#("!!($$!,')'(#"(($#(!$))'.#!($'(*))$
)!$))'.2$!*"#(5@645A6'%$')($#)('$"''(($#($)+'!#'$,$###)$'&*!)$$#)()*#)($'
("!!($$!2'%$'))(()")($')("%!,)!!+!!()*#)"$'%(#$!*"#5@6#!($(!#($'(#$!*"#5A62
'(($#(#!*'( 4()$#)'$!(0#'$*()()#'''$'('#%'#)((2#22"#(#$)+!!2%!*)$## ")#!(
'$#)()*#)($#$)$#)'*))$)!$))'.("%!*($).,'#$)(*))$!$))'.#)($$!"(($#(%'$((24+!*(
''$")()($).%$)(())!!$#)('/'$2
                                          #!   "  
                                                
                                                                                  %$6$(%"")                    #""%%"%#&" ()
                                                                                   :@5J@;             %$6(8J@9         (8JA9
                                                                                       8A9                     8B9                     8C9
                                                                                                      
$(%""*#""%%")                                                            @3@@                     @3@@                   A3@@

$(%"" $ $**$                                                                @3B@                     @3BB                    @3AF
$(%"" $(%$.                                                                    @3AF                     @3CI                    @3DF
$(%"" $(%%!"/$                                                                 @3BF                     @3AI                    @3B@
$(%"" $+$)                                                                   @3BC                     @3AA                    @3@I
$(%"" $**$ )"$                                                            @3@F                     @3@I                    @3@I

                                                                                                     
 (*(, )*%%%"                                                           AC1@EA                  AD1BID                    AC1FEA
"))(%%#+$)                                                                      G1CBI                   G1HI@                     G1DAE
()                                                                          F1@@H                   F1DBA                     F1@D@
 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, )                                                       A1IBF                   B1BDI                     A1IHB
  () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(*                                                  A1FHC                   A1IBA                     A1ID@
$ ""(/+&&%(*                                                                     HIG                     HDH                       I@H
+ " $(, )                                                                    A1ADB                   A1C@D                     A1CBD
 "+&&%(*%)*)                                                                   CBF                     CED                       C@@
/)*#6- %)*)                                                                     CEB                     CG@                       CFF
/)*#6- " * %$)                                                              A1BE@                   A1C@@                     A1C@B

                                                                                                      
 +#(%(I*+$*)                                                            GAE                     HFC                     AFA
 +#(%(I6AB*+$*)                                                        B1AAG                   B1BDI                     DDC

,($" )")) 0                                                            BG                       BG                      BE
,( *")) 0                                                               BG                       BF                      BE

%*" +#(%%(")))+*                                                  DBH                     DDF                     A@G
%*" +#(%()                                                             ABA                     ACB                     CB
($*%()- *-(*$(()% $.&( $               AC                      AD                      C@
($*%()- * )*(<)(&"+)C@%+()%(%*%(*                  DF                      DC                      BI
($*%()- * %"  $(*  *                                D                       E                       F
(+($%,(*                                                                AF                      AI                      BH

 +#(%+""6* #)) )*$*( $ &")                                               E                       F                      A
 +#(%+""6* # %$6 $*                                                 I                      AB                      C

                                                                                                         
)" $( $ $ *                                                           @3@B                    6@3BH                   6@3@G
)" $( $ $$" )                                                        @3@@                    6@3BH                   6@3@C

(%&%(* %$"!%( )&$                                                              @3G@                     @3HE                   @3HD
(%&%(* %$+)  0 +$                                                             @3FH                     @3FH                   @3GB
(%&%(* %$#"                                                                       @3DH                     @3DD                   @3DH
(%&%(* %$& "+* %$                                                            @3A@                     @3AA                   @3@H
(%&%(* %$ # *$" )(%  $*                                                    @3AB                     @3AD                   @3@G
  %*)2 )*")%-))( &* ,)** )* )%()*+$*)$%*$(%""*)#"")%%")1)#"")%%"$(%""#$*%#&" ()$%*%(# )) %$)
8J@91$$(%""#$*%#&" ()%(# )) %$)8JA93%#&" (**( +*)(%#&+*%""%- $#*%))(  $ 8B@@C93
)" $&(#$)((%#H*( -%(!** *$$" )$ $+(*)*)*)%(&( $B@@B6B@@G3(*+($%,((* )
*$+#(%*() $**)%%"/(-%-($%** $ $*%""%- $)%%"/( , /*$+#(%*() $*)&  
)%%"/(1.&()))&($*3 %$6* $)*()*%*(*$*()1&( $ &")1$)) )*$*&( $ &") $"+ $
# $ )*(*%()1+ $%+$)"%()1)%%"$+())1&)/%"% )*)1$%*(&(%)) %$")-%,%*#%(*$,%* (* #*%$%$6
* $+* )3 (*(, )*%%%") $"+"))(%%# $)*(+* %$1 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, )1 () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(*1$ ""(/
+&&%(*(, )1$+ " $(, )3"))(%%#+$) $"+()1+* %$"(&(%)) %$")1*("))(%%#*1.*%%!)1
  (( )= ((/%%!)1 $)*(+* %$"+&&" )='+ &#$*1(%)) %$","%&#$*1%$*(* $)*(+* %$"(, )1$+##(=,$ $
%%"3 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, ) $"+%+$)" $1**$$=+*((, )1"*(, )1(+(,$* %$(%(#)1(("
=,"+* %$(, )1*(%%"=*+$** , * )1($* $,%",#$*3 () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(* $"+)( $ &")1)) )*$*
( $ &")1+&(, )%()1(*( )1%%" )=*(+&&%(**1+&&" )1 *( ")1'+ &#$*$"&%$3$ ""(/+&&%(*(, )
 $"+%%(, )1($)&%(** %$1%%"*/1$%#&+*(/)*#+&&%(*3+ " $(, ) $"++)*% "(, )1+ " $
   $*$$1 ))1$$(/3%%"1*(1$)*(*( )* )((%# -%(!**&%(*()%(*/()B@@F6@I, ""
***&244(&%(*()3$/)3%,4 $.3&&3"))) 0* )(%#* -) *%(*/()B@@G6B@@I, ""*
**&244)%%")3$/3%,4%+*)4*4"))) 04"))) 03*#3.&$ *+(* )(%#* -) *%(*/()B@@F6B@@I, ""*
**&244)%%")3$/3%,4 )444 73*#3
                                                                   
                                    %"!&$"%                         9 )0&"!"!&$"%                 &&$&"!'%& !&
                                      '                                             "$#%D           $& %%!&%&%"$%
                                                                          "$#%
!&%'&         $%&&      "$             9                                  %!%                   %!%"$
                            182           192             1:2                 1;2                1<2                             1=2
  &                    7/;<?333      7/7=933         7/8:=33             7/8:833            7/8:9333                        7/88@333
                          17/7<?2       17/7:72         17/7=:2             17/7==2            17/7;72                         17/7;72
                           >,;@;         >,;@;           >,;@;               >,;@:              >,;;?                          87,7<?

!%                 7/>><333        7/7?:33        7/87>33             7/87>33               7/7?7                         7/7>9
                         17/8792         17/7;82        17/7<:2             17/7<;2             17/7<82                       17/7;@2
                          >,99;           >,99;          >,99;               >,99:               >,8;?                        87,7:>

 (!!($"! !&      7/;;@333       7/7>@333       7/8>=333             7/8=@333            7/8?@333                      7/8>?333
                         17/7=82        17/79:2        17/7<@2              17/7<>2             17/7<72                       17/7;<2
                          =,@>=          =,@>=          =,@>=                =,@><               =,@;7                        87,7<?

" %&"$+          7/=>9333        7/7>;33        7/8883               7/87?3              7/8773                        7/8893
                         17/7>72         17/7:=2       17/7=72              17/7<@2             17/7<92                       17/7<@2
                          >,8;<           >,8;<         >,8;<                >,8;;               >,7>8                        87,7:>

 %&"$+                7/>?<333       7/7==333       7/7?<33             7/7?<33               7/7==33                         7/7<@33
                           17/8:@2        17/7982        17/7:<2             17/7:<2               17/79@2                        17/79@2
                            =,=<=          =,=<=          =,=<=               =,=<<                 =,<?;                          87,7:>
  "&.%&$#"$&%9 %& &%"&&"+$%%#!&!% %"""!!&%&%&"'&" %/!%&$' !&%!
!&"$"$"&!!"&&$+"$/ "%!'+$"&%&!$%%&"!&$"%/"' !1;2% "$#"!&$"%,)
"' !1<2%%!&%&%"$%/ "$#"!&$"%!'$&&!'          %"$ ,, %#!,)&,%!,
   !&&!,$""+!,$"!*,!'!%/'%%! &"$ &! (!!($"! !&,!%!!"$!%,"
  %&"$+,! %&"$+/ !"' !1=2,"$!+%&'!&%)")& %%!"'&" %"$,) #'&&%&'!&4%%!%"$/ &
%!%"$%'%"$!&% &! (!!($"! !&/!%%!%"$%'%"$!&%!%," %&"$+,!
   %&"$+/ !"' !%1>2!1?2,)$#"$&%& &%"'##$!")$"'!%)&"'&'           %"&%&+$!$%%&%, "$#
!%!"!&$"%"")! 1977@2/"'%&%&!$$$"$%'%&$+%""!+$"&%&$!#$!&%%/
3%!!&&87C-33%!!&&<C-333%!!&&8C/
               Table5.LotteryEstimatesonCreditsandAttendance

                                  MeanforNonͲOffered          AllSmallSchools

                                            (1)                         (2)
                                                   PanelA.Credits
TotalCreditsperYear                    9.433                       1.369***
                                                                       (0.212)
                              N           17,867                       34,884

10+CreditsperYear                      0.556                       0.098***
                                                                       (0.020)
                              N           17,867                       34,884

11+CreditsperYear                      0.497                       0.096***
                                                                       (0.020)
                              N           17,867                       34,884

                                             PanelB.GradeRepetition
StartGrade10onͲtime                    0.741                   0.136***
                                                                   (0.025)
                                          5,049                     9,752

StartGrade11onͲtime                    0.587                       0.166***
                                                                       (0.029)
                                          4,152                         8,265

StartGrade12onͲtime                    0.523                       0.169***
                                                                       (0.041)
                                          2,581                         5,180

                                                   PanelC.Attendance
DaysAbsent                                  26.56                   Ͳ3.728***
                                                                       (1.42)
                                N           15,871                     31,298
Notes:Thistablereports2SLSestimatesofsmallschoolattendanceonmeasuresof
creditsperyearandattendance,wheretheendogenousvariableis9thgradesmall
schoolenrollmentandtheinstrumentisanindicatorforoffer.Thesampleis
restrictedtostudentsinourlotterysamplewithdemographicsandbaselinescores.
Allmodelsincludecontrolsforrisksets,demographics,andbaselinescores.Robust
standarderrorsclusteredatthestudentlevelareinparenthesisforPanelAandC.
RobuststandarderrorsarereportedforPanelB.Sinceenrollmentdataonlycovers
2005Ͳ2010,weincludeapplicantsfrom2004Ͳ2007for"StartGrade11onͲtime."For
"StartGrade12onͲtime,"weincludeapplicantsfrom2004Ͳ2006.Ifastudentisnot
matchedwiththecreditsorattendancefiles,theyaretreatedashaving0credits
and0attendance.*significantat10%;**significantat5%;***significantat1%.
                  
                                                     !
                                                                    "
                                                   + !
                                                      ,2-                 ,3-
                                                             
 %                                 1*644              1*1:4...
                                                                        ,1*142-
                                                     6'257               :':36

 %                           1*259               1*112
                                                                       ,1*133-
                                                    6'257               :':36

 % #"                           1*452             1*212...
                                                                       ,1*146-
                                                    6'257               :':36

 %% #"                 1*155              +1*11:
                                                                       ,1*124-
                                                    6'257                :':36

                                                                  
 #  ! #                          1*296               1*141
                                                                       ,1*137-
                                                    5':74               :'6:8

 #  !                        1*426             1*197...
                                                                       ,1*141-
                                                    5':74               :'6:8

 #  !!#                       1*424              1*1:1...
                                                                        ,1*142-
                                                    5':74                :'6:8
  #")#! !#"3  "##"""##"
!$#*$"%!"#!!&#!"#$###"
""!:*"#!$#"#!!#!#
""*"#$#""!%#   #"
!% #" '&$##"#$#"!% #"!
% #" *" "!"#!##"#$#"&#""!"
! !#!"#"* #!"!" 
#!""* #$#"&!#!!##!"!621!!
  #!86!! #"#* #$#"&!#!!
!#!"!621!!  !86!! #"
"* #$#"&!#!!&!##!"!621!!! 
!#!86!! #""*"$!""#$"'
! #!"'"#"##!"* $"#"#!!!!"$"#!
:#!"!! !# !#""*."##21=(.."##
6=(..."##2=*
                                      
                                             
                                                   +               
                                                            ,3-                           ,4-
                                                                 
#!!                                       2*587                       2*293..
                                                                                       ,2*24:-
                                                          6'855                         :'795

!!$!"&                                  2*4:5                        2*28;...
                                                                                        ,2*248-
                                                         6'855                           :'795

!!$! %&                                   2*59;                         2*286..
                                                                                        ,2*254-
                                                         5'962                           9'2;7

#!!4&                             2*3;8                          2*258
                                                                                        ,2*24:-
                                                         6'855                           :'795

#!!6&                             2*427                        2*282...
                                                                                        ,2*242-
                                                         6'855                           :'795

#!!6+&"                      2*357                        2*288...
                                                                                        ,2*243-
                                                         6'855                           :'795

#!!6+&#!                     2*2:9                          2*229
                                                                                        ,2*23;-
                                                         6'855                           :'795

#!!                                          2*469                         2*292..
                                                                                        ,2*24:-
                                                         6'855                           :'795

                                                                      
! !4  ! !!!                  2*465                          2*26;.
                                                                                         ,2*247-
                                                         6'855                            :'795

! !6  ! !!!                  2*379                             2*257
                                                                                           ,2*245-
                                                            5'962                           9'2;7
  ! )  !! 4   !!   !! " ! &
!!'$!" # !!  ;! !"! !
*! !4225+26!" $#$ #! ! ! 
!*/!!/ 3 !"! "!$!! !
!! ! *  ! !!$"&&
!!$"" !* !!$! %&   ! "! 6
  ! &!! 4226+27'4227+28'4228+29* " ! !
 " !;! !!  *. !!32>(.. !!7>(
... !!3>*
                                                                  Table8.LotteryResultsforSubgroups
                                                                  Gender                             Race                  Subsidized                   Baseline
                                         All
                                                           Male           Female            Black           Hispanic         Lunch         Belowmedian Abovemedian
                                         (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)                (7)               (8)
RegentsMath                           0.132***            0.049         0.183***         0.343***           0.032        0.151***           0.167***          0.110***
                                       (0.040)           (0.051)         (0.052)          (0.074)          (0.038)         (0.045)            (0.047)           (0.042)
                                  N      7,448             3,467           3,981            3,417            3,414           5,405              3,474             3,974

RegentsEnglish                          0.08              0.027         0.117**            0.073            0.115           0.113*             0.076                0.083
                                       (0.051)           (0.071)        (0.053)           (0.053)          (0.095)          (0.058)           (0.086)              (0.051)
                                  N      7,148             3,228          3,920             3,225            3,305            5,188             3,068                4,080

ReceivedaHSdiploma                  0.093***           0.072*         0.128***            0.075          0.108**         0.085**             0.074           0.109***
                                        (0.031)           (0.041)         (0.045)           (0.048)         (0.045)         (0.035)            (0.048)           (0.036)
                                  N      9,925             4,691           5,234             4,418           4,630           7,087              4,736             5,189

ReceivedaRegentsdiploma             0.101***           0.099**        0.109**             0.094          0.102***        0.104***            0.037           0.158***
                                        (0.035)           (0.045)        (0.047)            (0.058)          (0.039)         (0.038)           (0.048)           (0.040)
                                  N      9,925             4,691          5,234              4,418            4,630           7,087             4,736             5,189

Attendcollege                         0.071**            0.092**          0.064            0.073*           0.063            0.039             0.051           0.090***
                                       (0.028)            (0.037)         (0.044)           (0.043)         (0.042)          (0.034)           (0.042)           (0.035)
                                  N     8,879              4,204           4,675             3,961           4,097            6,233             4,225             4,654

Attenda4yearcollege                0.060***           0.067**         0.065*           0.068**           0.024          0.052**             0.024           0.099***
                                        (0.022)           (0.028)         (0.034)          (0.034)          (0.034)         (0.025)            (0.028)           (0.029)
                                  N      8,879             4,204           4,675            3,961            4,097           6,233              4,225             4,654

Attenda4Ͳyearpubliccollege         0.066***           0.053**        0.085**          0.082***           0.023          0.062**             0.028           0.101***
                                        (0.023)           (0.026)        (0.034)           (0.030)          (0.027)         (0.025)            (0.020)           (0.032)
                                  N      8,879             4,204          4,675             3,961            4,097           6,233              4,225             4,654
Notes:Thistablereports2SLSestimatesofsmallschoolsforsubgroupsofstudents.Thesampleisrestrictedtostudentswithbaselinescoresanddemographic
characteristics.TheendogenousvariableisyearsatsmallschoolforRegentsoutcomesandgrade9smallschoolattendanceforotheroutcomes.Allmodelsincludeyear
oftest,risksetdummies,demographiccontrols,andbaselinetestcontrols.Robuststandarderrors,clusteredonyearandschoolwhentakingtheRegentstest,andby
schoolfortheotheroutcomesareinparenthesis.*significantat10%;**significantat5%;***significantat1%.
                                                                               
                                                                                                           &"  &
                                                                                                                    !""#" 
                                                                                                       "#"                       #"%        " 
                                         !       %!!      !!&       "!      ! $"              #           !
                                          ,2-           ,3-             ,4-             ,5-              ,6-            ,7-          ,8-              ,9-             ,:-
    "!"                        1*243...       1*255...        1*347...        1*199..          1*698...       +1*213..     1*3:7...           1*122         +1*184
                                       ,1*151-        ,1*151-         ,1*184-         ,1*151-          ,1*294-        ,1*152-      ,1*1:9-          ,1*161-        ,1*175-
                                         8'559          6':23            888             572              564            399          2:8               99            6:4

    "!!                       1*191         1*199.           1*1:4         +1*12:           1*298..        +1*141        1*226...        1*367..         +1*139
                                       ,1*162-        ,1*162-         ,1*177-        ,1*183-           ,1*185-       ,1*162-        ,1*151-         ,1*1:6-        ,1*13:-
                                         8'259          6'817            874            569               551           369            292             87             672

    $ "!          1*212...       1*1:7...        1*293..          1*127            1*1:6          1*148          1*186         1*499...         1*158
                                        ,1*146-        ,1*148-         ,1*186-        ,1*16:-          ,1*257-        ,1*177-        ,1*18:-         ,1*1:3-        ,1*158-
                                         :':36          8':13            :8:            714              741            478            395             223            892

""                         1*182..         1*16:..         1*1:4.          +1*134           +1*145        1*22:          1*26:.        1*427...          1*136
                                       ,1*139-         ,1*141-         ,1*164-        ,1*163-          ,1*1:3-       ,1*188-         ,1*1:2-        ,1*1:3-         ,1*172-
                                        9'98:           7'99:            947            6:1              656           44:             395            223             863

""5&                1*171...         1*162..          1*133         1*184.            1*174         1*1:9           1*182           1*239          1*128
                                       ,1*133-         ,1*132-         ,1*157-        ,1*149-          ,1*1:1-       ,1*177-         ,1*182-         ,1*1:9-        ,1*178-
                                        9'98:           7'99:            947            6:1              656           44:             395             223            863

""5+& #          1*177...        1*171...         1*167         1*181..            1*137            1*195           1*165       1*161            1*148
                                         ,1*134-         ,1*132-        ,1*157-         ,1*145-          ,1*196-          ,1*175-         ,1*155-     ,1*1:9-          ,1*179-
                                          9'98:           7'99:           947             6:1               656             44:             395         223              863
  "!) !"  "!3  !""!!!!&"  !* !! !" ""!"#"!%"!! !  " !"!* 
#!$ !& !"!!!# "&""  &  "!#"!"""!!!# "&""  & " 
#"!*!#& "!"' !!"#!' " !'!"!"" !* #!"!"   !'#!" & !%
"" "!"!"'&! "" #"!  "!!*.!""21=(..!""6=(...!""2=*
                  Table10.ContrastsinSchoolEnvironmentforSmallSchoolCompliersfromStudentResponsesonNYCSchoolClimateSurveys
                                                                                                NonͲOffered        Offered                          Rankof
                                                                                               Compliers(Z=0) Compliers(Z=1)      Difference       Difference
                                                                                                     (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                                          PanelA.Engagement(11questions;Smallschoolsratedhigheron10outof11)
MostoftheadultsIseeatschooleverydayknowmynameorwhoIam.                               Ͳ1.00             0.45             1.45             Best
Theadultsatmyschoollookoutforme.                                                            Ͳ0.79             0.19             0.98             2nd

Myteachersinspiremetolearn.                                                                     Ͳ0.29             Ͳ0.22           0.07             10th
Myschooloffersawideenoughvarietyofclassesandactivitiestokeepmeinterestedin
                                                                                                      0.45             Ͳ0.37          Ͳ0.82            Worst
school.

                                       PanelB.SafetyandRespect(20questions;Smallschoolsratedhigheron19outof20)
Moststudentsinmyschooljustlookoutforthemselves.                                              0.87             Ͳ0.34          Ͳ1.21             Best
Thereisgangactivityatmyschool.                                                                  Ͳ0.96             0.20           1.16             2nd

ThepresenceandactionsofSchoolSafetyAgentshelptopromoteasafeandrespectful
                                                                                                     Ͳ0.32           Ͳ0.28           0.04             19th
learningenvironment.
Thereisapersonorprograminmyschooltohelpstudentsresolveconflicts.                        Ͳ0.09            Ͳ0.22           Ͳ0.13            Worst
                                      PanelC.AcademicExpectations(10questions;Smallschoolsratedhigheron9outof10)
Howoften,duringthisschoolyear,haveyourteachersaskedyoutocompleteanessayor
                                                                                                     Ͳ0.73             0.64            1.37             Best
researchprojectusingmultiplesourcesofinformation?
Studentswhogetgoodgradesinmyschoolarerespectedbyotherstudents.                           Ͳ0.66             0.10            0.76             2nd

Ineedtoworkhardtogetgoodgradesatmyschool.                                                 Ͳ0.22             Ͳ0.12           0.10              9th
Myhighschoolprovideshelpfulcounselingonhowtogetagoodjobafterhighschoolor
                                                                                                      0.00             0.09            0.09            Worst
howtogetintocollege.

                                         PanelD.Communication(5questions;Smallschoolsratedhigheron5outof5)
Inhowmanyofyourclassesduringthepasttwoweekshaveyouworkedingroupsof2to
                                                                                                  Ͳ0.90              0.14              1.04             Best
6students?
Howcomfortableareyoutakingtoteachersandotheradultsatyourschoolaproblem
                                                                                                  Ͳ0.18              0.39              0.57             2nd
youarehavinginclass?

Howcomfortableareyoutakingtoteachersandotheradultsatyourschoolabout
                                                                                                    Ͳ0.14             0.17             0.31               4th
somethingthatisbotheringyou?
InhowmanyofyourclassesduringthepasttwoweekshaveyouparticipatedinhandsͲon
                                                                                                    Ͳ0.45            Ͳ0.17             0.28              Worst
activitiessuchasscienceexperimentsorbuildingthings?
Notes:ThistablereportsdifferencesinschoolenvironmentforsmallschoolcompliersbasedonstudentanswerstoSchoolClimateSurveysfrom2007through
2009.Surveyresponsesarestandardizetomeanzeroandunitvariancewithinsurveyyearandschooltype,sothatthetypicalresponseis0.Foreachschool,we
computeanaverageofthreeyearsweightedbythenumberofrespondentsforeachquestion.Complierattributesarecomputedfollowingmethodsdescribedin
Abadie(2003),followingTable3.
                                       
                                                                                               - "        "                        
                                                                                             "#.<2/  "#.<3/   "      "
                                                                                                  .3/              .4/            .5/             .6/
                                                  '       &'!
"##$"$"#(#%#"$" "$#$
                                                                                                -2,7;            -2,29          2,74             #$
 "&#$"%$ "$#$#$%$"#,
#("*"& %$"$%##$%$&$$$
                                                                                                -2,5;             2,29          2,68             4
 "&$",

 "##& $"&$#(" "&'$$$
                                                                                               -2,25            -2,2:           -2,27            9$
#% "$(#%$",
  (#"#'%&"$($&$#"%"##$ #$%$#
                                                                                               2,45             -2,62           -2,85           "#$
$(#,

                                             #'       #$#'!
$&$(# "$(#,                                                     -2,:3            2,42              3,23             #$
"&" "(#,                                               -2,;9           -2,27              2,;4             4

"# "#" ""(#$ #$%$#"#&$#,                  -2,3;            -2,5;           -2,42            39$
 "#$#  $($# $ "$#
                                                                                               -2,29            -2,65           -2,58           "#$
"# $%"&"$,

                                            #&       #%#&!
"#$##%##$%$&$$$ "&#$"%$
                                                                                             -2,93            2,33              2,:4             #$
##,
 "#%""$$"#,                                       -2,99           -2,28              2,93             4

"#$"##$%""%%*#$"%$*####$'$
                                                                                               -2,68            -2,64           2,26             37$
"##$"&#$$##,
 " &#$###"#$#"&$!%$($$$##,             -2,44            -2,82           -2,5:           "#$

                                        ##       #"##!
 "#%$"&#"$##,                                -2,78            2,23                 2,79             #$
  (#%$#$&('$ "$#'#$%$##&,                 -2,87            -2,32                2,77             4

 "#&"%" %%$($,                          -2,57           -2,53            2,26             32$
 " #$&"'#$#"%#$(,                        -2,42           -2,4;            -2,2;           "#$
  $#+#$" "$#"##&"$"## "##$"#'"#$ $ %"&(#"4229
$"%422;, %"&("# ##"#$")$)"%$&"'$#%"&(("#$( *#$$$$( "# ##2,"
#*' %$&"$"("#'$($%""# $#"!%#$, "$$"%$#" %$'
$##".4225/*'5,
                                 
                                                 $"!
                           (!<.433"/ (!"<-45.433"/
                                        .4/                                .5/
                                                      
 #" #                        -3,357000                          -3,33<000
                                      .3,33:/                            .3,336/
                                       :)4<:                              :)4<:

 #""                       -3,3560                           -3,33<0
                                      .3,346/                           .3,338/
                                       9)<95                             9)<95

!$#                        -3,34400                          -3,337000
                                      .3,337/                            .3,335/
                                       <)749                              <)749

##                   -3,34300                           -3,33700
                                      .3,338/                            .3,335/
                                       ;)743                              ;)743

                                                        
 !                  -5,9<6000                           -:,33:000
                                      .3,69</                             .3,<6</
                                      :)4<:                               :)4<:
  #"+"#!!#"#&-"#"#" $!".5/"##"##""
"( #"#"#"!")!$###,!"#-"# 
"!# #" #$#$"!"""!",
$!!##!!"#-"#"!"!,"$""#$#"&#!"
""!"##!#"%!'!$#&#
!!#$##, $"#"#!!!!")$"#!'!"&
## #"#"#)'"!##!$#"!!#"",
0"##43?*00"##8?*000"##4?,
                                                                 TableA1.NewYorkCitySmallHighSchoolsEligiblefortheStudy
                                                                                                                                                ReasonforExclusionfromLotterySample
                                                                        Program Intermed Year Close Audit
                             School                         SchoolID     Code      iary  Opened d     ed     YearsinLotterySample    2003Ͳ04      2004Ͳ05 2005Ͳ06 2006Ͳ07 2007Ͳ08
                                  (1)                          (2)         (3)       (4)    (5)  (6)   (7)               (8)                (9)          (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)
1    SchoolForDemocracy&Leadership                        K533        K01J       NV    2004             0708                        nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery
2    SchoolForDemocracy&Leadership                        K533        K01X       NV    2004             0506                        nolottery   nolottery            nolottery nolottery
3    BrooklynSecondarySchoolforCollaborativeStudies      K448        K03R       OB    2005             0506,0607                   notopen     nolottery                       nolottery
4    SchoolforHumanRights/AmnestyInternational          K531        K04X       NV    2004                                         nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
5    HSforYouth&CommunityDevelopmentatErasmus          K537        K06A       NV    2004                                         nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
6    HSforYouth&CommunityDevelopmentatErasmus          K537        K06X       NV    2004             0405                        nolottery              nolottery nolottery nolottery
7    BrooklynPreparatoryHighSchool                         K488        K07X       ISA   2004             0405,0506,0607              nolottery                                    nolottery
8    UASchoolforLaw&Justice                              K483        K08X     NV,UA   2004             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                       nolottery
9    WilliamsburgHighSchoolforArchitecture&Design       K558        K09X       NV    2004             0405,0506                   nolottery                         nolottery nolottery
10   JuanMorelCamposSecondarySchool                       K071        K11X     Other   2004             0708                        nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery
11   FoundationsAcademy                                      K322        K18R       ISA   2005         Y                               notopen     nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
12   HighSchoolforService&LearningatErasmus            K539        K30X       NV    2004                                         nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
13   HighSchoolforGlobalCitizenship                       K528        K32A       NV    2004                                         nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
14   FrederickDouglassAcademyIVSecondarySchool           K393        K33R      Rep    2005             0506,0607                   notopen     nolottery                       nolottery
15   BushwickLeaders'HSforAcademicExcellence             K556        K36A     Other   2004             0405                        nolottery              nolottery nolottery nolottery
16   WilliamsburgPrep                                        K561        K39X       NV    2004             0506,0607                   screened     screened                         nolottery
17   BrooklynAcademyofScience&theEnvironment            K547        K41A       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                       nolottery
18   InternationalArtsBusinessSchool                       K544        K44A       NV    2003   Y         0405,0506,0607              nolottery                                    nolottery
19   InternationalArtsBusinessSchool                       K544        K44B       NV    2003   Y         0405,0506,0607              nolottery                                    nolottery
20   InternationalArtsBusinessSchool                       K544        K44C       NV    2003   Y         0405,0506                   nolottery                         nolottery nolottery
21   UANewYorkHarborSchool                                K551        K51A     NV,UA   2003             0405,0506                   nolottery                         nolottery nolottery
22   AcademyofUrbanPlanning                                K552        K52A       NV    2003             0405                        nolottery              nolottery nolottery nolottery
23   BushwickSchoolforSocialJustice                       K549        K54A     NV,ISA  2003         Y 0304,0405                                             nolottery nolottery nolottery
24   AllCityLeadershipSecondarySchool                     K554        K55A       NV    2003             0405,0506,0607              nolottery                                    nolottery
25   PerformingArts&TechHS                                K507        K61X       NV    2004             0506,0607                   nolottery   nolottery                       nolottery
26   FDNYHSForFire&LifeSafety                           K502        K62X       NV    2004             0607,0708                   nolottery   nolottery nolottery
27   HSforCivilRights                                      K504        K63X       NV    2004                                         nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
28   HSForPublicService:HeroesofTomorrow                K546        K64A       NV    2003                                         nolottery   screened screened screened screened
29   WorldAcademyforTotalCommunityHealthHS              K510        K65X       NV    2004                                         nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
30   FrederickDouglassAcademyVIIHS                        K514        K80X      Rep    2004             0506,0607                   nolottery   nolottery                       nolottery
31   BrooklynCollegiate:ACollegeBoardSchool              K493        K93X       CB    2004             0405,0506,0607,0708         nolottery
32   HSforSportsManagement                                 K348        K97R     Other   2005         Y 0506                          notopen     nolottery              nolottery nolottery
33   RachelCarsonHSforCoastalStudies                     K344        L01R     Other   2005         Y                               notopen     screened     nolottery nolottery nolottery
34   UrbanAssemblyHSofMusic&Art                         K350        L02R       UA    2005             0506,0607                   notopen     nolottery                         nolottery
35   AcademyforCollegePreparation&CareerExploration     K382        L21A       CB    2006                                         notopen     notopen     nolottery nolottery nolottery
36   AcademyforYoungWriters                                K404        L22A       ISA   2006             0607,0708                   notopen     notopen     nolottery
37   AcademyforEnvironmentalLeadership                     K403        L23A       NV    2006                                         notopen     notopen     nolottery nolottery nolottery
                                                                TableA1.NewYorkCitySmallHighSchoolsEligiblefortheStudy
                                                                                                                                               ReasonforExclusionfromLotterySample
                                                                       Program Intermed Year Close Audit
                             School                        SchoolID     Code      iary  Opened d     ed     YearsinLotterySample    2003Ͳ04      2004Ͳ05      2005Ͳ06      2006Ͳ07      2007Ͳ08
                                   (1)                        (2)         (3)       (4)    (5)  (6)   (7)               (8)                (9)          (10)         (11)        (12)          (13)
38   AcademyofHospitality&Tourism                        K408        L24A    NV,Acad 2006              0607                        notopen     notopen     nolottery                nolottery
39   BrooklynCommunityArts&MediaHighSchool             K412        L25A       ISA   2006             0607                        notopen     notopen     nolottery                nolottery
40   GreenSchool:AnAcademyForEnvironmentalCareers      K454        L27A       NV    2006                                         notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery   nolottery
41   AgnesY.HumphreySchoolForLeadership                 K027        L28A       NV    2006   Y                                     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery   nolottery
42   Arts&MediaPreparatoryAcademy                        K589        L31A       ISA   2007                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery
43   ExpeditionaryLearningSchoolforCommunityLeaders     K572        L34A       OB    2007                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery
44   ItTakesAVillageAcademy                              K563        L36A     Other   2007                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery
45   KurtHahnExpeditionaryLearningSchool                 K569        L37A       OB    2007                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery
46   LifeAcademyHSforFilm&Music                        K559        L38A       ISA   2007                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery
47   LyonsCommunitySchool                                  K586        L39A       NV    2007                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery
48   VictoryCollegiateHS                                   K576        L41A       ISA   2007                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery
49   AcademyforSocialAction:ACollegeBoardSchool       M367       M01A        CB    2007                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery
50   FacingHistorySchool                                   M303       M02R        NV    2005             0506                        notopen     nolottery                nolottery   nolottery
51   UrbanAssemblySchoolforthePerformingArts           M369       M04A        UA    2008             0708                        notopen     notopen     notopen     notopen
52   LowerManhattanArtsAcademy(Loma)                     M308       M05R      Other   2005             0506,0607,0708              notopen     nolottery
53   CommunityHealthAcademyoftheHeights                 M346       M07A        NV    2008             0708                        notopen     notopen     notopen     notopen
54   JamesBaldwin:ASchoolforExpeditionaryLearning      M313       M08R        OB    2005   Y         0506,0607                   notopen     nolottery                         nolottery
55   ManhattanTheatreLabSchool                            M283       M09X        NV    2004   Y         0405,0506                   nolottery                           nolottery nolottery
56   HSforArts,Imagination,&Inquiry                     M299       M11R        NV    2005             0506,0607                   notopen     nolottery                         nolottery
57   UrbanAssemblySchoolforMediaStudies                 M307       M22X      NV,UA   2004             0405                        nolottery                nolottery nolottery nolottery
58   Food&FinanceHS                                       M288       M34X        NV    2004             0304,0607,0708                         nolottery     nolottery
59   HSofHospitalityManagement                            M296       M36X     NV,Acad 2004              0506,0607                   nolottery nolottery                           nolottery
60   EssexStreetAcademy                                    M294       M37X        NV    2004             0405,0607,0708              nolottery                nolottery
61   PACEHS                                                 M298       M38X        NV    2004         Y 0304,0506,0607                           nolottery                           nolottery
62   FrederickDouglasAcademyII                            M860       M39A     NV,Rep   2002             0304                                   nolottery     nolottery screened screened
63   UrbanAssemblySchoolofDesign&Construction          M300       M44X      NV,UA   2004             0405,0506,0607              nolottery                                      nolottery
64   HenryStreetSchoolforInternationalStudies           M292       M46X       Rep    2004             0405,0506                   nolottery                           nolottery nolottery
65   MottHallHS                                            M304       M49X       Rep    2004             0405,0506,0607,0708         nolottery
66   NewDesignHS                                           M543       M53A      Other   2003                                         nolottery screened       screened screened     screened
67   UrbanAssemblySchoolofBusinessforYoungWomen       M316       M63R        UA    2005             0607                        notopen screened         nolottery            nolottery
68   UrbanAssemblyAcademyofGovernment&Law              M305       M65R        UA    2005             0506,0607                   notopen nolottery                             nolottery
69   WashingtonHeightsExpeditionaryLearningSchool        M348       M88A        OB    2008                                         notopen notopen         notopen notopen nolottery
70   QueensPreparatoryAcademy                              Q248       Q04R        ISA   2005                                         notopen nolottery       nolottery nolottery nolottery
71   HSofAppliedCommunication                             Q267       Q07R      Other   2005             0506,0607                   notopen nolottery                             nolottery
72   AcademyofFinance&Enterprise                         Q264       Q08R       Acad   2005             0506,0607                   notopen nolottery                             nolottery
73   PathwaysCollegePreparatorySchool                     Q259       Q09R        CB    2005                                         notopen nolottery       nolottery nolottery nolottery
74   HillcrestHS                                            Q505        Q24Z       NV    2004         Y 0405                          nolottery                nolottery nolottery nolottery
                                                                        TableA1.NewYorkCitySmallHighSchoolsEligiblefortheStudy
                                                                                                                                                       ReasonforExclusionfromLotterySample
                                                                               Program Intermed Year Close Audit
                                School                             SchoolID     Code      iary  Opened d     ed     YearsinLotterySample    2003Ͳ04      2004Ͳ05      2005Ͳ06 2006Ͳ07 2007Ͳ08
                                    (1)                               (2)         (3)       (4)    (5)  (6)   (7)               (8)               (9)          (10)          (11)       (12)       (13)
75    ExcelsiorPreparatoryHS                                       Q265       Q42X        ISA   2004             0304,0405                                             nolottery nolottery nolottery
76    GeorgeWashingtonCarverHighSchoolForTheSciences          Q272       Q45A      Other   2004             0405,0506,0607,0708         nolottery
77    GeorgeWashingtonCarverHighSchoolForTheSciences          Q272       Q45C      Other   2004             0405                        nolottery                nolottery   nolottery nolottery
78    FrederickDouglassAcademyVIHS                               Q260       Q75X       Rep    2004                                         nolottery   nolottery   nolottery   nolottery nolottery
79    CivicLeadershipAcademy                                       Q293       Q76A        NV    2008                                         notopen     notopen     notopen     notopen nolottery
80    CypressHillsCollegiatePreparatory                           Q279       Q81A        NV    2006             0607,0708                   notopen     notopen     nolottery
81    EastͲWestSchoolofInternationalStudies                      Q281       Q82A        NV    2006                                         notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery nolottery
82    PreparatoryAcademyforWriters                                Q283       Q84A        CB    2006         Y                               notopen     notopen     nolottery   nolottery nolottery
83    WorldJournalismPreparatory                                   Q285       Q85A        CB    2006             0607                        notopen     notopen     nolottery              nolottery
84    YoungWomen'sLeadershipSchool,QueensCampus                 Q896       Q89A        NV    2007             0607                        notopen     notopen     notopen                nolottery
85    ChannelViewSchoolforResearch                               Q262       Q97X      NV,OB   2004             0607,0708                   nolottery   nolottery   nolottery
86    CSIHSforInternationalStudies                               R047        R01R     Other   2005             0405,0506,0607              notopen                                          nolottery
87    HSofComputers&Technology                                   X275        X01X       NV    2004         Y 0304,0405,0506,0607,0708
88    AcademyforScholarship&Entrepreneurship                     X270        X02R       CB    2005         Y 0506,0607                     notopen     nolottery                           nolottery
89    EximiusCollegePreparatoryAcademy                            X250        X03R       CB    2005             0506                        notopen     nolottery                nolottery nolottery
90    MottHallBronxHS                                             X252        X04R    NV,Rep   2005             0607,0708                   notopen     nolottery   nolottery
91    BronxCenterforScience&Mathematics                         X260        X05R    NV,Rep   2005             0506,0607                   notopen     nolottery                         nolottery
92    LeadershipInstitute                                           X276        X06R       NV    2005                                         notopen     nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery
93    ValidusPreparatoryAcademy                                    X263        X07R       OB    2005             0607                        notopen     nolottery   nolottery            nolottery
94    ExplorationsAcademy                                           X251        X08R       ISA   2005         Y                               notopen     nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery
95    SouthBronxPreparatory                                        X221        X11X       CB    2004             0405,0506                   nolottery                           nolottery nolottery
96    ColumbusInstituteOfMathAndScience/CollegiateInstitute X415         X12Z       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                         nolottery
97    AstorCollegiateAcademy                                       X299        X17A       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607,0708
98    UAAcademyforHistory&CitizenshipforYoungMen             X239        X21X     NV,UA   2004   Y                                     screened     screened     nolottery nolottery nolottery
99    BronxAcademyofHealthCareers                                X290        X22A       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                         nolottery
100   UABronxAcademyofLetters                                    X551        X27A     NV,UA   2003             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                         nolottery
101   BronxSchoolofLaw&Finance                                  X284        X28A    NV,Acad 2003              0304,0405,0506,0607                                                         nolottery
102   CollegiateInstituteforMath&Science                        X288        X29J       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607,0708
103   BronxAerospaceAcademy                                        X545        X30A       NV    2002         Y 0304,0506,0607,0708                      nolottery
104   UrbanAssemblySchoolForCareersInSports                    X548        X31A     NV,UA   2002             0304,0506,0607                         nolottery                             nolottery
105   BronxGuild                                                    X452        X32A       NV    2002             0506                        nolottery nolottery            nolottery       nolottery
106   HighSchoolForTeachingAndTheProfessions                   X433        X34A       NV    2002             0405,0607                   nolottery            nolottery                  nolottery
107   BronxHSfortheVisualArts                                   X418        X35A       NV    2002             0304,0506,0607,0708                    nolottery
108   BronxLeadershipAcademyIIHS                                 X527        X37A       NV    2002                                         nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery       nolottery
109   BronxTheatreHS                                               X546        X38A       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                           nolottery
110   BronxTheatreHS                                               X546        X38B       NV    2003             0405,0506,0607,0708         nolottery
111   DiscoveryHS                                                   X549        X39A       NV    2003         Y 0405,0506,0607                nolottery                                        nolottery
                                                                        TableA1.NewYorkCitySmallHighSchoolsEligiblefortheStudy
                                                                                                                                                       ReasonforExclusionfromLotterySample
                                                                               Program Intermed Year Close Audit
                               School                              SchoolID     Code      iary  Opened d     ed     YearsinLotterySample    2003Ͳ04      2004Ͳ05    2005Ͳ06    2006Ͳ07 2007Ͳ08
                                    (1)                               (2)         (3)       (4)    (5)  (6)   (7)               (8)                (9)         (10)       (11)        (12)       (13)
112   GlobalEnterpriseAcademy                                      X541        X40A       NV    2003   Y         0405,0506                   nolottery                         nolottery nolottery
113   HighSchoolForViolinAndDance                               X543        X41A     Other   2004             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                       nolottery
114   MottHavenVillagePreparatoryHS                              X473        X44A       NV    2002             0304,0405,0506                                                 nolottery nolottery
115   MottHavenVillagePreparatoryHS                              X473        X44X       NV    2007             0607,0708                   notopen     notopen   notopen
116   PelhamPreparatoryAcademy                                     X542        X45A       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                     nolottery
117   SchoolForExcellence                                          X404        X46A     NV,ISA  2002             0405                        nolottery            nolottery nolottery nolottery
118   CommunitySchoolforSocialJustice                            X427        X47A       NV    2002             0304,0405,0607                                    nolottery            nolottery
119   HSforContemporaryArts                                       X544        X48A       NV    2003             0405                        nolottery            nolottery nolottery nolottery
120   HSforContemporaryArts                                       X544        X48B       NV    2003             0405                        nolottery            nolottery nolottery nolottery
121   NewExplorersHS                                               X547        X49A       NV    2002             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                     nolottery
122   SchoolforCommunityResearch&Learning                       X540        X50A       NV    2003   Y                                     nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
123   BronxExpeditionaryLearningHS/CollegiateAcademy           X227        X58X       OB    2004   Y         0506                        nolottery nolottery            nolottery nolottery
124   WestBronxAcademyfortheFuture                              X243        X59X       NV    2004             0405                        nolottery            nolottery nolottery nolottery
125   BronxEngineering&TechAcademy                               X213        X61X    NV,Acad 2004          Y 0405,0506,0607                nolottery                                  nolottery
126   M.CurieHSforNursing,Med.,&AlliedHealthProfessions     X237        X62X       NV    2004             0405,0506,0607,0708         nolottery
127   FrederickDouglasAcademyIII                                  X517        X63X      Rep    2004             0506,0607,0708              nolottery nolottery
128   BronxLaboratoryHS                                            X265        X64X       ISA   2004             0405,0607,0708              nolottery            nolottery
129   FelisaRinconDeGautierInstituteforLaw&PublicPolicy     X519        X65R     Other   2005         Y                               notopen nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
130   GatewaySchoolofEnvironmentalResearch&Technology          X295        X66A       NV    2004   Y         0304,0405                                         nolottery nolottery nolottery
131   MillenniumArtAcademy                                         X312        X72A       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607,0708
132   BronxHSforWriting&CommunicationArts                      X253        X76X       NV    2004             0405,0607                   nolottery              nolottery            nolottery
133   MetropolitanHS                                                X248        X77R      Rep    2005         Y                               notopen     nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
134   NewDayAcademy                                                X245        X79R      Rep    2005   Y                                     notopen     nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
135   MorrisAcademyforCollaborativeStudies                       X297        X81X       NV    2004                                         nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
136   BronxHSforPerformance&Stagecraft                          X262        X82X       NV    2004   Y         0405,0506,0607              nolottery                                    nolottery
137   EastBronxAcademyfortheFuture                              X271        X83X       NV    2004             0607,0708                   nolottery   nolottery nolottery
138   Peace&DiversityAcademy                                      X278        X84X       NV    2004         Y 0405,0506                     nolottery                         nolottery nolottery
139   BronxwoodPreparatoryAcademy/SportsProfessionsHS            X514        X85R     Other   2005         Y 0506,0607,0708                notopen     nolottery
140   BronxHealthSciencesHS                                       X249        X88X       NV    2004         Y 0405,0506,0607                nolottery                                    nolottery
141   PabloNerudaAcademy                                           X305        X97A     NV,ISA  2003         Y                               nolottery   nolottery nolottery nolottery nolottery
142   RenaissanceHSofMusicalTheater&Technology                 X293        X98A       NV    2003             0304,0405,0506,0607                                                       nolottery
143   EagleAcademyforYoungMen                                    X231        X99X       NV    2004             0506,0607,0708              screened     screened
144   YoungWomen'sLeadershipSchool,Bronx
                                                                     X282       Y01T        NV      2006                 0506,0607             notopen     notopen                         nolottery
      Campus/Women'sAcademyofExcellence
145   DreamYardPreparatorySchool                                   X329       Y21A       NV       2006                                       notopen     notopen   nolottery nolottery nolottery
146   HolcombeL.RuckerSchoolofCommunityResearch                X332       Y22A       ISA      2006                                       notopen     notopen   nolottery nolottery nolottery
147   InternationalSchoolforLiberalArts                          X342       Y24A      Other     2006                 0607,0708             notopen     notopen   nolottery
                                                                           TableA1.NewYorkCitySmallHighSchoolsEligiblefortheStudy
                                                                                                                                                                       ReasonforExclusionfromLotterySample
                                                                                 Program Intermed Year Close Audit
                                School                              SchoolID      Code        iary   Opened d           ed        YearsinLotterySample     2003Ͳ04 2004Ͳ05 2005Ͳ06 2006Ͳ07 2007Ͳ08
                                     (1)                                (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)    (6)     (7)                  (8)                  (9)          (10)       (11)         (12)         (13)
148 UrbanAssemblySchoolforthePerformingArts                     X336         Y25A         UA      2006                   0607                           notopen notopen nolottery                      nolottery
149 UrbanAssemblySchoolforAppliedMath&Science                  X241         Y29A       NV,UA     2007                   0607,0708                      notopen notopen notopen
150 Knowledge&PowerPrep.AcademyInternationalHS                  X374         Y32A       NV,Rep    2007                                                  notopen notopen notopen nolottery nolottery
151 BronxLatin                                                       X267         Y35A         NV      2007                                                  notopen notopen notopen nolottery nolottery
Notes.ListofeligiblesmallhighschoolprogramscomesfromtheNYCSupplementaryHighSchoolDirectoryfrom2004,2005,and2006;the2005NYCDOEGuidetoSmallSchools;NewVisionsAnnualReports
from2005,2007,2008,2010;SchoolintermediarywebsiteslistedinFoley(2010);andthelistofSmallSchoolsinBloom,Thompson,andUtterman(2010).Aschooliseligibleifitopenedbetween2002and2008
andisunscreenedorlimitedunscreenedforatleastoneyear.Tobeinthelotterystudy,aprogramattheschoolmustbeasetofapplicantswhoaresubjecttoarationingbytherandomnumber.Abbreviations
ofintermediaryorganizationsareasfollows:NV=NewVisions,UA=UrbanAssembly,Rep=Replications,Acad=NYCAcademies,ISA=InstituteforStudentAchievement,CB=CollegeBoard,OB=Outward
Bound,andOtheraretheremainingschools.Aschoolprogramisexcludedfromthelotterysampleifitiseither1)notopened,2)screened,3)withoutavalidlottery,or4)doesnotinvolverationing.Schools
withoutavalidlotteryarethoseforwhomtheirrecordsdonotmakeclearwhichapplicantswererationed,ifany.Aschoolmaynotberationediftherearenotmoreapplicantsthanseatsinthelastpriority
grouptoobtainanassignment,ortheschoolisnotrankedinthemainroundoftheHSmatch.Aschoolisclosedifitisnotlistedinthe2012Ͳ13HSDirectory.Thelistofauditedschoolsiscontainedinthe
AuditorGeneral'sHighSchoolAcademicDataReport(Fleischer2012).
                                                   TableA2.LotteryInformationatNYCSmallHighSchools
                                                                                                       Numberof                                   Average
                                                                                        Numberof      applicants                                 yearsat
                               Enrollment Numberof Numberof                       schoolswith rankingalotto                               schools
               Calendaryears   Grades   applicantsto students     Numberof        avalid   smallschoolas   Percent       Percent     (among
LotteryCohort    observed      observed smallschools everenrolled      schools         lottery      firstchoice     offered       attended      offered)
      (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)             (7)              (8)          (9)            (10)         (11)
                                                            PanelA.AllSmall High Schools
  2003Ͳ2004      2004Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        21442         7713             90             26              7204         0.10           0.28          1.21
  2004Ͳ2005      2005Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        34235        10020            118             57              9434         0.10           0.53          1.64
  2005Ͳ2006      2006Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        33615        11360            134             68              9052         0.11           0.61          1.49
  2006Ͳ2007      2007Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        34599        12520            147             75              8450         0.19           0.76          1.00
  2007Ͳ2008      2008Ͳ2010        9Ͳ11        35287        12312            151             31              3664         0.17           0.73          0.82
                                                                  PanelB.NewVisions
  2003Ͳ2004      2004Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        19515         6192             73             24              1034         0.68           0.31          1.17
  2004Ͳ2005      2005Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        30101         6656             78             45              1666         0.46           0.43          1.47
  2005Ͳ2006      2006Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        27995         7345             86             45              1822         0.40           0.41          1.48
  2006Ͳ2007      2007Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        28330         8021             92             49              2398         0.46           0.46          0.97
  2007Ͳ2008      2008Ͳ2010        9Ͳ11        28780         7805             94             20              1221         0.29           0.27          0.80
                                                                PanelC.UrbanAssembly
  2003Ͳ2004      2004Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12         4606          562             7               3               145         0.66           0.34          1.19
  2004Ͳ2005      2005Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12         7886          821            10               5               250         0.68           0.68          2.00
  2005Ͳ2006      2006Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        8251           913            11               7               261         0.73           0.59          1.35
  2006Ͳ2007      2007Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        7048          1000            12               9               311         0.76           0.59          0.73
  2007Ͳ2008      2008Ͳ2010        9Ͳ11        7306           966            13               2                24         0.58           0.67          1.00
                                                                  PanelD.Replications
  2003Ͳ2004      2004Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12          772          487             6               1                13         0.62           0.46          1.00
  2004Ͳ2005      2005Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        5124           974            11               2                37         0.51           0.57          2.89
  2005Ͳ2006      2006Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        5886          1029            11               6               185         0.45           0.46          1.61
  2006Ͳ2007      2007Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        6165          1115            12               6               294         0.67           0.69          1.06
  2007Ͳ2008      2008Ͳ2010        9Ͳ11        6551          1030            12               3                85         0.89           0.80          0.89
                                                                 PanelE.NYCAcademies
  2003Ͳ2004      2004Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        2780           196             3               1                87          0.45          0.02          0.00
  2004Ͳ2005      2005Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        4969           305             4               2               163          0.11          0.22          0.17
  2005Ͳ2006      2006Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        4411           376             5               4               192          0.18          0.21          1.29
  2006Ͳ2007      2007Ͳ2010        9Ͳ12        4323           387             5               5               209          0.49          0.36          0.64
  2007Ͳ2008      2008Ͳ2010        9Ͳ11        4046           388             5               0             .    .    .    .
                                                       TableA2.LotteryInformationatNYCSmallHighSchools
                                                                                                              Numberof                                      Average
                                                                                              Numberof       applicants                                    yearsat
                                  Enrollment Numberof Numberof                          schoolswith rankingalotto                                   schools
                 Calendaryears     Grades   applicantsto students         Numberof      avalid    smallschoolas      Percent      Percent      (among
LotteryCohort       observed      observed smallschools everenrolled           schools       lottery       firstchoice        offered      attended       offered)
      (1)               (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)           (7)               (8)              (9)           (10)         (11)
                                                             PanelF.InstituteforStudentAchievement
  2003Ͳ2004         2004Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         3151           507                6             2                 30             0.57           0.53         1.88
  2004Ͳ2005         2005Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         4626           754                9             5                 94             0.69           0.63         1.28
  2005Ͳ2006         2006Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         4390           995               12             1                 19             0.95           0.79         1.39
  2006Ͳ2007         2007Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         5938           1238              15             4                115             0.79           0.71         1.35
  2007Ͳ2008         2008Ͳ2010         9Ͳ11         6249           1150              15             2                121             0.84           0.69         0.81
                                                                       PanelG.CollegeBoard
  2003Ͳ2004         2004Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12          300           154                2             0              .       .     .   .
  2004Ͳ2005         2005Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         2042           368                5             2                 39             0.54           0.51         2.05
  2005Ͳ2006         2006Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         2821            580               8             4                106             0.38           0.47         1.55
  2006Ͳ2007         2007Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         3223           667                9             3                125             0.44           0.46         0.87
  2007Ͳ2008         2008Ͳ2010         9Ͳ11         3813           707                9             1                 23             0.61           0.57         0.93
                                                                      PanelH.OutwardBound
  2003Ͳ2004         2004Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12          262           180                2             0              .       .     .   .
  2004Ͳ2005         2005Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         1406            428               5             0              .       .     .   .
  2005Ͳ2006         2006Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         1972           434                5             3                 28             0.68           0.54         1.26
  2006Ͳ2007         2007Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         2214           492                7             4                 68             0.71           0.60         1.02
  2007Ͳ2008         2008Ͳ2010         9Ͳ11         2914            575               8             1                 23             0.43           0.35         0.80
                                                                  Panel I .AllOtherSmallSchools
  2003Ͳ2004         2004Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         2999            585               6             1                 29             0.52           0.55         3.13
  2004Ͳ2005         2005Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         5564           1075              13             5                157             0.80           0.73         2.34
  2005Ͳ2006         2006Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         7054           1125              14             7                234             0.39           0.33         1.47
  2006Ͳ2007         2007Ͳ2010         9Ͳ12         7290           1252              15             7                252             0.47           0.47         1.04
  2007Ͳ2008         2008Ͳ2010         9Ͳ11         8443           1298              15             5                138             0.80           0.67         0.83
Notes:Tablereportsthenumberofschoolsandoversubscriptionratesateligiblesmallhighschools.Column(4)isrestrictedto8thgradersinNewYorkCitypublic
                                   
                                                    %%#% #%$
                           #%   /
                                                                 #!$B
                              #(%  #!$
                                                                $ #$
                               %$
%$&%
                                 061                071                081
  %                           5.<6<              5.56;              5.56;
                                                  05.5661            05.5661
                                8+=5>             65+759             65+5:=

$                         5.;=9             5.57822           5.57:22
                                                   05.5661           05.5661
                                8+;89              65+759            65+58<

 ''# %              5.;::             5.599222          5.59;222
                                                   05.5661           05.5661
                                8+9=7              65+759            65+5:=

 $% #*                  5.;<7             5.57<22           5.57>22
                                                   05.5661           05.5661
                                8+:;>              65+759            65+58<

$% #*                      5.;6;             5.599222           5.59;222
                                                   05.5671            05.5671
                                 8+7<:             65+759             65+58<
   %$-#! #%$ %$# ##$$ $ % #'#
"&% 6% &% %$%$ #$ /$$  #. $ #
 &$071081&#$/$% %# $ #!'#$. 
 &081+($%$%$ #$$ %# $.$!&$
 %%#*!#%!%$ #( ()!%%  $#'  (/&!$ #$. &$%
$%### #$!#%$$.2$%%65A,22$%%:A,222
$%%6A
                                                                           
                                                                                                                 "  !
                                                                                                                          !""#" 
                                                                                                   "#"                  #"% 
                             ,         !            %!!    !!'      "!   !     $"       #             "
                                 -3.             -4.                 -5.            -6.           -7.           -8.            -9.          -:.          -;.                -32.
                          2+859         2+354///             2+336///       2+348//        2+275         ,2+297         2+2;8                                       2+2;3//
                                                                                                                                         !" !"
                                              -2+24:.              -2+254.       -2+274.       -2+266.       -2+398.        -2+295.                                       -2+258.
                                                                                                                                           !        !
                               6(;85          ;(7;9                9(8:3          ;7;           79:           828             583                                          954

   ! -&.              329+2:5          2+9;8                2+666       8+326///        4+96;          4+85:        ;+927///                                       2+28:
                                                                                                                                           !"    !"
" !                                  -3+294.              -3+426.       -4+52:.       -4+328.        -6+2:9.        -4+;9:.                                      -2+;78.
                                                                                                                                             !          !
                               5(384          8(647                7(322          8:2           63:            59;            479                                          734

                           2+565          2+239               2+284/       2+474///      ,2+367///        2+232          2+393/                                     ,2+457///
                                                                                                                                           !"    !"
                                              -2+25;.              -2+254.       -2+285.        -2+275.       -2+337.         -2+2;2.                                      -2+2:3.
                                                                                                                                             !          !
                               6(;85          ;(7;9                9(8:3          ;7;            79:           828             583                                          954

    -&.               33;6+687        ,37+977              ,2+::6        54+767         58+885         36+369         ,42+94:                                      ,57+64:
                                                                                                                                           !"    !"
" !                                 -38+268.             -39+9;2.      -54+937.       -55+456.       -78+837.       -64+463.                                     -4;+444.
                                                                                                                                             !          !
                               3(924          5(779                4(:9;         6:7            43;            422             377                                          469

 ' &                2+2::           2+225                2+238         2+34;///         ,2+225         2+35;        ,2+255                                       ,2+275/
                                                                                                                                            !" !"
                                               -2+23;.              -2+243.         -2+267.        -2+257.        -2+2;4.      -2+26:.                                       -2+24;.
                                                                                                                                                !         !
                                6(;85          ;(7;9                9(8:3            ;7;            79:            828          583                                           954
"!*   "!4  !""!!!"" #"!+ #!$ !"   ;!! "+ 
!" #"!"  " "!!+!#' "!"( !!"#!( " !(!"!"" !+  
  ! !  ""&#!   "" !+ #!"!"   !#!" ;" !   " "!!+/!""32>)//!""
7>)///!""3>+
                                       
                                                                                                %#&" ()* $*(# ( )

                                                                 - ) %$)             ($))#"/                   &" * %$)               # )

                                                        %*5(                  %*5(                  %*5(                 %*5(
                                                                    (7G>8                 (7G>8               (7G>8               (7G>8
                                                          7G=8                        7G=8                        7G=8                       7G=8
                                                           7>8           7?8            7@8            7A8           7B8           7C8           7D8           7E8
                                                                                                     
$(%""*)#"")%%")                                 =3>D          >3==         =3AC          >3==         =3@D         >3==          =3B>         >3==

$(%"" $ $**$                                     =3?A          =3>F         =3>F         =3>C          =3?E          =3??         =3?B         =3?D
$(%"" $(%$.                                         =3B>          =3BF         =3@?         =3@A          =3BC          =3C=         =3AB         =3@D
$(%"" $(%%!"/$                                      =3>D          =3>E         =3AB         =3B=          =3>F          =3>E         =3=@         =3==
$(%"" $+$)                                        =3=D          =3=B         =3=B         =3==          =3==          =3==         =3@A         =3@B
$(%"" $**$ )"$                                 =3=>          =3==         =3==         =3==          =3==          =3==         =3==         =3==

                                                                                                    
 (*(, )*%%%"                                >A1AF>         >@1E=>        >A1=?C         >@1D?@       >A1A@F         >?1F=F         >C1@F>        >A1AFB
"))(%%#+$)                                           D1F@E          D1B?=         D1D=?          D1@=B        D1E>A          D1?A?          E1A>F         D1B??
()                                               C1A>=          C1=D@         C1?EC          B1E@@        C1@CF          B1C?E          C1CCA         C1>@?
 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, )                            ?1?B?          ?1=AC         ?1=D=          ?1>>F        ?1>?=          >1E??          @1=D>         >1B=>
  () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(*                       >1FFA          >1FC@         ?1=FB          >1F?C        ?1=E@          >1D@?          ?1=AF         ?1=C?
$ ""(/+&&%(*                                          E@E            F=>           DAC            EDA          EAB            EF=            FD=           EA@
+ " $(, )                                         >1@EC          >1?EB         >1@?C          >1@F=        >1AED          >1>@D          >1DEA         ?1B==

                                                                                                     
 +#(%(F*+$*)                                 DF=           >D@          B>D          >=C          AE>          >@>            EE@         >@B
 +#(%(F5>?*+$*)                             >1FBB           AEA          >1@@B          @>A          >1@>>          @>A            ?1>BD         @>B

,($" )")) 0                                 ?C            ?B           ?B           ?A            ?D            ?E           ?A           ?A
,( *")) 0                                    ?B            ?A           ?B           ?@            ?D            ?D           ?B           ?A

%*" +#(%%(")))+*                        @EE            >=F          ?D@            CC            ?C?             DF           @EA            DD
%*" +#(%()                                   >>D             @A           E?            ?A             E?             ?C           >?E            ?A
($*%()- *-(*$(()%
                                                           >E             @=            >E            @C             ?C             AB            >B            @?
 $.&( $
($*%()- * )*(9)(&"+)@=
                                                           @F             ?F            @F            ?@             @C             ?>            AB            ?E
 %+()%(%*%(*
($*%()- * %"  $
                                                           >C             >B            >@            ?>             >E             >F            >E            >A
(*  *
(+($%,(*                                      ?>             ?E            ?>            ?B             ?A             @>            ?F            @>

 +#(%+""5* #)) )*$*( $ &")                   B                  >          A             >             @                  =         C              >
 +#(%+""5* # %$5 $*                     >>                 @          E             >             D                  ?         >@             >

                                                                                                       
)" $( $ $ *                                5=3@@         5=3>@        5=3@>       5=3=@       5=3?>            =3>>         5=3A?        5=3=C
)" $( $ $$" )                             5=3@@         5=3>=        5=3@>       5=3=?       5=3?=            =3>B         5=3AF        5=3>@

(%&%(* %$"!%( )&$                                =3F>          =3F>         =3F@         =3FC          =3FA          =3FB         =3EF         =3EB
(%&%(* %$+)  0 +$                               =3CF          =3D?         =3DA         =3DF          =3DA          =3DB         =3CB         =3CD
(%&%(* %$#"                                         =3AA          =3AC         =3AA         =3A@          =3B=          =3B?         =3A>         =3AE
(%&%(* %$& "+* %$                              =3>>          =3=F         =3=F         =3=C          =3=E          =3=C         =3>A         =3=C
(%&%(* %$ # *$" )(%  $*                      =3>B          =3=E         =3>?         =3=D          =3>?          =3=C         =3?>         =3>@

  %*)2 )*")%-))( &* ,)** )* )%()*+$*)$%*$(%""*)#"")%%")1)#"")%%"$(%""#$*%#&" ()$%*%(# )) %$)7G=81$
$(%""#$*%#&" ()%(# )) %$)7G>83%#&" (**( +*)(%#&+*%""%- $#*%))(  $ 7?==@83)" $&(#$)((%#E*
( -%(!** *$$" )$ $+(*)*)*)%(&( $?==?5?==D3(*+($%,((* )*$+#(%*() $**)%%"/(-%-(
$%** $ $*%""%- $)%%"/( , /*$+#(%*() $*)&  )%%"/(1.&()))&($*3 %$5* $)*()*%*(
*$*()1&( $ &")1$)) )*$*&( $ &") $"+ $# $ )*(*%()1+ $%+$)"%()1)%%"$+())1&)/%"% )*)1$%*(&(%)) %$")-%,%*
#%(*$,%* (* #*%$%$5* $+* )3 (*(, )*%%%") $"+"))(%%# $)*(+* %$1 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, )1
 () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(*1$ ""(/+&&%(*(, )1$+ " $(, )3"))(%%#+$) $"+()1+* %$"(&(%)) %$")1*("))(%%#
*1.*%%!)1 (( ): ((/%%!)1 $)*(+* %$"+&&" ):'+ &#$*1(%)) %$","%&#$*1%$*(* $)*(+* %$"(, )1$+##(:,$ $
%%"3 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, ) $"+%+$)" $1**$$:+*((, )1"*(, )1(+(,$* %$(%(#)1((":,"+* %$
(, )1*(%%":*+$** , * )1($* $,%",#$*3 () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(* $"+)( $ &")1)) )*$*( $ &")1+&(, )%()1(*( )1
%%" ):*(+&&%(**1+&&" )1 *( ")1'+ &#$*$"&%$3$ ""(/+&&%(*(, ) $"+%%(, )1($)&%(** %$1%%"*/1$
%#&+*(/)*#+&&%(*3+ " $(, ) $"++)*% "(, )1+ " $  $*$$1 ))1$$(/3%%"1*(1$)*(*( )* )((%#
  -%(!**&%(*()%(*/()?==C5=F, ""***&244(&%(*()3$/)3%,4 $.3&&3"))) 0* )(%#* -) *%(*/()
?==D5?==F, ""***&244)%%")3$/3%,4%+*)4*4"))) 04"))) 03*#3.&$ *+(* )(%#* -) *%(*/()?==C5?==F, ""
***&244)%%")3$/3%,4 )444 63*#3
                                          
                                                                                                      %#&" ()* $*(# ( )
                                                                 $)* *+*%(*+$*
                                                                                                %""%(               +*-(%+$                      ""*()
                                                                     ,#$*
                                                               %*5(                  %*5(                  %*5(                  %*5(
                                                                           (7G>8                 (7G>8               (7G>8                (7G>8
                                                                 7G=8                        7G=8                        7G=8                        7G=8
                                                                  7>8           7?8            7@8            7A8           7B8           7C8            7D8           7E8
                                                                                                            
$(%""*)#"")%%")                                        =3@E          >3==         =3@B          >3==         =3@A         >3==          =3?>           >3==

$(%"" $ $**$                                            =3=F          =3==         =3=E          =3==         =3=@          =3=E         =3=E           =3=@
$(%"" $(%$.                                                =3?>          =3?A         =3@E          =3@F         =3@D          =3?E         =3@B           =3@F
$(%"" $(%%!"/$                                             =3C=          =3D?         =3@A          =3@F         =3A?          =3@A         =3=?           =3=>
$(%"" $+$)                                               =3=E          =3=B         =3?=          =3??         =3@=          =3?F         =3>=           =3>=
$(%"" $**$ )"$                                        =3==          =3==         =3==          =3==         =3=>          =3==         =3A@           =3AD

                                                                                                           
 (*(, )*%%%"                                       >@1DAA        >A1>?C         >B1>?C         >A1DCC       >B1?C@         >A1CBF         >@1AD@          >@1E=B
"))(%%#+$)                                                  D1BF@         D1CEF          E1@AE          D1DAC        E1B?>          E1>=@          D1A=C           D1A=>
()                                                      C1=EA         C1=>C          C1DE>          C1A>=        C1E=@          C1CBF          C1>>D           C1?=C
 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, )                                   ?1=?@         ?1>>B          ?1?>=          ?1>@B        ?1>E?          ?1>>D          ?1>BB           >1FBE
  () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(*                              >1EDA         ?1>?>          ?1>?@          ?1=?D        ?1=>F          >1DFC          >1DDC           ?1=E=
$ ""(/+&&%(*                                                 E>>           EAE            EDF           >1>=A         FCC           >1=@=           FD=             F>@
+ " $(, )                                                >1@C@         >1?C>          >1AE?          >1CBF        >1AF@          >1B@=          >1=EB           >1@E=

                                                                                                            
 +#(%(F*+$*)                                       @E@           >?F           B>=          >=C          ACF          >=E           D==                >>C
 +#(%(F5>?*+$*)                                   >1>C>           @@A           >1ABA          ?B>          >1?A@          ?DA           ?1>B@                ?E>

,($" )")) 0                                        ?C            ??           ?F           ?F            ?E           ?D            ?E                ?B
,( *")) 0                                           ?C            ?A           ?F           ?F            ?E           ?C            ?D                ?A

%*" +#(%%(")))+*                              ?AE             F?           ?FF             F=           ?B@            >?@           AA@                 ED
%*" +#(%()                                          CF             ?D            ED             @@            EA             A?           >?@                 ??
($*%()- *-(*$(()%
                                                                  ?A             ?B            ?B             @@            ??            @?             >E                 @A
 $.&( $
($*%()- * )*(9)(&"+)@= %+()%(
                                                                  @@             >F            @E             ?B            @E            ?A             AA                 @=
%*%(*
($*%()- * %"  $(*  *            >C             >C            >D             >B            >D            >A             >A                 >E
(+($%,(*                                             ??             ?C            ?A             @B            ??            >F             >B                 ?@

 +#(%+""5* #)) )*$*( $ &")                           @             >              A             >              @             >             B                   >
 +#(%+""5* # %$5 $*                             C             ?              D             @              E             @             >=                  >

                                                                                                               
)" $( $ $ *                                       5=3@?        5=3@B         5=3?=        5=3>C       5=3@=          5=3>C         5=3>D          5=3=D
)" $( $ $$" )                                    5=3?F        5=3?A         5=3?>        5=3=B       5=3?A          5=3=A         5=3>?          5=3=>

(%&%(* %$"!%( )&$                                       =3F@          =3FD         =3EC          =3EC         =3FD         =3EF          =3CE           =3C?
(%&%(* %$+)  0 +$                                      =3DB          =3E=         =3D?          =3D>         =3DC         =3E=          =3CC           =3CE
(%&%(* %$#"                                                =3B>          =3BC         =3B>          =3BA         =3BB         =3BC          =3B=           =3BC
(%&%(* %$& "+* %$                                     =3>=          =3=C         =3=F          =3=D         =3=E         =3=D          =3>=           =3=C
(%&%(* %$ # *$" )(%  $*                             =3>>          =3>=         =3>>          =3=B         =3=E         =3=E          =3>=           =3=E

  %*)2 )*")%-))( &* ,)** )* )%()*+$*)$%*$(%""*)#"")%%")1)#"")%%"$(%""#$*%#&" ()$%*%(# )) %$)7G=81$$(%""#$*
%#&" ()%(# )) %$)7G>83%#&" (**( +*)(%#&+*%""%- $#*%))(  $ 7?==@83)" $&(#$)((%#E*( -%(!
** *$$" )$ $+(*)*)*)%(&( $?==?5?==D3(*+($%,((* )*$+#(%*() $**)%%"/(-%-($%** $ $*
%""%- $)%%"/( , /*$+#(%*() $*)&  )%%"/(1.&()))&($*3 %$5* $)*()*%*(*$*()1&( $ &")1
$)) )*$*&( $ &") $"+ $# $ )*(*%()1+ $%+$)"%()1)%%"$+())1&)/%"% )*)1$%*(&(%)) %$")-%,%*#%(*$,%* (* #*%$%$5
* $+* )3 (*(, )*%%%") $"+"))(%%# $)*(+* %$1 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, )1 () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(*1$ ""(/+&&%(*(, )1$
+ " $(, )3"))(%%#+$) $"+()1+* %$"(&(%)) %$")1*("))(%%#*1.*%%!)1 (( ): ((/%%!)1 $)*(+* %$"+&&" ):
'+ &#$*1(%)) %$","%&#$*1%$*(* $)*(+* %$"(, )1$+##(:,$ $%%"3 $)*(+* %$"+&&%(*(, ) $"+%+$)" $1**$$:
+*((, )1"*(, )1(+(,$* %$(%(#)1((":,"+* %$(, )1*(%%":*+$** , * )1($* $,%",#$*3
 () &4+&(, ) %$4+&&%(* $"+)( $ &")1)) )*$*( $ &")1+&(, )%()1(*( )1%%" ):*(+&&%(**1+&&" )1 *( ")1'+ &#$*$
"&%$3$ ""(/+&&%(*(, ) $"+%%(, )1($)&%(** %$1%%"*/1$%#&+*(/)*#+&&%(*3+ " $(, ) $"++)*% "(, )1
+ " $  $*$$1 ))1$$(/3%%"1*(1$)*(*( )* )((%# -%(!**&%(*()%(*/()?==C5=F, ""*
**&244(&%(*()3$/)3%,4 $.3&&3"))) 0* )(%#* -) *%(*/()?==D5?==F, ""*
**&244)%%")3$/3%,4%+*)4*4"))) 04"))) 03*#3.&$ *+(* )(%#* -) *%(*/()?==C5?==F, ""*
**&244)%%")3$/3%,4 )444 63*#3
                                   TableA6.LotteryResultsbySchoolSubsamples
                                                                                                            Excluding
                                       AllSmall            Yearschoolopened            Excluding       audited
                                         Schools           2002Ͳ2005       2006Ͳ2008     closedschools      schools
                                           (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)
RegentsMath                            0.132***           0.108***         0.282**         0.135***        0.114***
                                        (0.040)            (0.040)         (0.112)          (0.036)         (0.042)
                                   N      7,448              7,024            424             7,110           6,541

RegentsEnglish                           0.080              0.073          0.081***         0.087*           0.049
                                        (0.051)            (0.051)          (0.017)         (0.048)         (0.045)
                                   N      7,148              6,761             387            6,830           6,304

TotalCredits                           1.369***           1.266***         1.037**         1.486***        1.218***
                                         (0.212)            (0.208)         (0.496)          (0.204)         (0.213)
                                   N     34,884             33022            1,862           33,228          30,400

ReceivedaHSdiploma                   0.093***           0.081***         0.137**         0.099***        0.100***
                                         (0.031)            (0.029)         (0.068)          (0.030)         (0.032)
                                   N      9,925              9,344            581             9,472           8,711

ReceivedaRegentsdiploma              0.101***           0.095***           0.064         0.107***        0.120***
                                         (0.035)            (0.033)          (0.073)         (0.033)         (0.033)
                                   N      9,925              9,344             581            9,472           8,711

Attendcollege                           0.071**            0.058**          0.135*         0.076***        0.066**
                                         (0.028)            (0.027)          (0.071)         (0.027)        (0.029)
                                   N      8,879              8,298             581            8,447          7,788

Attenda4yearcollege                 0.060***            0.049**          0.106*         0.063***        0.055**
                                         (0.022)            (0.021)          (0.061)         (0.022)        (0.023)
                                   N      8,879              8,298             581            8,447          7,788

Attenda4Ͳyearpubliccollege             0.066***           0.059***         0.077          0.074***       0.056**
                                            (0.023)            (0.022)        (0.048)          (0.022)        (0.024)
                                     N       8,879              8,298           581             8,447          7,788
Notes:Thistablereports2SLSestimatesfordifferentsetsofsmallschools.Theendogenousvariableisyearsatsmall
schoolforRegentsoutcomesandgrade9smallschoolattendanceforotheroutcomes.Thesampleisrestrictedto
studentswithbaselinescoresanddemographiccharacteristics.Allmodelsincludeyearoftest,risksetdummies,
demographiccontrols,andbaselinetestcontrols.Robuststandarderrors,clusteredonyearandschoolwhentaking
theRegentstest,andbyschoolfortheotheroutcomesareinparenthesis.ThestandarderrorofEnglishinColumn
(3)isclusteredontheyearoftest.Thelastrowreports2SLSestimatesoneffectsofenrollmentatanysmallschools
ingrade9.Robuststandarderrorsclusteredatthestudentlevelarereported.*significantat10%;**significantat
5%;***significantat1%.
                           
                                                                                                $"$        "$                        
                                                                                              "#.=3/  "#.=4/   "     "
                                                                                                    .4/             .5/            .6/            .7/
                                                   '       &'!
'(0##,                                                              -3,;4            3,59          4,3:            #$
  #("*"& %$"$%##$%$&$$$
                                                                                                  -3,6<            3,3:          3,79            5
 "&$",

  "##& $"&$#(" "&'$$$
                                                                                               -3,36             -3,3;           -3,38           :$
#% "$(#%$",
  (#"#'%&"$($&$#"%"##$ #$%$#
                                                                                                3,56             -3,73           -3,96          "#$
$(#,

                                             #'       #$#'!
$&$(# "$(#,                                                     -3,;4            3,53               4,34            #$
"&" "(#,                                               -3,<:           -3,38               3,<5            5

 "# "#" ""(#$ #$%$#"#&$#,                  -3,4<             -3,6<           -3,53           4:$
  "#$#  $($# $ "$#
                                                                                               -3,3:             -3,76           -3,69          "#$
"# $%"&"$,

                                            #&       #%#&!
 "#$##%##$%$&$$$ "&#$"%$
                                                                                             -3,:4            3,44               3,;5            #$
##,
 "#%""$$"#,                                       -3,::           -3,39               3,:4            5

 "#$"##$%""%%*#$"%$*####$'$
                                                                                               -3,79             -3,75           3,37            48$
"##$"&#$$##,
  " &#$###"#$#"&$!%$($$$##,             -3,55             -3,93           -3,6;          "#$

                                        ##       #"##!
 "#%$"&#"$##,                                -3,89            3,34                  3,8:            #$
  (#%$#$&('$ "$#'#$%$##&,                 -3,98            -3,43                 3,88            5

 "#&"%" %%$($,                          -3,68           -3,64             3,37              43$
  " #$&"'#$#"%#$(,                        -3,53           -3,5<            -3,3<             "#$
  $#+ #$" "$#"##&"$"## "## "$#'"#$ $ %"&(#"533:$"%
533<, %"&("# ##"#$")$)"%$&"'$#%"&(("#$( *#$$$$( "# ##3,"
#*' %$&"$"("#'$($%""# $#"!%#$, "$$"%$#" %$'
$##".5336/*' 6,
A     Data Appendix

A.1    Constructing List of Small High Schools

Data Sources for School Sample

There is no comprehensive list of new small high schools created during school years 2002-03
and 2007-08. We assembled a master list of small schools from the following sources:

  1) NYC Department of Education Publications

        – Directory of NYC Public High Schools 2002-2003

          This directory indicates on the top of each page whether a school is new. 44 school
          programs are listed as new in the directory, three of them are exam schools. The
          remaining 41 school are in the master list.
        – Supplementary Directory of NYC Public High Schools, 2004, 2005, 2006

          These directories were distributed to participants in the High School (HS) Match
          to provide information on new small schools, which were not included in the HS
          Directory. 50 schools are listed in the 2004 directory, 30 schools are listed in the 2005
          directory, and 18 schools are listed in the 2006 directory. These 98 schools are in the
          master list.

  2) New Visions Publications

        – 2005-06 Guide to NYC Small High Schools

          In 2005, the New Visions for the Public Schools published a separate guide to NYC
          small high schools listing 220 small schools. 115 of these schools are not in the 2002-
          2003 directory or Supplementary Directories, and are therefore added to the master
          list.

        – Annual Reports from New Visions for Public Schools, 2005, 2007, 2008, 2010

          The appendix of the Annual Reports of the New Visions for Public Schools includes
          a list of small schools supported by New Visions. We collected all annual reports
          available online, covering years 2005, 2007, 2008 and 2010. 109 schools are in the
          2005 report, but each is already in the master list. 120 schools are in the 2007 report,
          4 of which are not yet in the master list. 98 schools are in the 2008 report, 43 of
          which are not yet in the master list. 98 schools are in the 2010 report, 8 of which are
          not yet in the master list.


                                               65
    – The Fund for Teachers list of New Visions-Aﬃliated New York City Public Schools

      The Fund for Teachers, a group supporting teacher training, assembled a list of 194
      New Visions aﬃliated New York City Public Schools. 10 of these schools are not yet
      in the master list.

3) Other Outside Reports

    – New Century High Schools and the Small Schools Movement in New York City –
      Interim Report

      There are 81 schools in this report, all of which are already in the master list.

    – Approaches of Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation-Funded Intermediary Organizations
      to Structuring and Supporting Small High Schools in New York City (Foley et al.,
      2010)

      We visit each intermediary organization’s website to collect the list of schools they
      support. We visited websites of the following organizations: Asia Society, Big Pic-
      ture Learning, City University of New York (CUNY), Coalition of Essential Schools,
      College Board, Diploma Plus, Good Shepherd Services, Institute for Student Achieve-
      ment, Internationals Network for Public Schools, Johns Hopkins University (JHU),
      National Academy Foundation, National Council of La Raza (NCLR), New Visions
      for Public Schools, New York City Outward Bound Center, Replications, The Urban
      Assembly, Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation (WWNFF), and Young
      Women’s Leadership Network. The Early College High School Initiative lists CUNY,
      NCLR and WWNFF schools at their website. We identify a total of 324 schools from
      these 18 Intermediary websites, 147 of which are not yet in the master list. Many of
      these additional schools admit students at 6th grade, are screened, or are created after
      2008 and therefore will be ineligible. Diploma Plus and Good Shepherd Services are
      primarily involved in transfer schools serving over-age students with diﬃculty in ful-
      ﬁlling graduation requirements, so these schools are excluded from the sample. Johns
      Hopkins Talent Development High Schools operate schools which are not necessarily
      small high schools and therefore excluded.
    – Transforming the High School Experience: How New York City’s New Small Schools
      Are Boosting Student Achievement and Graduation Rates? (Bloom et al., 2010)
      There are a total of 109 schools in this report, 1 of which is not yet in the master list.




                                            66
Eligible Unscreened Small Schools

There can be multiple school programs at a school, and applicants rank programs in the HS
match. The HS match ﬁles (further described below) include the correspondence between pro-
gram code and school building code (DBN code). If a program code is not linked to a school
building code, we look up the building code in subsequent year’s high school directories.
   Combining the list of schools identiﬁed above, there are a total of 466 school programs.
To be an eligible small school, we impose two additional restrictions. First, we require that a
school is created in or after 2002 and is created before or in 2008. New programs in the 2002-03
Directory of the NYC Public High Schools are founded in 2002. We identify the opening years
for the other remaining programs by using the opening year listed in the 2005-06 Guide to NYC
Small High Schools, if available. If the opening year of a program cannot be identiﬁed from
these sources, we deﬁne the opening year based on the enrollment and ranking year as follows:
First, we exclude programs at schools that have students enrolled in grade 12 in 2004, inferring
that the school was open before 2002. Second, we include any school for which the ﬁrst year a
program at their school is listed as a choice is a year between 2004-05 through 2007-08.
   Next, we eliminate any small schools that screen applicants. Schools with Audition, Edu-
cational Option, Screened, and Test admissions types are excluded, while Unscreened, Limited
Unscreened, or Zoned schools are included.
   Table A1 lists 151 programs in 143 schools that form our eligible small school program
sample.


A.2    Data Sources for Student Applications, Outcomes, and School Surveys

The New York City Department of Education is the source for four datasets: 1) high school
match and student enrollment oﬃce ﬁles containing student rankings, eligibility and priorities
for each school as well as demographic information on applicants at the time of application, 2)
registration and enrollment ﬁles which contains school attendance information from the Oﬃce
of School Performance and Accountability, 3) outcome ﬁles for baseline tests, Regents tests,
graduation, credits, attendance, College Board (PSAT, SAT, and AP) assessments, and National
Student Clearinghouse college information and 4) School Climate Surveys. We describe these
data sets in turn and provide details on the procedures used to construct the analysis sample.


High School Match and Student ﬁles

The High School Application Processing System (HSAPS) is maintained by the Student En-
rollment Oﬃce (formerly the Oﬃce of Student Enrollment and Planning Operations, OSEPO),
which oversees the high school admissions process. The Student Enrollment oﬃce provided us

                                              67
access to ﬁles used in the HS match for ﬁve school years 2003-04 through 2007-08, for initial
placement of students into high school in school years 2004-05 through 2008-09.
   All students interested in attending a New York City high school participate by submitting a
rank order list of up to 12 schools. The high school match ﬁles contain students’ choice schools
in preference order, the priority that a student obtains at each school, and the high school
assignments at the end of the main round of the match (the main round follows the assignment
of Specialized High Schools).
   In addition to the match ﬁles, the student ﬁle has demographic information such as gender,
race, home language code, and borough of residence for each student. These ﬁles also include a
student’s LEP and SPED status for application years 2003-04 through 2006-07. LEP and SPED
status for 2007-08 are provided in enrollment ﬁles (see below). Each ﬁle for a given application
year contains a unique student ID number, which allows us to merge the ﬁles together.


Registration and Enrollment ﬁles

The registration ﬁle is from the Oﬃce of School Performance and Accountability and is available
as part of data underlying school progress reports. The registration and enrollment cover all
public school students in grades 9 to 12 for school years 2002-2003 through 2009-2010.
   This data set includes each student’s ID, grade, and current school as of October in the school
year. The registration data are used to determine whether and for how many years a student
enrolls in a small school, where a student who is enrolled in October is counted as enrolling for
the entire year. Starting in 2004-05, there is a separate ﬁle which contains a list of all students
who obtain a subsidized school lunch in that year. This variable is used to code subsidized
lunch status for applicants using the application year. For applicants in 2003-04, 2004-05, and
2005-06, we used the lunch status record from 2004-05. For application cohort in 2006-07, we
used the lunch status record from 2005-06. For application cohort in 2007-08, we used the lunch
status record from 2006-07. Table B1 indicates the steps involved in processing the high school
application ﬁle and merging it with the Student Enrollment ﬁles.
   From the ﬁle of high school applicants, we eliminated 9th grade applicants (since the main
entry point is the 8th grade), private school applicants (based on whether their ID starts with the
letter “A”) and those who do not submit a New York City Public School Admissions Application
(based on the Main Round HS ranking ﬁle). These correspond to columns 2-4 in Table B1.
Further sample restrictions to identify the applicants subject to lotteries are described below.




                                                68
Identifying Admissions Lotteries

Table B1 describes additional steps involved towards identifying admissions lotteries from the
high school application ﬁle. In the ﬁrst few years of the high school match, the enrollment oﬃce
had discretion on the placement of limited English proﬁcient and special education students,
so we exclude them from the lottery sample. We also exclude students who are rated top 2%
performers in a standardized English Language Arts exam since they are guaranteed a seat if
their ﬁrst choice is an Educational Option school.
   The next step is to eliminate students who do not rank a small school program as their ﬁrst
choice. A student’s priority at a program is determined by two variables: priority group and
hs rank. priority group is an integer that is determined by factors such as students’ borough
of residence. hs rank is an integer entered by schools, which may be determined by eligibility,
whether the student visited school open house, etc. Programs that screen students also enter
their ranking of students via hs rank. A ﬁner hs rank indicates that the program is screening
applicants. Therefore, if the maximum hs rank is greater than 10 for a program in a given year,
the program is likely screening applicants and is not part of the lotteried set.
   A program may give precedence to either the priority group variable or the hs rank variable
in determining a student’s ﬁnal priority. For example, consider a school that gives precedence
to priority group. A student has higher (i.e. better) priority if he has a lower priority group
number. Among two students who have the same priority group number, the one with the lower
hs rank has higher priority. We identify the “lotteried priority” at a school as the priority group-
hs rank cell where some students who rank the school ﬁrst are oﬀered a seat, and others are
not. We only include lotteried priority (given by priority group-hs rank cells) where 1) some of
the students in the priority group-hs rank cell are not assigned the school, 2) no student with
priority group-hs rank cell higher than the lotteried priority at the school is assigned a lower
school in her choice list, and 3) no student in a priority group-hs rank lower than the lotteried
priority at the school receives an oﬀer from the program.
   Among students within the lotteried priority, a student’s oﬀer variable is coded as 1 if he is
assigned to the school program; it is coded 0 otherwise.


Outcomes: Baseline test ﬁles

The baseline test ﬁle has 8th grade scores on New York State Education Department Math and
English Language Arts for each student indexed by student ID and spans years 2003 through
2008. Each year, we standardized scores to have mean zero and standard deviation one for each
test among all test takers in New York City. These serve as our baseline math and English
scores.


                                                69
Outcomes: Regents test ﬁle

The NYC Regents test ﬁle contains the date and raw score for each tested student from 2004 to
2010. Regents exams are mandatory state examinations where performance determines whether
a student is eligible for a Regents high school diploma in New York. There are Regents exam-
inations in English, Global History, US History, and multiple exams in math and Science. A
Regents exam typically has a multiple choice section and a long answer or essay component, and
each exam usually lasts for three hours. The English exam, however, consists of two three-hour
pieces over two days. The exam has a locally graded component and Dee, Jacob, McCrary, and
Rockoﬀ (2011) illustrate how test scores bunch near performance thresholds.
   The New York State Board of Regents governs and designs the Regents exams. Starting in
2005, they started to modify the math exams. At the beginning of our sample, the two math
exams were Elementary Algebra and Planar Geometry (Math A) and Intermediate Algebra and
Trigonometry (Math B). Two new math exams, Integrated Algebra I (Math E) and Geometry
(Math G), have since been phased in. Since students typically either take Math A or Math E,
we focus on the score on the test taken ﬁrst, taking the Math A score when both are contem-
poraneous. There are Regents science exams in Earth Science, Living Environment, Chemistry,
and Physics. The science outcome we focus on is Living Environment because it is the most
commonly taken Regents science exam. English and US History Regents exams are typically
taken in 11th grade. In Table B2, for each test, we report the number of applicants and the
number of test scores we observe.
   Since students may take Regents exams multiple times, there can be multiple test scores
per student in the Regents test ﬁle. Table B2 presents the number of students who have taken
each exam more than once among small school applicant sample. The Regents ﬁle does not
have the test date, and instead only has a variable indicating the term (”termcd”). Based on
discussions with the DOE, we either convert term to fall, if the termcd is “1”, “5”, “a”, or “A”
and to spring if the termcd is “2”, “3”, “4”, “6”, or “7”. The DOE indicated that there are
exceptions at the following school DBNs where the termcd of “2” refers to the fall semester:
79M573, 79M612, 32K564, 02M560, 10X319, 02M575, 22K585, 12X480, 03M505, 02M570,
21K525, 21K540, 19K409, 17K489, 15K698, 14K454, 14K640, 07X379, 11X265, 15K529, 08X377,
05M285, 21K728, 02M303, 25Q792, 18K578, 24Q520, and 19K431. If a student takes the test
more than once after 9th grade, we used the test score from the earliest date. There are a small
number of cases where there is more than one score on the same date, and this date is the ﬁrst
date after entering 9th grade. In some of these cases, there are two diﬀerent test codes, where
one code ends with a “2.” We used the score corresponding to the test that does not end with
a “2.” Otherwise, we treated the score as missing.



                                              70
   Some students may also take Regents exams before exam school enrollment. Table B2 shows
the fraction of students who take exams before enrolling in an exam school. With the exception
of Math where the fraction is small, almost no students take a Regents exam before entering high
school. Students who have scores before the 9th grade are omitted for that outcome because
they tested prior to potential small school enrollment.
   Most Regents exams are oﬀered in January, June, and August, with most students usually
taking tests in June. The exact number of students who take the exam before 9th grade, the
number who take the exam more than once after 9th grade, and the number who take the exam
on a date other than the most common test date are presented in Table B2.
   For each subject, we standardized scores to have mean zero and standard deviation one
within year-term-subject among all subject test takers among the cohort of applicants in the
HS match for years 2003-04 to 2007-08.


Outcomes: Credits

The Credit ﬁle indicates the total number of high school credits a student earned in a given year
covering years 2005-2011. We study three measures of credits: 1) total credits per year, 2) an
indicator if credit requirement for promotion is met, i.e. credit is greater than or equal 10, and
3) an indicator if credit requirement for graduation is met, i.e. credit greater than or equal 11.


Outcomes: Attendance

The Attendance ﬁle contains information on student absences for each school year and term.
The ﬁle covers school years from 2003-04 to 2008-09. If a student switches schools, there are
multiple observations within the year for the student. We total the days of absence in these
cases within the year.


Outcomes: High School Graduation

The Graduation ﬁle contains the discharge status of all public school students from 2005 to the
Spring 2012. For application cohorts 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08, students
should start school in Fall 2004, Fall 2005, Fall 2006, Fall 2007 and Fall 2008 and graduate
on-time in Spring 2008, Spring 2009, Spring 2010, Spring 2011 and Spring 2012, respectively.
We do not report graduation in 5 years or 6 years.
   To code graduation type, we use the following discharge codes:

  a) 26, 30, and 61 (discharge codes for a local diploma)

  b) 27, 46, and 60 (discharge codes for a Regents diploma)


                                               71
  c) 28, 47, and 62 (discharge codes for an Advanced Regents diploma)

   It is possible for students to have graduated with several diﬀerent discharge ﬁles. In such
cases, we take the highest ranking diploma received. For instance, if a student received both
a local and Regents diploma, then we code her as obtaining a Regents diploma. Similarly,
if a student is listed as receiving a Regents and an Advanced Regents diploma, we code her
as receiving Advanced Regents. Consequently, there is a unique graduation outcome for each
student.


Outcomes: College Board (PSAT, SAT, and APs)

The College Board provides NYC DOE with reports on the test performance of all NYC test-
takers from 2006 through 2012. The match rates of our application cohorts is shown in Table
B3. When there is more than one test score available for applicants, we use the maximum test
score.


Outcomes: National Student Clearinghouse

The NYC Department of Education matches data on seniors to National Student Clearinghouse
(NSC) ﬁles, which record information on enrollment at over 90 percent of American 4-year
colleges and universities. The data were submitted by the NYC DOE for students based on
graduation or GED cohorts for a 4 or 6 year cycle. The ﬁle we have is from the list of students
in a graduation cohort in 2009-2012, and was submitted to the NSC in January 2013. A college
is coded as a four year college if the highest degree oﬀered by the college is 4 years, even if a
student is enrolled in a 2 year program. In 2011 and 2012, parents could opt out of the National
Student Clearinghouse. The DOE estimates that only roughly 100 parents opted out. Table B3
shows the number of applicants we observe with NSC outcomes.
   The NYC DOE reports that the following colleges with more than 1,000 students are not
in the National Student Clearinghouse. The two main colleges are Rutgers and Columbia Uni-
versity. Other colleges which are not in the NSC are ASA Institute of Business and Computer
Technology, the United States Military Academy, Bard College, St. Thomas Aquinas College,
Briar Cliﬀe College in Bethpage, United Talmudical Seminar, Art Institute of New York City,
UTA Mesivta or Kiryas Joel, Boricua College, the American Musical and Dramatic Academy,
and the Mildred Elley School.
   The most common colleges attended in our lottery sample are CUNY Borough of Manhat-
tan, CUNY Bronx Community College, CUNY New York City College of Technology, CUNY
Lehman College, CUNY LaGuardia Community College, CUNY College of Staten Island, CUNY



                                               72
Kingsborough Community College, CUNY Hostos CMTY College, CUNY Queensborough Com-
munity College, and CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice.


NYC School Climate Surveys

In the 2006-07 school year, the NYC Department of Education initiated a Learning Environment
Survey to collect information from students in grades 6-12, parents, and teachers about school
practices. The survey is administered every year and the response rate for the years we use are
as follows:

                           Parent         Teacher         Students          Total
              2006-07   216,914 (26%)   31,592 (44%)   338,201 (65%)    586,707 (40%)
              2007-08   347,829 (40%)   48,002 (61%)   410,708 (73%)    806,539 (55%)
              2008-09   381,543 (45%)   57,822 (73%)   410,299 (80%)    849,664 (59%)

We use data on school surveys obtained online at http://schools.nyc.gov/Accountability/tools/
survey/default.htm (last accessed, July 2013). Even though response rates have increased over
time, we only use data from surveys for three years from 2007-2009 because our goal is to
characterize the school environment experienced by the students in our sample.
   The school survey contains four parts: engagement, safety and respect, communication, and
academic expectations. Though there is some overlap between these categories, the DOE deﬁnes
them as follows:

  1) Engagement: engage all parents, teachers, and students in an active and vibrant partner-
      ship to promote student learning.

  2) Safety and Respect: ensure that all members of the school community feel physically and
      emotionally secure, allowing everyone to focus on student learning.

  3) Communication: provide information about school’s educational goals and oﬀer appropri-
      ate feedback on each student’s learning outcomes.

  4) Academic Expectations: encourage students to do their best by developing rigorous and
      meaningful academic goals.

   Students, parents, and teachers are asked to ﬁll out questions related to each of these aspects
of schooling. Each question response is awarded a score between 0 and 10, with 10 reﬂecting the
score most favorable to a school’s learning environment. The DOE converts each question into
a score using a school survey model (DOE, 2012d). Scores on surveys contribute to a school’s
progress reports, representing 10-15% of school’s grade. Rockoﬀ and Speroni (2008) provide

                                               73
further analysis of the comparability of survey responses from students, teachers, and parents
from 2008.
   The survey classiﬁes schools into nine groups: Early Childhood Center, Elementary School,
Elementary/Middle School, K-12 School, Middle School, Middle/High School, High School,
Transfer School, and YABC. We standardize scores with zero mean and unit variance within
survey year and school type. For each school, we compute an average of three years weighted by
the number of respondents for each question. We merge school survey attributes to enrollment
by school (not program).


Matching Datasets and the Analysis Sample

We merged high school match ﬁles and the student ﬁle, then matched the merged ﬁle to the
registration ﬁle for grade 8. Next, we merged baseline scores for students for whom they are
available. Finally, we merged the dataset of cleaned Regents outcome scores. For each test, we
compute the implied years of small school attendance based on the test date and enrollment
status. If a student took a Regents test in the fall semester, we computed years assuming
the exam date is January 31st. Otherwise, we compute years assuming the exam date is June
1st. The resulting ﬁle is our analysis sample for the Regents outcomes. We follow a similar
approach for credit, attendance, and graduation outcomes. We compute grade progression from
enrollment ﬁles. The NYC DOE’s College Board and National Student Clearinghouse ﬁles are
matched to the set of lotteried small school applicants.




                                               74
                                      TableB1.ProcessingofSmallSchoolApplicationDatafromHSMatch

                                                                                                   Excludingapplicants ExcludinglimitedEnglish
                           Totalnumberof                              Excludingapplicants
                                                 Excluding9thgraders                            notinMainRoundof proficientandspecial
   ApplicationYear            records                                   fromprivateschools
                                                                                                 theapplicationprocess   educationstudents

                                 (1)                     (2)                     (3)                      (4)                      (5)
       2003Ͳ04                 173,855                 92,070                  81,191                   72,637                   59,140
       2004Ͳ05                 191,108                 96,949                  86,662                   73,502                   59,802
       2005Ͳ06                 192,231                 96,631                  86,683                   72,000                   58,012
       2006Ͳ07                 181,262                 91,637                  81,984                   70,575                   56,668
       2007Ͳ08                 78,995                  78,995                  78,995                   65,501                   53,966
       AllYears               817,451                 456,282                 415,515                  354,215                  287,588

                                                                                                                             Excludingstudents
                                                Excludingstudentsnot                         Excludingapplicants
                           Excludingtop2%                            Excludingapplicants                                withoutanypostͲ
                                                 rankingsmallschools                        participatedinlotteries
   ApplicationYear            students                                 notinvalidlotteries                              assignmentnumeric
                                                    asfirstchoice                               ofpreviousyears
                                                                                                                            outcometestscores
                                  (6)                     (7)                      (8)                    (9)                      (10)
        2003Ͳ04                57,345                   4,522                    1,067                  1,067                     1,052
        2004Ͳ05                59,033                   6,716                    1,967                  1,939                     1,901
        2005Ͳ06                56,912                   7,312                    2,487                  2,429                     2,391
        2006Ͳ07                55,913                   7,720                    3,315                  3,240                     3,198
        2007Ͳ08                52,708                   8,291                    1,582                  1,556                     1,541
       AllYears               281,911                 34,561                   10,418                  10,231                    10,083
Notes:Thistablesummarizesthestepsgoingfromrawapplicationdatatotheanalysissample.
                                   TableB2.MatchfromSmallSchoolApplicantstoRegentsTestScoreOutcomes
                                                                                                     ApplicationSchoolYear
                               RecordAvailability                              2003Ͳ04 2004Ͳ05 2005Ͳ06 2006Ͳ07 2007Ͳ08 AllYears
                                                                                   (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                                                                          PanelA.Math
Numberofapplicants                                                              1,067     1,939       2,429        3,240     1,556       10,231
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforeapplication                                      29         20          53          149        64          315
Numberwithscoreobservedafterapplication                                       802      1,415       1,745        2,393     1,169        7,524
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication                   247       644         808         1,164      534         3,397
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication,onfirstdate     1          5           0           2          2           10
Numberwithscoreobservedonmostcommondate                                     498       662         720         1,435      678         3,993
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforemostcommondate                                 194       507         753          179        47         1,680
Numberwithscoreobservedaftermostcommondate                                  109       241         272          777       442         1,841
                                                                                                         PanelB.English
Numberofapplicants                                                              1,067     1,939       2,429        3,240     1,556       10,231
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforeapplication                                       0          0           0           0          1            1
Numberwithscoreobservedafterapplication                                       778      1,353       1,709        2,331     1,091        7,262
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication                   223       458         650          701       352         2,384
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication,onfirstdate     0          1           1           15         5           22
Numberwithscoreobservedonmostcommondate                                     310       549         674          993       456         2,982
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforemostcommondate                                 168       278         394          455       291         1,586
Numberwithscoreobservedaftermostcommondate                                  300       525         640          868       339         2,672
                                                                                                     PanelC.GlobalHistory
Numberofapplicants                                                              1,067     1,939       2,429        3,240     1,556       10,231
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforeapplication                                       0          0           0           0          0            0
Numberwithscoreobservedafterapplication                                       797      1,365       1,673        2,276     1,069        7,180
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication                   254       640         692          823       371         2,780
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication,onfirstdate     0          5           2           9          1           17
Numberwithscoreobservedonmostcommondate                                     475       809         933         1,315      723         4,255
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforemostcommondate                                  26        62         151          165        85          489
Numberwithscoreobservedaftermostcommondate                                  296       489         587          787       260         2,419
                                                                                                       PanelD.USHistory
Numberofapplicants                                                              1,067     1,939       2,429        3,240     1,556       10,231
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforeapplication                                       0          0           0           0          0            0
Numberwithscoreobservedafterapplication                                       716      1,256       1,608        2,163      933         6,676
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication                   215       399         492          494       174         1,774
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication,onfirstdate     0          0           1            2         2            5
Numberwithscoreobservedonmostcommondate                                     393       624         887         1,180      641         3,725
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforemostcommondate                                 240       403         468          572       214         1,897
Numberwithscoreobservedaftermostcommondate                                   83       229         252          409        76         1,049
                                                                                                   PanelE.LivingEnvironment
Numberofapplicants                                                              1,067     1,939       2,429        3,240     1,556       10,231
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforeapplication                                       0          0           0           0          0            0
Numberwithscoreobservedafterapplication                                       788      1,326       1,645        2,189     1,046        6,994
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication                   157       447         511          598       232         1,945
Numberwithdifferentmultiplescoresobservedafterapplication,onfirstdate      0         1           0            2         1            4
Numberwithscoreobservedonmostcommondate                                     307       473         749         1,050      491         3,070
Numberwithscoreobservedbeforemostcommondate                                   2         7          42          123        39          213
Numberwithscoreobservedaftermostcommondate                                  479       845         854         1,014      515         3,707
Notes:ThistablesummarizesthematchbetweenRegentstestscoreoutcomesandlotteriedsmallschoolapplicants.Thesampleisrestrictedto
studentsincolumn(10)ofTableB1.
                                     TableB3.MatchfromSmallSchoolApplicantstoOutcomeData
                      Numberof                                                                 MatchingRate
                                                            MostCommon
ApplicationCohort    Studentsin       YearsObserved
                                                            YearsObserved
                        Sample                                                         Total         Offered         NotOffered
                                                                    PanelA.Credits
    2003Ͳ2004            1,067              2005Ͳ2011         2005Ͳ2008            0.922             0.926              0.914
    2004Ͳ2005            1,939              2005Ͳ2011         2006Ͳ2009            0.943             0.949              0.937
    2005Ͳ2006            2,429              2005Ͳ2011         2007Ͳ2010            0.929             0.942              0.920
    2006Ͳ2007            3,240              2005Ͳ2011         2008Ͳ2011            0.921             0.932              0.911
    2007Ͳ2008            1,556              2005Ͳ2011         2009Ͳ2011            0.939             0.927              0.947

                                                                  PanelB.Attendance
    2003Ͳ2004            1,067              2005Ͳ2010         2005Ͳ2008           0.988              0.986              0.991
    2004Ͳ2005            1,939              2006Ͳ2010         2006Ͳ2009           0.985              0.986              0.984
    2005Ͳ2006            2,429              2007Ͳ2010         2007Ͳ2010           0.978              0.984              0.974
    2006Ͳ2007            3,240              2008Ͳ2010         2008Ͳ2010           0.970              0.973              0.968
    2007Ͳ2008            1,556              2009Ͳ2010         2009Ͳ2010           0.993              0.985              0.998

                                                                   PanelC.Graduation
    2003Ͳ2004            1,067              2008Ͳ2012            2010              0.799             0.799              0.797
    2004Ͳ2005            1,939              2009Ͳ2012            2011              0.812             0.836              0.788
    2005Ͳ2006            2,429              2010Ͳ2012            2012              0.798             0.823              0.780
    2006Ͳ2007            3,240              2011Ͳ2012            2012              0.815             0.826              0.803
    2007Ͳ2008            1,556                2012               2012              0.814             0.803              0.821

                                                                     PanelD.PSAT
    2003Ͳ2004            1,067              2004Ͳ2008         2005Ͳ2006            0.604             0.631              0.550
    2004Ͳ2005            1,939              2002Ͳ2010         2006Ͳ2007            0.624             0.660              0.588
    2005Ͳ2006            2,429              2005Ͳ2011         2007Ͳ2008            0.636             0.679              0.604
    2006Ͳ2007            3,240              2007Ͳ2011         2008Ͳ2009            0.660             0.705              0.616
    2007Ͳ2008            1,556              2008Ͳ2012         2009Ͳ2010            0.673             0.687              0.664

                                                                        PanelE.SAT
    2003Ͳ2004            1,067              2006Ͳ2010            2007                  0.425         0.450              0.372
    2004Ͳ2005            1,939              2007Ͳ2011            2008                  0.326         0.331              0.321
    2005Ͳ2006            2,429              2008Ͳ2012            2009                  0.297         0.342              0.264
    2006Ͳ2007            3,240              2009Ͳ2012            2010                  0.374         0.399              0.350
    2007Ͳ2008            1,556              2010Ͳ2012            2011                  0.393         0.423              0.374

                                                              PanelF.AdvancedPlacement
    2003Ͳ2004            1,067              2006Ͳ2008         2007Ͳ2008            0.070             0.058              0.095
    2004Ͳ2005            1,939              2007Ͳ2009         2008Ͳ2009            0.054             0.051              0.056
    2005Ͳ2006            2,429              2007Ͳ2011         2009Ͳ2010            0.091             0.111              0.076
    2006Ͳ2007            3,240              2008Ͳ2012         2010Ͳ2011            0.123             0.147              0.100
    2007Ͳ2008            1,556              2009Ͳ2012         2011Ͳ2012            0.107             0.132              0.089

                                                        PanelG.NationalStudentClearinghouse
    2003Ͳ2004            1,067             2009Ͳ2012               n.a                0.004              0.001           0.009
    2004Ͳ2005            1,939             2009Ͳ2013           2009Ͳ2012              0.401              0.444           0.359
    2005Ͳ2006            2,429             2009Ͳ2013           2010Ͳ2012              0.395              0.439           0.363
    2006Ͳ2007            3,240             2009Ͳ2013           2011Ͳ2012              0.400              0.431           0.370
    2007Ͳ2008            1,556             2010Ͳ2013              2012                0.293              0.316           0.277
Notes:Thistablesummarizesthematchbetweencredit,attendance,graduation,CollegeBoard,andNationalStudentClearinghouse
outcomesandlotteriedsmallschoolapplicants.Thesampleisrestrictedtostudentsincolumn(10)ofTableB1.
References
Abadie, Alberto, “Semiparametric Instrumental Variables Estimation of Treatment Response
    Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 2003, 113(2), 231–263.

Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Josh Angrist, and Parag Pathak, “The Elite Illusion: Achieve-
    ment Eﬀects at Boston and New York Exam Schools,” 2011. forthcoming, Econometrica.

    ,        , Yusuke Narita, and Parag Pathak, “Research Design meets Market Design,”
    2013. Unpublished working paper, MIT.

    , Joshua D. Angrist, Susan Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag A. Pathak,
    “Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters and
    Pilots,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126(2), 699–748.

    , Parag A. Pathak, and Alvin E. Roth, “The New York City High School Match,”
    American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2005, 95, 364–367.

    ,        , and      , “Strategy-proofness versus Eﬃciency in Matching with Indiﬀerences:
    Redesigning the New York City High School Match,” American Economic Review, 2009,
    99(5), 1954–1978.

Anderson, Michael, “Multiple Inference and Gender Diﬀerences in the Eﬀects of Early Inter-
    vention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool and Early Training Projects,”
    Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2008, 103, 1481–1495.

Andrews, M., W. Duncombe, and J. Yinger, “Revisiting Economies of Size in American
    Education: Are We Any Closer to a Consensus?,” Economics of Education Review, 2002,
    21(3), 245262.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan Krueger, “Estimating the Payoﬀ to Schooling Using the
    Vietnam-Era Draft Lottery,” 1992. NBER Working Paper 4067.

        and Guido Imbens, “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of Average Causal Eﬀects in
    Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,” Journal of the American Statistical Association:
    Applications and Case Studies, 1995, 90, 431–442.

        and Victor Lavy, “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Eﬀect of Class Size on
    Student Achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114(2), 533–575.

    , Parag Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters, “Explaining Charter School Eﬀective-
    ness,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5(4), 1–27.

                                             78
    , Sarah R. Cohodes, Susan Dynarski, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher Wal-
    ters, “Stand and Deliver: Eﬀects of Boston’s Charter High Schools on College Preparation,
    Entry and Choice,” 2013. NBER Working paper, 19275.

    , Susan Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher Walters,
    “Who Beneﬁts from KIPP?,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2012.

Barrow, Lisa, Amy Claessens, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, “The Impact of
    Chicago’s Small High School Initiative,” 2013. NBER Working Paper, 18889.

Bloom, Howard S. and Rebecca Unterman, “Sustained Positive Eﬀects on Graduation
    Rates Produced by New York City’s Small Public High Schools of Choice,” 2012. MDRC
    Policy Brief.

     and         , “Sustained Progress: New Findings about the Eﬀectiveness and Operation of
    Small Public High Schools of Choice in New York City,” 2013. MDRC Policy Brief, August
    26.

Bloom, Howard, Saskia-Levy Thompson, and Rebecca Unterman, “Transforming the
    High School Experience: How New York City’s New Small Schools are Boosting Student
    Achievement and Graduation Rates,” 2010. MDRC.

Bloomﬁeld, David C., “Small Schools:          Myth and Reality,” in “NYC Schools Under
    Bloomberg and Klein: What Parents, Teachers, and Policymakers Need to Know” 2006,
    pp. 49–56.

Bowen, William, Mathew Chingos, and Mike McPherson, Crossing the Finish Line:
    Completing College at America’s Public Universities, Princeton University Press, Princeton
    NJ, 2009.

Brynes, Susan, “$51 Million Grant from Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to Support Small
    Dynamic High Schools to Boost Student Achievement,” 2003. Press Release, Bill & Melinda
    Gates Foundation, September. Available at:       http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Media-
    Center/Press-Releases/2003/09/New-York-City-Department-of-Education-Receives-
    Grant.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, and Diane Whit-
    more Schanzenbach, “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Aﬀect Your Earnings?
    Evidence from Project Star,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126(4), 1593–1660.

Conant, James B., The American High School Today: A First Report to Interested Citizens,
    New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959.

                                             79
Cullen, Julie B., Brian Jacob, and Steve Levitt, “The Eﬀect of School Choice on Partic-
    ipants: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries,” Econometrica, 2006, 75, 1191–1230.

    , Steven D. Levitt, Erin Robertson, and Sally Sadoﬀ, “What Can Be Done to
    Improve Struggling High Schools?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2013, 27(2), 133–
    152.

Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman, “The Technology of Skill Formation,” American Eco-
    nomic Review, 2007, 97(2), 31–47.

    ,         , and Susanne Schennach, “Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncog-
    nitive Skill Formation,” Econometrica, 2010, 78(3), 883–931.

Dee, Thomas S., Brian A. Jacob, Justin McCrary, and Jonah Rockoﬀ, “Rules and
    Discretion in the Evaluation of Students and Schools: The Case of the New York Regents
    Examinations,” 2011. Work in progress, Columbia University.

Deming, David J. and Susan Dynarski, “Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to Increase
    the Postsecondary Attainment of the Poor,” in Philip Levine and David Zimmerman, eds.,
    Targeting Investments in Children: Fighting Poverty When Resources are Limited, Univer-
    sity of Chicago Press, 2010.

    , Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger, “School Choice,
    School Quality and Postsecondary Attainment,” 2011. forthcoming, American Economic
    Review.

Dobbie, William and Roland J. Fryer, “Are High Quality Schools Enough to Close the
    Achievement Gap? Evidence from a Social Experiment in Harlem,” American Economic
    Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3(3), 158–187.

        and      , “Getting Beneath the Veil of Eﬀective Schools: Evidence from New York City,”
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5(4), 28–60.

        and       , “The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving Charter Schools on Non-Test
    Score Outcomes,” 2013. Working paper, Princeton University.

DOE, “Empowerment School Performance Agreement for 2006-07,” 2007.                   Available
    at: http://www.crpe.org/portfolio/external-resources/nyc-performance-contract, Last ac-
    cessed: September 2013.




                                               80
    , “New York City Department of Education, Oﬃce of Labor Relations, Frequently
    Asked Questions,” 2007.             http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/7E50C743-72E1-4BDC-
    8F40-E8DDED86570A/0/LaborFAQs200742407.pdf, Last accessed: September 2013.

    ,     “ChildrenFirst:     A Bold,       Common-Sense Plan to Create Great Schools for
    All New York City Children,” 2009.                     New York City Department of Educa-
    tion, Available at:        http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/51C61E8F-1AE9-4D37-8881-
    4D688D4F843A/0/cf corenarrative.pdf, Last accessed: September 2013.

    ,     “Mayor      Bloomberg     and      Chancellor    Walcott        Announce       54     New     Schools
    Will     Open     Next     Fall,”     2012.        DOE        Press   Release,      April     17,     Avail-
    able       at:          http://schools.nyc.gov/Oﬃces/mediarelations/NewsandSpeeches/2011-
    2012/54 New Schools, Last accessed: September 2013.

    , “New York City Graduation Rates: Class of 2011 (2007 Cohort),” 2012. Available at:
    http://www.nyc.gov/html/om/pdf/2012/2011 grad deck presentation.pdf, Last accessed:
    August 2013.

    ,      “New      York    City       Graduation     Requirements,”         2012.            Available     at:
    http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/GraduationRequirements/default.htm,                       Last      ac-
    cessed: August 2013.

    ,        “NYC       School      Survey          2011-2012,”       2012.                   Available      at:
    http://schools.nyc.gov/Accountability/tools/survey/default.htm,                   Last accessed:        Au-
    gust 2013.

Dur, Umut, Scott D. Kominers, Parag A. Pathak, and Tayfun Sönmez, “The Demise
    of Walk Zones in Boston: Priorities vs. Precedence in School Choice,” 2013. NBER Working
    Paper 18981.

Dynarski, Susan M., Joshua Hyman, and Diane Schanzenbach, “Experimental Evi-
    dence on the Eﬀect of Childhood Investments on Postsecondary Attainment and Degree
    Completion,” 2011. NBER Working Paper, w17533.

Epstein,      Marc,    “Small Schools:            Miracle or Mirage?,”        2013.       Huﬃngton Post,
    Blog, Available at: http://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/marc-epstein/small-schools-miracle-
    or b 2641400.html?utm hp ref=new-york, Last accessed: September 2003.

Fleischer, Brian, “High School Academic Data Audit Report,” 2012. Report from Oﬃce of
    Auditor General Commissioned by the New York City Department of Education, February
    23.

                                                      81
Foderaro, Lisa, “CUNY Adjusts Amid Tide of Remedial Students,” 2011. New York Times,
    N.Y. / Region, March 3.

Foley, Eileen and Elizabeth Reisner, “The New Century High Schools in New York City,”
    in Becky A. Smerdon and Kathryn M. Borman, eds., Saving America’s High Schools, Urban
    Institute Press, 2009, pp. 85–111.

    , Erickson Arcaira, Stephen Coleman, Elizabeth Reisner, Troy Scott, Tandra
    Turner, and Yvonne Woods, “Approaches of Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation-Funded
    Intermediary Organizations to Structuring and Supporting Small High Schools in New York
    City,” 2010. Policy Studies Associates.

Fredriksson, Peter, Björn Öckert, and Hessel Oosterbeek, “Long-Term Eﬀects of Class
    Size,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128(1), 249–285.

Gates, Bill, “Prepared remarks by Bill Gates at National Education Summit on High Schools,”
    2005. Available at: http://www.gatesfoundation.org/media-center/speeches/2005/02/bill-
    gates-2005-national-education-summit, Last accessed: July 2013.

    ,   “Annual     Letter     of   the   Bill   and   Melinda   Gates   Foundation,”   2009.
    http://www.gatesfoundation.org/who-we-are/resources-and-media/annual-letters-
    list/annual-letter-2009.

Gewertz, Catherine, “Federal Oﬃcials to Probe Complaint Against N.Y.C. Small High
    Schools,” Education Week, July 12, 2006.

    , “Small Schools Under Big Fire,” Education Week, March 22, 2006.

Goertz, M., S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoﬀ, “Recruiting, Evaluating and Retaining teachers: The
    Children First Strategy to Improve New York City’s Teachers,” in J. O’Day, C. Bitter, and
    L. Gomez, eds., Education Reform in New York City: Ambitious Change in the Nation’s
    Most Complex School System, Cambridge MA: Harvard Education Press, 2011, pp. 157–177.

Gootman, Elisa, “Early Gains at City’s Themed Schools,” 2005. New York Times, Metropoli-
    tan Desk, January 4.

    , “Annenberg Grant to Help Smaller Schools,” 2006. New York Times, NY/Region Section,
    April 28.

    , “City’s New Small Schools are Focus of a Bias Inquiry,” 2006.         New York Times,
    NY/Region Section, June 16.


                                                 82
     and Sharona Coutts, “Lacking Credits, Some Students Learn a Shortcut,” 2008. New
    York Times, NY/Region Section, April 11.

Hanuschek, Eric A., “The Failure of Input-Based Schooling Policies,” Economic Journal,
    2003, 113, F64–F98.

Hemphill, Clara and Kim Nauer, “The New Marketplace: How Small-School Reforms and
    School Choice have Reshaped New York City’s High Schools,” 2009. Center for New York
    City Aﬀairs, Milano the New School for Management and Urban Policy.

     and       , “Managing by the Numbers: Empowerment and Accountability in New York
    City’s Schools,” 2010. Center for New York City Aﬀairs, Milano the New School for Man-
    agement and Urban Policy.

Hoxby, Caroline and Christopher Avery, “The Missing “One-oﬀs”: The Hidden Supply of
    High-Achieving, Low-Income Students,” 2012. NBER Working Paper, 18586.

Iatarola, P., A. Schwartz, L. Stiefel, and Colin Chellman, “Small Schools, Large Dis-
    tricts: Small School Reform and New York City’s Students,” Teachers College Record, 2008,
    110(9), 1837–1878.

Imbens, Guido W. and Joshua D. Angrist, “Identiﬁcation and Estimation of Local Average
    Treatment Eﬀects,” Econometrica, 1994, 62, 467–475.

Klein, Joel I., “Cover Letter,” in Laura Kurgan and New Visions for Public Schools, eds., From
    Large School Buildings to Small School Campuses: Orchestrating the Shift, 2005, p. 2.

    , “Empowerment Schools FAQ,” 2006. New York City Department of Education, Avail-
    able at: http://schools.nycenet.edu/region6/midwood/empowerment.html, Last accessed:
    September 2013.

Kling, Jeﬀrey R., Jeﬀrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Experimental Analysis
    of Neighborhood Eﬀects,” Econometrica, 2007, 75(1), 83–119.

Kominers, Scott D. and Tayfun Sönmez, “Designing for Diversity in Matching,” 2012.
    Working paper, Boston College.

Krueger, Alan, “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 1999, 114(2), 497–532.

Krueger, Alan B., “Economic Considerations and Class Size,” Economic Journal, 2003, 113,
    34–63.

                                             83
Kuziemko, Ilyana, “Using Shocks to School Enrollment to Estimate the Eﬀect of School Size
    on Student Achievement,” Economics of Education Review, 2006, 25, 63–75.

Lawrence, Barbara, “Dollars and Sense: The Cost Eﬀectiveness of Small Schools,” 2002. To-
    gether with: Steven Bingler and Barbara Diamond and Bobbie Hill and Jerry Hoﬀman and
    Craig Howley and Stacy Mitchell and David Rudolph and Elliot Washor, KnowledgeWorks
    Foundation.

Lazear, Edward P., “Educational Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116(3),
    777–803.

Miller, Giﬀord, “Sharing Space: Rethinking the Implementation of Small High School
    Reform in New York City,” 2005.          Council of the City of New York, Available
    at: http://www.nyc.gov/html/records/pdf/govpub/2130small schools ﬁnal3.pdf, last ac-
    cessed: September 2013.

Murnane, Richard J., “U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations,”
    2013. NBER Working Paper, 18701.

Nadelstern, Eric, “Inteview with Horace editor Jill Davidson,” 2005.            Available at:
    http://www.essentialschools.org/resources/312, Last accessed: September 2013.

NCES, “Digest of Education Statistics, National Center for Education Statistics,” 2010.
    http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/, Last accessed: July 2012.

NVPS, “Reforming High Schools: Lessons from the New Century High Schools Initiative,”
    2006. Publication of New Visions for Public Schools.

NYSED, “New York State Education Department, 100.5 Diploma Requirements,” 2010. Avail-
    able at: http://www.p12.nysed.gov/part100/pages/1005.html, Last accessed: August 2013.

Otterman, Sharon, “Big Schools Fall Hard in City Plan,” 2010. NY Times, Metropolitan
    Desk, January 26.

Phillips, Anna, “In a First, City Plans to End Contract with a Support Organization,” 2011.
    GothamSchools, April 19th, http://gothamschools.org/2011/04/19/in-a-ﬁrst-city-plans-to-
    end-contract-with-a-support-organization/, Last accessed: September 2013.

Pop-Eleches, Cristian and Miguel Urquiola, “Going to a Better School: Eﬀects and Be-
    havioral Responses,” American Economic Review, 2013, 4, 1289–1324.

Ravitch, Diane, The Death and Life of the Great American School System: How Testing and
    Choice are Undermining Education, Basic Books, 2011.

                                             84
Robelen, Eric, “Gates High Schools get Mixed Review in Study,” 2005. Education Week,
    November 16.

Rockoﬀ, Jonah and Cecilia Speroni, “Reliability, Consistency, and Validity of the NYC
    DOE Environmental Surveys: A Preliminary Analysis,” 2008. Unpublished note, Columbia
    University.

Rodriguez-Planas, Nuria, “Longer-Terms Impacts of Mentoring, Educational Services, and
    Learning Incentives: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in the United States,” American
    Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2012, 4(4), 121–139.

Santos, Fernanda, “Before the School Bell, Teachers in Bronx Make House Calls,” 2011. NY
    Times, N.Y. Region, September 2.

Schwartz, Amy E., L. Stiefel, and Matthew Wiswall, “Do Small Schools Improve Perfor-
    mance in a Large, Urban District? Causal Evidence from New York City,” 2013. Unpub-
    lished manuscript, Institute for Education and Social Policy, NYU.

Shear, Linda, Barbara Means, Karen Mitchell, Ann House, Torie Gorges, Aasha
    Joshi, Becky Smerdon, and Jamie Shkolnik, “Contrasting Paths to Small-School
    Reform: Results of a 5-year Evaluation of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation’s National
    High Schools Initiative,” Teachers College Volume, 2008, 110(9), 1986–2039.

Toch, Thomas, High Schools on a Human Scale: How Small Schools Can Transform American
    Education, Beacon Press, 2003.

    , “Small is Still Beautiful,” Washington Monthly, 2010, July/August.

UFT, “Report of the United Federation of Teachers Small School Task Force,” 2005. Avail-
    able at: http://www.uft.org/ﬁles/attachments/uft-report-2005-06-small-schools.pdf, Last
    accessed: September 2013.




                                             85
