                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   BLOCKHOLDERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

                                           Alex Edmans

                                       Working Paper 19573
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19573


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




I am grateful to Bo Becker, Jerry Davis, Christine Dobridge, Vivian Fang, Slava Fos, Todd Gormley,
Cliff Holderness, Sudarshan Jayaraman, Giorgia Piacentino, Enrique Schroth, and Luke Taylor for
valued comments, David Schoenherr for research assistance, and Janet Chater for help in preparing
this manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alex Edmans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Blockholders and Corporate Governance
Alex Edmans
NBER Working Paper No. 19573
October 2013
JEL No. G34

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the theoretical and empirical literature on the different channels through which
blockholders (large shareholders) engage in corporate governance. In classical models, blockholders
exert governance through direct intervention in a firm’s operations, otherwise known as “voice.” These
theories have motivated empirical research on the determinants and consequences of activism. More
recent models show that blockholders can govern through the alternative mechanism of “exit” – selling
their shares if the manager underperforms. These theories give rise to new empirical studies on the
two-way relationship between blockholders and financial markets, linking corporate finance with asset
pricing. Blockholders may also worsen governance by extracting private benefits of control or pursuing
objectives other than firm value maximization. I highlight the empirical challenges in identifying
causal effects of and on blockholders, and the typical strategies attempted to achieve identification.
I close with directions for future research.


Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu
1. INTRODUCTION


Berle and Means’s (1932) seminal article highlighted the agency problems that arise from the

separation of ownership and control. When a firm’s managers are distinct from its ultimate owners,

they have inadequate incentives to maximize its value. For example, they may exert insufficient

effort, engage in wasteful investment, or extract excessive salaries and perks. The potential for such

value erosion leads to a first-order role for corporate governance – mechanisms to ensure that

managers act in shareholders’ interest. The importance of firm-level governance for the economy

as a whole has been highlighted by the recent financial crisis, which had substantial effects above

and beyond the individual firms involved.

     Since the source of agency problems is that managers have inadequate stakes in their firms,

large shareholders – otherwise known as blockholders – can play a critical role in governance,

because their sizable stakes give them incentives to bear the cost of monitoring managers.

Blockholders are prevalent across companies and around the world. Holderness (2009) finds that

96% of U.S. firms contain at least one blockholder (defined as a shareholder who holds at least 5%);

this ratio is the 15th highest out of the 22 countries that he studies. Thus, understanding the role that

blockholders play in corporate governance is an important question.

     Large shareholders can exert governance through two main mechanisms (see Hirschman

(1970)). The first is direct intervention within a firm, otherwise known as voice. Examples include

suggesting a strategic change via either a public shareholder proposal or a private letter to

management, or voting against directors.        While most of the early research on blockholder

governance has focused on voice, a recent literature has analyzed a second governance mechanism

– trading a firm’s shares, otherwise known as exit, following the “Wall Street Rule,” or taking the

“Wall Street Walk.” If the manager destroys value, blockholders can sell their shares, pushing


                                                                                                       2
down the stock price and thus hurting the manager ex post. Ex ante, the threat of exit induces the

manager to maximize value.

     Blockholders may also exacerbate rather than solve agency problems.               First, even if

blockholders’ actions maximize firm value ex post, their presence may reduce value ex ante: the

threat of intervention may erode managerial initiative, and their mere presence may lower liquidity.

Second, instead of maximizing firm value, they may extract private benefits. While blockholders

may alleviate conflicts of interest between managers and investors, there may be conflicts of interest

between the large shareholder and small shareholders. For example, blockholders may induce the

firm to buy products from another company that they own at inflated prices.

     This article will survey the three mechanisms through which large shareholders can affect firm

value – improving it by governance through voice, improving it by governance through exit, or

worsening it through extracting private benefits or other channels.        I start by reviewing the

theoretical literature, in particular highlighting empirical implications. While the two governance

mechanisms share some predictions – for example, a larger stake generally improves governance

through both voice and exit, and such governance in turn enhances firm value – they differ in many

others. Most notably, voice theories yield implications for the causes and consequences of activism,

while exit theories predict how blockholders affect financial markets and how their effectiveness

depends on microstructure factors. I then move to the empirical evidence on the determinants and

effects of blockholder structure.

     In linking the theoretical and empirical literatures, I emphasize four challenges.         First,

identifying causal effects is difficult: instead of causing changes in firm outcomes, potential

investors may predict changes in firm outcomes and acquire a block accordingly, or unobservable

variables may jointly attract large shareholders and affect outcomes. Second, blockholders can

exert governance through the threat of exit and voice, rather than only actual acts of exit and voice.

                                                                                                    3
The absence of these actions does not imply the absence of governance – on the contrary, the threat

of intervening or selling may be sufficient to induce the manager to maximize value, so that the

actual act is not necessary. However, such threats are much harder for empiricists to observe.

Third, there is no unambiguous definition of a blockholder. While the empirical literature typically

defines a blockholder as a 5% shareholder, since this level triggers disclosure requirements in the

U.S., theoretical models predict that monitoring increases continuously with block size (up to a

point), rather than a discontinuity at 5%. Moreover, the percentage stake required for a blockholder

to exert a given level of governance will differ across firms, and the dollar block size may be more

relevant in some settings. Fourth, while most models consider a single blockholder or multiple

symmetric blockholders, in reality blockholders are a diverse class comprising many different types

of investor: hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds, individuals, and corporations.         These

different investors may engage in different forms of governance, be affected by firm characteristics

in different ways, and have different effects on firm outcomes. Considering blockholders as a

homogenous entity may miss interesting relationships at a more granular level.

     Far from reducing its attractiveness as a research area, these empirical challenges suggest that

blockholder governance is a particularly fruitful topic, as they mean that many first-order questions

– including an issue as fundamental as whether blockholders affect firm value – remain

unanswered, and many theories remain untested. This article will close by highlighting open

questions for future research, both theoretical and empirical.     In particular, while early voice

theories spawned an empirical literature on blockholders and corporate control (see Holderness

(2003) for an excellent survey), recent exit theories suggest a different way of thinking about

blockholder governance that gives rise to new areas for research – in particular, the link between

governance (traditionally a corporate finance topic) and financial markets (traditionally an asset



                                                                                                   4
pricing topic). (See Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012) for a survey on the link between financial

markets and corporate finance).

      This article focuses on outside blockholders: large shareholders who are not the firm’s

officers.1 The literature on inside blockholders is covered by reviews of the CEO compensation

literature, such as Murphy (1999, 2013), Edmans and Gabaix (2009), and Frydman and Jenter

(2010).



2. THE THEORY

2.1 Theories of Voice / Intervention


Intervention encompasses any action that an investor can undertake, that improves firm value but is

personally costly to the investor. It can involve helping managers to create value, such as providing

advice on strategic alternatives, or preventing managers from destroying value, such as blocking a

wasteful merger or removing an underperforming executive. Regardless of the specific form, all

intervention involves a free-rider problem: the blockholder bears all of the costs of intervention, but

only enjoys a fraction of the benefits.

      I first introduce notation to make the discussion more concrete; in addition, using consistent

notation across models will highlight their shared themes. Let V (V*) denote firm value without

(with) the intervention, G = V* – V be the value created by intervention, and P be the price at which

the blockholder can trade shares. (This price will typically depend on the number of shares that the

blockholder trades, and whether she buys or sells). The blockholder’s initial stake is given by .

      Shleifer and Vishny (1986) model the blockholder’s free-rider problem. The blockholder

engages in costly monitoring, which increases the probability that she uncovers a superior business

1
 Some empirical studies further distinguish between outside blockholders who are on the board of directors and those
who are not.

                                                                                                                       5
strategy that creates a privately-known value G. If she finds an improvement, she can implement it

through one of three channels of intervention. First, she can pay the cost of launching a takeover

bid for 0.5 –  shares to obtain majority control and implement the restructuring. She earns a return

on her activism from two sources: her initial stake of  increases in value by G, and she may also

be able to buy the additional 0.5 – shares at a price P that is below the post-restructuring value

V*.    This purchase is subject to the Grossman and Hart (1980) free-rider problem2: small

shareholders will demand a price P that incorporates their expectation of the restructuring gains

(and thus exceeds V). However, since small shareholders do not know the actual restructuring gains

G (and thus post-restructuring value V*), but must estimate it, P will typically be below V*. The

higher the blockholder’s initial stake , the higher her share of the restructuring gains G (her first

source of return), and so G need not be so high to induce her to bid. Since small shareholders

expect fewer restructuring gains, they are willing to sell for a lower price P. This lower takeover

premium further increases the blockholder’s monitoring efforts to begin with.

      Second, the blockholder can implement the new strategy after changing the board of directors

via a proxy fight3 – proposing her own slate of directors and soliciting votes from other investors,

for example, via a public campaign. A larger stake is again beneficial, through the standard free-

rider argument: it gives the blockholder a sufficiently large share of the gains G to offset the cost

of the proxy fight.4 Third, she can implement the strategy by “jawboning”: informal negotiations



2
  The general free-rider problem in intervention is that the blockholder only earns a fraction  of the benefits of
intervention (whether intervention involves launching a takeover bid or proxy fight, engaging with management, or any
other channel) but bears all of the costs. The Grossman and Hart (1980) free-rider problem is specific to the takeover
channel: small shareholders will not sell their shares to the acquirer for V, instead wishing to free-ride on the
restructuring that the acquirer will undertake post-acquisition. They will only sell for V*, reducing the blockholders’
gains from taking over the firm. However, it does not apply to the other channels (e.g., jawboning or voting) which do
not require the purchase of additional shares.
3
  See Yermack (2010) for a review of the role in corporate governance of shareholder voting more generally.
4
  See, e.g., Becker, Bergstresser, and Subrahmanian (2013) for details on the costs of launching a proxy fight. Gantchev
(2013) builds a sequential decision model to estimate the costs of proxy fights and other stages of shareholder activism.

                                                                                                                       6
with firm management such as writing letters. This mechanism is less costly as it does not involve

changing management, but the absence of a management change also means that it realizes only a

fraction of the potential value creation (1–)G, where  > 0. A higher encourages the blockholder

to pay the cost of a takeover, rather than jawboning, thus creating greater value as the full

improvement G is achieved.             In sum, Shleifer and Vishny (1986) predict that firm value is

monotonically increasing in block size.

      Since block size determines intervention incentives, Winton (1993), Noe (2002), and Edmans

and Manso (2011) show that the number of blockholders affects the strength of voice by impacting

block size. Splitting a block between multiple investors (e.g., so that N blockholders each hold /N

shares) weakens voice by exacerbating the free-rider problem: each individual shareholder has less

incentive to intervene.

      Even if a blockholder has a sufficiently large stake to justify the costs of intervening, she may

still not do so. Kahn and Winton (1998) show that the blockholder may instead “cut and run”: not

intervene (in which case the firm is worth V) and sell her shares. She will be able to sell for a price

P that exceeds V, since the price incorporates a possibility of intervention, and thus profit from

selling.5 (Unlike in “exit” theories, such selling has no beneficial impact on governance, as there is

no managerial action.) The option to cut and run leads to a second driver of intervention in addition

to block size: stock illiquidity, the cost at which the blockholder can trade her shares. Holding all

else equal, greater illiquidity reduces the profitability of selling and thus encourages intervention.

One source of illiquidity is price impact – a large trade moves the price because the market maker

fears that the trader is informed (adverse selection). In turn, price impact can be reduced by the




5
  Maug (2002) shows that this problem is particularly severe if insider trading is allowed. The manager will voluntarily
tell the blockholder bad news, to encourage her to “cut and run” on this news rather than intervene.

                                                                                                                      7
presence of investors who trade for non-informational reasons, such as financing consumption.6 A

second source is transaction costs, such as taxes, commissions, or shorting costs. A third is

inventory holding costs, the market maker’s cost of holding risky assets after buying from the

blockholder.

      Coffee (1991) and Bhide (1993) verbally argued that greater liquidity is harmful to voice, as it

facilitates cutting and running. This point was later modeled formally by Aghion, Bolton, and

Tirole (2004) and others. It led academics and practitioners to advocate the Japanese model of

illiquid stakes, to “lock in” shareholders for the long-term and induce them to govern through voice.

These arguments have resurfaced in the recent financial crisis, as commentators argued that locked-

in shareholders would have monitored firms more closely and prevented the crisis. The European

Union implemented disclosure requirements for short positions in November 2012, and in

September 2011 it recommended implementing a financial transaction tax in all 27 member states

by 2014.

      Maug (1998) overturned the above arguments by showing that liquidity can encourage

intervention. As in Shleifer and Vishny (1986), the blockholder gains from intervention not only on

her initial stake , but also by buying additional shares for a price P < V*; liquidity reduces the

price that she must pay. In general, if block size  is exogenous, whether the costs of liquidity

(encouraging “cutting and running”) dominates its benefits (encouraging “doubling down and

intervening”) depends on parameter values. However, Maug shows that the blockholder will

endogenously choose an initial stake  for which the benefits of liquidity outweigh the costs, and so

liquidity is unambiguously beneficial.



6
 Such needs are often referred to as “liquidity” needs, and these investors as “liquidity” investors. Note that these are
different concepts from stock liquidity; while stock liquidity is enhanced by the presence of liquidity investors, it is also
enhanced by other factors such as a reduction in transaction costs.

                                                                                                                           8
     A second benefit of liquidity is identified by Faure-Grimaud and Gromb (2004). The value

created by intervention may only manifest in the long term. The blockholder may be hit by a

liquidity shock that forces her to sell in the short term at a price P that is less than V* (because the

full benefits of intervention have not yet materialized). Stock liquidity encourages trading by

speculators (such as hedge funds), who have information on V* through their own monitoring.

Such trading pushes P closer towards V*, and thus allows the blockholder to earn a return on her

intervention even if she has to sell early.

     A third benefit of liquidity is that it facilitates initial block formation. In Grossman and Hart

(1980) and Shleifer and Vishny (1986), the free-rider problem exists because atomistic shareholders

have full discretion on whether to sell, and thus will only sell for a price that includes the expected

gains from restructuring. Kyle and Vila (1991) show that the presence of liquidity traders, who are

forced to sell due to a liquidity shock, allows the raider to overcome the free-rider problem and

obtain a block. In Kahn and Winton (1998) and Maug (1998), liquidity increases the informed

trading profits that the blockholder can enjoy once she has acquired her stake. Fearing future losses

to the blockholder, small shareholders are willing to sell at a discount when the blockholder

acquires her initial stake, and so liquidity encourages block formation. In sum, voice theories reach

different conclusions on whether liquidity hinders or helps intervention.



2.2 Theories of Exit / Trading


Many of the above forms of intervention are difficult to implement for some blockholders. First,

certain blockholders’ competitive advantage may lie in selecting stocks, rather than launching a

proxy fight or providing strategic advice. Using the terminology of Dow and Gorton (1997), their

expertise lies in gathering backward-looking, retrospective information to evaluate the current value

of the firm (which depends on past decisions), but not forward-looking, prospective information
                                                                                                      9
about optimal future investments. Second, even with expertise, successful intervention can be

difficult. The firm can use corporate resources to support the board’s recommended slate of

directors in a proxy fight or oppose a takeover bid, e.g., through campaigning to shareholders. It

can stagger board elections so that only a minority of positions can be voted on during a particular

year. Third, particularly in the U.S., most blockholders hold small stakes. While Holderness (2009)

reports that 96% of U.S. firms feature a shareholder who owns at least 5%, La Porta, Lopez-de-

Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) note that only 20% (10%) of large (medium) U.S. firms feature a

blockholder with at least 20%, which they estimate as the threshold required to exert control.7 Roe

(1990) documents political and legal impediments to forming large blocks in the U.S. The theories

in Section 2.1 show that low  reduces incentives to intervene. Even if the blockholder’s incentives

were sufficient (e.g., high G means that G is high even if  is low), a low stake lowers her

likelihood of success in a proxy fight (which requires winning a sufficient percentage of votes) or

being able to “jawbone” managers into changing strategy (since managers’ receptivity may depend

on the threat of a proxy fight if they are non-compliant).

    In the context of voice theories, the prevalence of small blockholders poses a puzzle – if they

cannot intervene, why do they exist, given that holding an undiversified stake is costly from a risk

perspective? Admati and Pfleiderer (2009) and Edmans (2009) show that, even if a blockholder

cannot exercise voice, she can still exert governance through the alternative channel of exit. We

now define V* as the firm’s long-run fundamental value after the manager has taken an action (e.g.,

effort or investment). The manager’s objective function will typically place weight not only on V*

but also the short-term stock price P, for reasons discussed below. Thus, his incentives to improve


7
  Since La Porta et al. study several countries, they use a small sample size within each country: “large firms” are the
top 20 firms by market capitalization, and “medium firms” as the smallest 10 firms with a market capitalization of at
least $500 million. In personal correspondence, Cliff Holderness kindly reports a median block size of 8.9% in the
U.S., using the dataset of Holderness (2009).

                                                                                                                    10
V* will depend on the extent to which these improvements are reflected in P. The blockholder has

private information on V*; by trading on this information, she makes the stock price more reflective

of firm value.8 Put differently, if the manager destroys value and reduces V*, the blockholder will

sell her shares and drive the stock price down towards V*, hurting the manager.9 Thus, the manager

has greater incentives to maximize value in the first place; in Admati and Pfleiderer (2009), he

typically exerts greater effort10, and in Edmans (2009), he invests in long-term projects. Note that

exit theories do not require the blockholder to be cognizant of the impact of her trading on the

manager’s behavior for it to be effective. The blockholder could be motivated purely by the private

desire to earn informed trading profits, but such self-interested actions have a social benefit by

disciplining the manager.

      A natural question is why blockholders have private information on V*, and similarly why

they have a special role in governing through exit, compared to other traders (e.g., speculators

without a stake). Edmans (2009) microfounds the link between block size, information acquisition

incentives, and informed trading. Regardless of her stake, the investor has the option to engage in

costly monitoring to gather information about V*. In the presence of short-sale constraints, a trader

with a zero position has little incentive to acquire information, because if she receives a negative

signal, she cannot trade on it. Up to a point, the larger her stake, the more she can sell upon a

8
  While this governance mechanism is commonly referred to as “exit,” blockholder trading in both directions increases
price informativeness. In Edmans and Manso (2011), the blockholder trades in both directions. In Admati and
Pfleiderer (2009) and Edmans (2009), the blockholder either holds or sells in the core model, but the results are robust
to allowing for blockholder purchases.
9
   In Edmans (2009), exit involves breaking up a block and selling shares on the secondary market, so that the
blockholder can camouflage with liquidity traders. In Admati and Pfleiderer (2009), the block remains intact and its
sale is observable, but is sold to an uninformed market maker who does not know whether the blockholder has sold due
to a liquidity shock rather than negative information. Negotiated block sales (studied, e.g., by Barclay and Holderness
(1991)), where the block not only remains intact but is sold to an informed buyer who engages in substantial due
diligence, are unlikely to be motivated by negative private information.
10
    Interestingly, Admati and Pfleiderer (2009) show that, in some specifications of the model, the blockholder can
exacerbate agency problems. If all investors can observe whether the manager has taken an action to increase firm
value, but only the blockholder can observe the amount of value created by the action, the blockholder will sell her
shares if the value increase is small. Such selling will reduce the stock price, and thus the manager’s incentive to take
the value-maximizing action to begin with.

                                                                                                                     11
negative signal and thus the greater the incentives to gather the signal to begin with. However, if 

becomes too large, liquidity becomes a constraint: the blockholder cannot sell her entire stake upon

a negative signal as the price impact will be too high. Thus, in contrast to some voice theories, the

optimal block size is finite, consistent with the prevalence of small blockholders in the U.S.

      Like voice, the effectiveness of exit depends not only on block size but also on liquidity – but,

while voice theories have differing predictions, Edmans (2009) shows that liquidity (i.e., the volume

of liquidity trader demand) enhances exit through three channels. First, holding private information

constant, the blockholder trades more aggressively on her information. Second, holding block size

constant, she gathers more private information since she can profit more from trading. Third, since

liquidity allows her to sell more upon negative information, she acquires a greater initial block.

One disadvantage of liquidity is that a given trade size has less impact on the stock price, because

the blockholder’s informed trade is camouflaged with liquidity investors.11 However, the overall

effect of liquidity on price informativeness – and thus the manager’s incentives to maximize firm

value – is positive. The first and second effects are also featured in Edmans and Manso (2011).

Admati and Pfleiderer (2009) do not feature liquidity traders, but transaction costs reduce the

effectiveness of governance through exit.                Their model also predicts that liquidity improves

governance, to the extent that illiquidity proxies for transaction costs.

      A third determinant shared with the voice channel is the number of blockholders. However,

here, the effect works in the opposite direction. While splitting a block reduces the effectiveness of

voice by exacerbating the free-rider problem, Edmans and Manso (2011) show that the same

coordination difficulties strengthen exit.            The threat of selling one’s shares upon managerial

11
   In the Kyle (1985) model, where block size is irrelevant (due to the absence of short-sales constraints) and
information is exogenous, the second and third benefits of liquidity do not apply. The first benefit of liquidity is fully
offset by the disadvantage of liquidity, and so price informativeness is independent of liquidity. However, with
endogenous information acquisition, liquidity is unambiguously beneficial for price informativeness (see also Edmans
and Manso (2011) who do not feature short-sales constraints).

                                                                                                                      12
misbehavior only elicits value maximization ex ante if it is dynamically consistent. Once the

manager has taken his action, blockholders cannot change it and are concerned only with

maximizing their trading profits. As in Kyle (1985), a single blockholder will strategically limit her

order to hide her private information. In contrast, multiple blockholders trade aggressively, as in a

Cournot oligopoly (see also Holden and Subrahmanyam (1992)). Such trading impounds more

information into P, so that it more closely reflects V* and thus the manager’s actions.

     There are other determinants of the effectiveness of exit that are not shared with voice. The

first is the manager’s contract – in particular, the weight placed on P versus V*. Short-term

concerns may stem from a number of factors: takeover threat (Stein (1988)), termination threat

(Edmans (2011)), concern for managerial reputation (Narayanan (1985), Scharfstein and Stein

(1990)), the manager expecting to sell his shares before V* is realized (Stein (1989)), the manager

considering the interests of shareholders who expect to sell early (Miller and Rock (1985)), or the

firm intending to issue equity (Stein (1996)).

     A second determinant is the blockholder’s own short-term concerns. In Edmans (2009) and

Edmans and Manso (2011), the blockholder has full discretion on over when to sell, but in Admati

and Pfleiderer (2009), she may suffer a liquidity shock that forces her to sell regardless of the

manager’s action. An increase in the frequency of this shock reduces the effectiveness of exit, as

the blockholder may sell even if the manager is maximizing value. Goldman and Strobl (2013)

study a blockholder who may be forced to liquidate her shares before V* is realized. To increase

the price at which any future liquidation will occur, she has incentives to refrain from disciplinary

exit and instead buy additional shares. Such price manipulation is only possible if the firm’s assets

are complex, i.e., their value does not become public during the shareholder’s tenure. Since the

manager wishes to encourage price inflation, he chooses excessive investment complexity.



                                                                                                   13
     In Dasgupta and Piacentino (2013), the blockholder’s short-term concerns arise from a

different source: she is a mutual fund who cares about attracting investor flows. In this case, she

may not sell her shares even if the manager has shirked. Selling will signal that her initial decision

to buy the firm was misguided, lowering investors’ perceptions of her ability and thus their inflows

into the fund. Hence, the threat of exit is weaker.

     Two other theories show how blockholder trading can exert governance, but through a

different mechanism from affecting the incentives of an equity-aligned manager. Levit (2013)

combines both exit and voice.       Differing from prior theories, voice involves the blockholder

communicating private information to guide the manager’s action, in a cheap-talk framework.

Since the manager cares about private benefits in addition to shareholder value, he may not follow

the blockholder’s recommendation. The option to exit improves the effectiveness of voice. If the

blockholder can exit when the manager pursues private benefits rather than shareholder value, she

becomes less misaligned with the manager. Thus, the manager is more willing to follow her

recommendation. Exit improves governance even if the manager is unconcerned with P, as it

enhances voice.

     In contrast to Admati and Pfleiderer (2009) where there is no voice option, Levit shows that

increasing the frequency of the blockholder’s liquidity shocks can, interestingly, raise her

effectiveness in exerting governance. The greater the frequency of liquidity shocks, the higher the

stock price if the blockholder voluntarily exits, and thus the greater her willingness to exit if the

manager pursues private benefits.

     Khanna and Mathews (2012) build on Goldstein and Guembel (2008), where an uninformed

speculator (with an initial stake of zero) may manipulate the stock price downwards by short-

selling. Such sales will reduce the stock price, fooling the manager into thinking that his investment

opportunities are poor and causing him to disinvest incorrectly; the speculator’s short position

                                                                                                   14
benefits from inducing this incorrect action. Khanna and Mathews show that a blockholder with a

sufficient stake will have incentives to buy to counteract the speculator’s bear raid. Even if such

purchases incur trading losses, these are outweighed by the benefits of inducing the correct

investment decision if  is sufficiently high. Interestingly, an increase in the blockholder’s private

information may weaken governance, as it may encourage her to trade on her information to

maximize trading profits, rather than counteracting the bear raid.



2.3 Theories of the Costs of Blockholders


      In addition to creating value through governing through voice or exit, blockholders can also

reduce firm value. In Burkart, Gromb, and Panunzi (1997), as in other voice theories, intervention

is ex-post desirable, since it ensures that the value-maximizing project is taken. However, the ex-

ante threat of intervention reduces the manager’s incentive to exert effort to find out about potential

projects, because he fears that his desired project (which maximizes private benefits rather than firm

value) will not be implemented. Thus, even in an intervention model, the optimal block size can be

finite. A similar overmonitoring result arises in Pagano and Röell (1998), where a founding owner-

manager chooses shareholder structure when going public. He wishes to maximize the sum of firm

value plus his private benefits, net of monitoring costs borne by the new blockholder (as she will

demand a price discount to offset these costs). However, when making her monitoring decision, the

blockholder will trade off only the effect on firm value and the cost of monitoring, ignoring the fact

that monitoring will reduce private benefits. Thus, the founder again chooses a lower block size.12

Bolton and von Thadden (1998) identify a different cost of large blockholders: a greater block size

 lowers the free float 1– and reduces liquidity.

12
 An important difference with Burkart, Gromb, and Panunzi (1997) is that, here, it remains the case that firm value is
monotonically increasing in , but a finite  arises because the founder is not maximizing firm value.

                                                                                                                     15
      The above costs exist even though the blockholder maximizes firm value ex post. Moreover,

the blockholder can lower firm value if she pursues her own private benefits – utility accruing to the

blockholder that is not shared with minority investors. Note that private benefits need not be at the

expense of other shareholders, as in the case of production synergies with another company

controlled by the blockholder.13 However, some forms of private benefits may indeed reduce firm

value. First, the blockholder may tunnel corporate resources away from the firm, for example

through inducing it to engage in business relationships with her other companies at unfavorable

terms. Second, her voting decisions may be conflicted: a labor union pension fund may vote for

labor-friendly directors (Agrawal (2012)) or a mutual fund may side with underperforming

management to preserve business ties (Davis and Kim (2007)). Third, her large stakes may cause

her to be concerned about idiosyncratic risk (unlike other shareholders) and induce the firm to forgo

risky, value-creating investments. Amihud and Lev (1981) and Lambert (1986) made this point in

the context of managers’ large stakes causing inefficient risk reduction.

      Theorists have modeled the implications of private benefit extraction for blockholder

structure. Zwiebel (1995) shows that, when blockholders can extract private benefits, the presence

of a majority investor deters other blockholders from forming, as they will not be able to obtain

private benefits of control given the presence of the majority shareholder. Thus, large shareholders

“create their own space.” While shareholder structure is privately chosen by the blockholders

themselves in Zwiebel (1995), in Bennedsen and Wolfenzon (2000), it is chosen by a founding

entrepreneur when going public. He brings in outside blockholders to dilute his own power and

commit to extracting few private benefits, thus allowing him to sell his equity at a higher price.



13
   Barclay and Holderness (1992) find that block trades that occur at a premium to the post-announcement exchange
price (thus implying private benefits of control) also lead to an increase in the stock price. This result suggests that
private benefits are either not at the expense of shareholders, or are outweighed by the governance benefits.

                                                                                                                     16
3   THE EVIDENCE


We now turn to empirical evidence of the relationship between large shareholders and firm

characteristics. Let F denote a firm characteristic such as profitability, and B either a blockholder

action (e.g., the decision to intervene or trade) or a measure of blockholdings. Empiricists have

used a variety of measures, such as the presence of a blockholder, the ownership of the largest

blockholder, the number of blockholders, or the total ownership of all blockholders.

     The theoretical literature generates two broad sets of empirical implications. The first (I1) is

the effect of F on B: the firm characteristics that determine blockholder presence or actions. The

second (I2) is the effect of B on F: the impact of blockholder presence or actions on firm outcomes,

such as profitability. The two-way relationship between blockholders and firm variables highlights

the first challenge to testing these theories: identifying causal effects is difficult. In addition to

simultaneity, another problem is that omitted variables may jointly affect both F and B. Several

strategies have been attempted to achieve identification. None is watertight, but each helps to

partially move our priors towards understanding the determinants and consequences of

blockholders. I will summarize two of the many potential strategies here.

     The first approach, as with any endogeneity problem, is to find a source of exogenous

variation in the independent variable of interest (B or F). For example, instrumenting for B, or

using a natural experiment that provides exogenous variation in B, will help identify the effects of

blockholders on firm outcomes (I2). However, finding exogenous variation in blockholders is

particularly challenging, since many variables that affect B will also affect F directly. While

Becker, Cronqvist, and Fahlenbrach (2011) instrument for individual blockholders, I am not aware

of instruments for blockholders in general. Isolating exogenous variation in F, to identify the

determinants of blockholder presence (I1), is similarly challenging. A related approach is to

instrumenting for a firm characteristic that affects firm outcomes F, and to show that the effect
                                                                                                   17
depends on B. This method will move us towards identifying the effect of B on F (I2), although it

may be that B proxies for an omitted variable.

         A second strategy used in the literature is to analyze the relationship between F (B) and lagged

B (F). The use of lagged variables helps mitigate concerns of simultaneity bias, but does not

eliminate it. For example, changes in B may occur in anticipation of future changes in F rather than

causing it, and thus not identify I2. Furthermore, omitted variables may drive both B and future F,

since their various determinants may be persistent. These remaining concerns can be further

attenuated by an event-study approach that analyzes how firm value changes within a small window

surrounding a blockholder action: it is unlikely that the blockholder took her action anticipating that

firm value would improve in that specific window.14 However, this approach can only study

blockholders’ effects on firm value, rather than other outcomes (e.g. changes in profitability). To

investigate the impact of blockholder voice on other firm outcomes, researchers can study how

these outcomes differ depending on whether the activism was successful versus unsuccessful, or

hostile versus non-hostile. However, this approach cannot be used to study the effects of entry or

exit, and omitted variables and reverse causality remain important concerns.

         Turning to I1, linking F to the level of future blockholdings will not identify causality from F

to blockholdings, because it may be that current blockholdings cause current F, and also cause

future blockholdings since they are persistent. In contrast, it is less likely (although far from

impossible) that a link between F and future changes in blockholdings (i.e., blockholder entry) or

actions (i.e., selling or intervention) results from reverse causality, since such events are typically

difficult to predict and non-persistent. However, we still have the problem that omitted variables

may drive both F and the event.



14
     Any anticipation of the event biases event-study returns towards zero.

                                                                                                      18
     In addition to endogeneity, which is a concern in almost all corporate finance settings, there

are three further empirical challenges when testing blockholder theories. One is that the models

emphasize that governance can occur through threats or actions that are typically unobservable to

the empiricist. For example, in the voice model of Shleifer and Vishny (1986), “jawboning” may

involve writing private letters to firm management; in exit theories, the mere threat of selling shares

may be sufficient to induce the manager to maximize value. One solution is to survey blockholders

on the governance mechanisms they use (McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2011)); while a survey

cannot identify the effect of these mechanisms, it can shed light on which channels blockholders

employ in practice. A second is to obtain non-public sources of information on blockholder

governance, such as private letters to management (Carleton, Nelson, and Weisbach (1998), Becht,

Franks, Mayer, and Rossi (2009)).

     A second challenge is that there is no unambiguous definition of a blockholder. In theory, a

blockholder is any investor who has a sufficient incentive to monitor management. There are two

sources of ambiguity when applying this concept empirically. The first is what type of investor will

constitute a blockholder if she acquires a sufficient stake. While it seems relatively clear that an

officer should not be classified as an outside blockholder, as she is unlikely to exert governance on

management, it is unclear how to treat a non-officer director. Even some investors who are neither

officers nor directors may not engage in governance, such as an Employee Share Ownership Plan

(“ESOP”) or index fund. The second source of ambiguity is the required stake to be classified as a

blockholder. In the U.S., a blockholder is typically defined as a 5% shareholder, but this definition

arises because investors are required to file a Schedule 13 disclosure upon crossing a 5% threshold,

rather than being motivated by theory.         In theory models, monitoring incentives increase

continuously with  (up to a point); there is no discontinuity at 5%. In practice, investors may

cluster just below 5% to avoid disclosure, and thus be missed by Schedule 13 filings. In particular,

                                                                                                    19
in a large firm, a small percentage block may translate into a large dollar block. If blockholder

governance has a percentage, rather than dollar, effect on firm value, the relevant measure of block

size is the dollar, rather than percentage, stake. (See Baker and Hall (2004) and Edmans, Gabaix,

and Landier (2009) for this point in relation to the relevant measure of CEO incentives.) Some of

the studies discussed below study institutional ownership using 13F filings (which identify large

stakes below the 5% threshold), rather than 5% blockholders using Schedule 13 filings. However,

there is no clear threshold stake that an institutional investor must own to be classified as a

blockholder.

     Moreover, even if we are willing to accept a discontinuous definition of a blockholder, e.g.,

define a blockholder as a shareholder who has incentives to exert a “given” level of monitoring, the

threshold to induce this level of monitoring will likely vary across firms rather than being a blanket

5%. For example, the block required to induce intervention will be higher in firms in which

intervention is particularly costly, and in which the CEO owns a higher stake and is thus more

entrenched. Unless otherwise stated, the papers reviewed below study the U.S. and define a

blockholder as a non-officer who owns a stake of at least 5%.

     A third challenge is that blockholders are a heterogeneous class of many different types, each

with their own determinants and consequences. Thus, even if we are clear on our definition on what

constitutes a blockholder, studying these blockholders in aggregate may miss interesting

relationships that exist with individual blockholder classes.

     We first start by reviewing evidence consistent with the idea that blockholders affect firm

outcomes. Such effects may result from voice, exit, or the costs of blockholders. I then move to

specific evidence on each of the three mechanisms.



3.1 Evidence on Blockholders and Firm Outcomes

                                                                                                   20
Perhaps the simplest piece of evidence in favor of blockholders exerting governance is their sheer

prevalence: Holderness (2009) finds that the vast majority of firms around the world have either

inside or outside blockholders. From a Darwinist perspective, if blockholders did not improve firm

value, then dispersed ownership should be much more common.

       A second piece of evidence is the importance of blockholder identity. If blockholders did not

engage in governance, firm value would be unaffected by who owns a particular block. Barclay and

Holderness (1991) find that trades of large blocks between investors (insiders or outsiders) lead to a

16% increase in market value. They interpret this result as the block being reallocated to a more

effective monitor.15 Holderness and Sheehan (1988) show that trades of majority blocks owned by

insiders or outsiders similarly raise stock prices. These results are consistent with blockholders

governing through voice and/or exit, and the benefits of governance outweighing any costs

associated with blockholders.

       Another set of papers studies the correlation between blockholdings and specific firm

outcomes, although it is typically difficult to assign causality. Holderness and Sheehan (1988) find

that, compared to matched, diffusely-held firms, firms with majority blockholders exhibit

insignificant differences in investment, accounting returns, Tobin’s Q, leverage, and the frequency

of corporate control transactions. McConnell and Servaes (1990) and Mehran (1995) document no

correlation between outside block ownership and firm value.16 These results need not imply that

blockholders have no effect on firm value: if block size is always chosen at the optimal level to

maximize firm value, there should be no relationship when controlling for the joint determinants of

blockholdings and firm value, as noted by Demsetz and Lehn (1985) in the context of managerial

15
   As explained in Section 2.2, such a trade is likely not motivated by overvaluation as in “exit” theories, as the
purchaser engages in extensive due diligence. However, it may lead to the block being transferred to a new owner who
is more able to engage in disciplinary exit in the future. Similarly, since the seller is likely informed, it is unlikely that
the stock price increase arises because the trade signals that the firm is undervalued.
16
   Mehran (1995) also finds no link with return-on-assets.

                                                                                                                          21
ownership. However, since blockholdings are chosen by the blockholder herself rather than the

firm, the empirically-observed block size is likely to be the one that maximizes the blockholder’s

payoff rather than firm value.17 Thus, private decisions will move the empirically observed block

size to or from the firm value optimum and generate correlations with firm value. Wruck (1989)

finds that increases in ownership concentration resulting from private sales of equity, which are

unlikely to be motivated by information because the purchaser undertakes due diligence, lead to

increases (decreases) in firm value for low (moderate) levels of initial concentration. This result is

consistent with the concave relationship between block size and firm value predicted by the voice

theory of Burkart, Gromb, and Panunzi (1997) and the exit theory of Edmans (2009).

      Moving to international evidence on the correlation between outside block ownership and firm

value, Lins (2003) studies 18 emerging markets and finds that Tobin’s Q is positively related to the

fraction of control rights held by non-management blockholders in aggregate. This correlation is

particularly strong in countries with low investor protection, in which corporate governance is likely

more important. Claessens, Djankov, Fan, and Lang (2002) analyze eight East Asian economies.

When the largest blockholder is a widely held corporation or financial institution (and thus an

outsider), the market-to-book ratio is increasing in her cash flow ownership and independent of the

wedge between her control rights and cash flow ownership.                          In contrast, when the largest

blockholder is a family or the state, valuations are negatively-related to this wedge. Their results

suggest that the private benefits of control are low for outside blockholders, relative to insiders.

      Turning to the predictions of multiple blockholder theories, Konijn, Kräussl and Lucas (2011)

find a negative correlation between outside blockholder dispersion (proxied by the Herfindahl


17
  The blockholder’s objective function will differ from firm value for a number of reasons. First, the blockholder only
captures  of firm value. Second, she benefits from trading profits, but such profits do not affect firm value as they are
are earned at the expense of small shareholders. Third, she may acquire too small a stake (from a governance
perspective) to reduce the idiosyncratic risk she has to bear (Admati, Pfleiderer, and Zechner (1994)).

                                                                                                                      22
index) and firm value. Their results support single-blockholder models in which firm value is

increasing in the ownership of the largest blockholder, but are inconsistent with the Edmans and

Manso (2011) model where blockholder dispersion is desirable (up to a point) in situations where

exit is an effective governance mechanism.

     The insignificant results of Holderness and Sheehan (1988), McConnell and Servaes (1990),

and Mehran (1995) may also arise because they study blockholders in aggregate. Cronqvist and

Fahlenbrach (2009) disaggregate the data and study the importance of blockholder identity by

identifying fixed effects for different classes of outside blockholders.       They find significant

blockholder fixed effects for various firm variables, such as investment and financial policies,

accounting performance, and executive compensation.          The effects are strongest for activists,

pension funds, and corporations, and weakest for banks, money managers, and insurance

companies. Since increases in (say) investment or leverage may be either good or bad for firm

value, these results are consistent with voice, exit, or the costs of blockholders. While these results

could stem either from blockholders causing a change in corporate policies through exerting

governance, or selecting firms based on expected future changes in corporate policies, Becker,

Cronqvist, and Fahlenbrach (2011) use the density of wealthy individuals in a firm’s headquarter

state as an instrument for individual blockholders. Blockholders increase firm performance and

shareholder payouts, and reduce investment, cash holdings, executive pay, and liquidity. The

negative impact on liquidity is consistent with the negative correlations between ownership

concentration and liquidity found by Heflin and Shaw (2000) and Rubin (2007).

     Some papers find a positive correlation between blockholders and long-term behavior. These

results are consistent with the Edmans (2009) model of exit and investment, but could also be

consistent with a voice theory in which myopia is the main agency problem. Dechow, Sloan, and

Sweeney (1996) and Farber (2005) find that firms that fraudulently manipulate earnings have lower

                                                                                                    23
outside blockholdings. Burns, Kedia, and Lipson (2010) study institutional ownership (rather than

blockholdings) using 13F filings, and find that institutional ownership concentration, measured by

the Herfindahl infex, is negatively correlated with financial restatements. Baysinger, Kosnik, and

Turk (1991) document a positive correlation between institutional ownership concentration and

R&D, and Lee (2005) shows a positive link between total blockholder ownership and patents.

Atanassov (2013) shows that the presence of an outside blockholder reduces the negative impact of

anti-takeover legislation on patent citations. Aghion, van Reenen, and Zingales (2013) use S&P

500 index inclusion as an instrument for total institutional ownership and find a positive effect on

citation-weighted patents.



3.2 Evidence Specific To Voice / Intervention


     While the above results could be consistent with voice or exit, the survey of McCahery,

Sautner, and Starks (2011) provides evidence on the specific channels of voice that blockholders

employ. In order of frequency, they show that blockholders vote against management at the annual

general meeting (AGM), initiate discussions with the executive board, contact the supervisory board

to seek management changes, disclose that they voted against management, make shareholder

proposals at the AGM, make critical speeches at the AGM, initiate lawsuits against managers, and

publicly criticize executive board members. The second and third of these channels are examples of

the “jawboning” analyzed by Shleifer and Vishny (1986).

     A separate set of papers studies the effect of activist events on firm performance. An early

literature found little evidence that activism by shareholders in general improves firm performance.

Del Guercio and Hawkins (1999) show that shareholder proposals by active pension funds lead to

asset sales, restructurings, and layoffs, but have no effect on stock or accounting performance.


                                                                                                 24
Yermack’s (2010) survey concludes that “the success of institutional investor activism to date

appears limited.”

      However, the absence of significant results may arise not because activism does not create

value, but because these studies cover blockholders whose expertise does not lie in activism, or who

face barriers to activism. Diversification requirements hinder mutual funds from acquiring the large

positions needed to exercise control,18 and “prudent man” rules constrain pension funds from

acquiring stakes in troubled firms in need of intervention (Del Guercio (1996)). Even if not legally

restricted, a blockholder may choose not to engage in activism due to a conflict of interest. For

instance, a fund may lose its contract to manage the firm’s pension plan if it opposes management.

      Research focusing on blockholders that have both a particular expertise in activism and few

barriers to intervention finds more significant effects. Holderness and Sheehan (1985) document

that the market reacts more favorably to block acquisitions by six controversial raiders known to

engage in activism as compared with a random sample of investors. Bradley, Brav, Goldstein, and

Jiang (2010) show that activist institutions successfully force closed-end funds to open-end, creating

value through the elimination of the closed-end fund discount. Moreover, activism attempts became

particularly frequent after the 1992 proxy form that reduced the costs of communication among

shareholders, demonstrating that coordination costs are an important determinant of intervention.

      Recent papers focus on activist hedge funds.               Hedge funds have few business ties or

regulatory constraints that hinder activism, and high performance-based fees that induce

intervention even if it is costly. While some hedge funds focus on stock picking, activist hedge

funds have particular expertise in intervention. McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2011) and Clifford




18
  Under the Investment Company Act of 1940, a “diversified” mutual fund can, with respect to 75% of its portfolio,
have no more than 5% invested in any one security and own no more than 10% of the voting rights in one company.

                                                                                                               25
and Lindsey (2013) find that hedge funds are more willing to engage in activism than other

institutions.

      Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008) study the 13D filings of activist hedge funds. When

acquiring a 5% stake in a public firm, a shareholder must file a Schedule 13, which can take one of

two forms. If she intends to engage in intervention, she must file a 13D and state in Item 4 the form

of intervention she intends to employ; if she intends to remain passive, she can file a 13G which is

shorter and comes with fewer disclosure requirements.19 Brav et al. find that 13D filings lead to 7-

8% abnormal returns in a (–20, 20) window, consistent with activism creating value. To support the

hypothesis that the abnormal returns stem from activism rather than stock-picking (i.e., do not

simply arise because the hedge fund’s block acquisition signals that the stock was undervalued),

they find that the abnormal return is 3.9% higher when the hedge fund uses hostile tactics than

without. Moreover, if the hedge fund later exits (reduces its stake to below 5%) due to the failure of

activism, the (–20, 20) return to the exit is 8% lower than the full sample of exits. In a similar vein,

Clifford (2008) finds that 13D filings by hedge fund activists lead to larger event-study returns and

improvements in return-on-assets than 13G filings, implying an additional return to activism over

stock picking (before taking into account the costs of activism). Turning to operating performance,

Brav et al. (2008) find that 13D filings lead to improvements in total payout, return-on-assets, and

operating margins, and Brav, Jiang, and Kim (2013) document improvements in plant-level

productivity using Census data.

      Klein and Zur (2009) focus on confrontational activism and find that hedge fund targets earn

10.2% abnormal returns in a (–30, +30) window surrounding a 13D filing, compared to 5.1% for

other activist targets. Greenwood and Schor (2009) show that the abnormal returns to 13D filings


19
  Blockholders who intend to remain passive still have the option of filing a 13D, but are unlikely to do so due to the
benefits of filing a 13G described in Edmans, Fang, and Zur (2013).

                                                                                                                    26
stem from activists’ ability to force target firms into a takeover, one particular form of intervention.

Both announcement and long-term returns to 13D filings are significant for targets that are

ultimately acquired, but insignificant for targets that remain independent. Boyson and Mooradian

(2011) show that hedge fund activism is associated with gains in long-term operating performance

and short-term stock performance.

     While the above studies focus on particular institutions that are most likely to be skilled at

activism (activist hedge funds), Boyson and Mooradian (2012) study particular fund managers.

They posit that hedge fund managers with past experience in the hedge fund’s industry of

specialization, or prior portfolio management experience at similar hedge funds, are likely skilled.

Indeed, activism by such managers is associated with higher long-term stock returns, in contrast to

Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008) who documented insignificant long-term stock returns

(albeit significant event-study returns) for activist hedge funds in general. Boyson and Mooradian’s

analysis also highlights the importance of blockholder heterogeneity.

     Moving away from hedge funds to blockholders in general, Helwege, Intintoli, and Zhang

(2012) find that forced CEO turnover, a particular type of activism, is positively related to the

presence of an outside blockholder in 1982-1994, but not 1995-2006. Chen, Harford, and Li (2007)

find that independent long-term institutional investors are associated with superior M&A

performance and the withdrawal of bad M&A bids, particularly if they have a large stake. They

interpret their results as stemming from blockholder monitoring.

     A quite separate reason why early studies (of overt activism by blockholders in general) need

not imply that voice is ineffective is that blockholders may engage in activism in ways unobservable

to the econometrician. Carleton, Nelson, and Weisbach (1998) study private letters written to

management by TIAA-CREF, a major pension fund, attempting to enact corporate governance

changes. TIAA-CREF reached agreements with the firm 95% of the time; over 70% of these cases

                                                                                                     27
occurred without shareholder votes. This result indicates that looking at actual shareholder votes

may miss a significant amount of activism. However, they find little evidence that such letters

increase the short-term stock price, likely because they were usually private. Becht, Franks, Mayer,

and Rossi (2009) study the Hermes Focus Fund, a U.K. pension fund that also specializes in

activism.   They find that “engagement rarely took a public form,” instead occurring through

communications with executives, and sometimes other shareholders. Common objectives included

selling non-core assets, replacing the CEO or Chairman, and increasing the cash payout to investors.

When the fund’s engagement objectives were achieved, the mean abnormal (–3,+3) returns were

5.3%, and these returns were higher for confrontational than collaborative engagements.

     While these last two papers directly observe behind-the-scenes activism, Fos (2013) estimates

it using a two-stage model that accounts for not only actual proxy contests but also the threat of

such contests. The first stage is a binary choice model to predict the likelihood of a proxy contest

and the second studies the effect of the threat of a proxy fight on firm outcomes. Using liquidity as

an instrument (under the assumption that liquidity increases the likelihood of a proxy contest but

does not affect firm outcomes), he shows that an increase in the threat of a proxy fight causes firms

to increase leverage dividends, and CEO turnover, and reduce R&D, capital expenditure, and

executive compensation. Thus, the mere threat of intervention plays a disciplinary role. He studies

all proxy fights, rather than only proxy fights by blockholders.

     Turning from the effects of activism to the determinants of activism, Norli, Ostergaard, and

Schindele (2013) use decimalization to show that liquidity increases the frequency of proxy fights

and shareholder proposals. Moreover, as predicted by Maug (1998), investors acquire additional

shares in advance of engaging in activism. While they study two actual acts of intervention,

Edmans, Fang, and Zur (2013) use a 13D filing to measure the threat of activism. Using the



                                                                                                  28
decimalization of the major U.S. stock exchanges in 2001 as an exogenous shock to liquidity, they

show that liquidity has a positive causal effect on the likelihood of activist hedge funds filing a 13D.

     Brav et al. (2008) find that activist hedge funds are more likely to target firms with high

operating cash flows, high return-on-assets, low total payout, and high executive compensation.

Such firms likely suffer from the agency costs of free cash flow (Jensen (1986)), thus increasing the

gains from blockholder intervention. These results are consistent with the theory of Maug (1998),

in which a block only forms to begin with if the gains from intervention are sufficiently high

relative to the cost. Brav et al. (2008) and Becker, Cronqvist, and Fahlenbrach (2011) find that

blockholders target smaller firms, where it is easier to acquire a significant percentage stake.

Evidence on targets’ prior stock price performance is more mixed. While Klein and Zur (2009) find

that targets of confrontational activism in the U.S. previously outperformed the market, Becht et al.

show that targets of the U.K. Hermes Focus Fund previously underperformed.



3.3 Evidence Specific To Exit / Trading


     The survey by McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2011) finds that exit is the number one

governance mechanism employed by blockholders. 80% of institutions respond to dissatisfaction

with firm performance by selling shares, a greater fraction than any of the channels of voice listed

in Section 3.2.

     One piece of evidence loosely consistent with exit is the existence of multiple blockholders.

Such a structure is suboptimal for voice due to free-rider problems, but improves the efficiency of

exit as shown by Edmans and Manso (2011).             Edmans and Manso use data from Dlugosz,

Fahlenbrach, Gompers, and Metrick (2006) to show that 70% of U.S. firms have multiple

blockholders (defined as a shareholder who owns at least 5%). Using a 10% threshold, Laeven and

Levin (2007) find that 34% of European firms have multiple blockholders, Maury and Pajuste
                                                                                                     29
(2005) document 48% for Finland, and Western European data made available by Faccio and Lang

(2002) yields a figure of 39%. However, the existence of multiple blockholders is also consistent

with voice-only theories, where a finite individual stake arises due to wealth constraints (Winton

(1993)) or risk aversion.

     More specific evidence for exit studies the link between blockholders and financial markets.

The first set of evidence supports the notion that blockholder trades contain private information.

Parrino, Sias, and Starks (2003) show that sales by institutional investors precede CEO turnover and

negative long-run returns. Institutions with larger positions sell their shares to a greater extent than

those with smaller positions, as in the Edmans (2009) model where larger blockholders are more

informed. Bushee and Goodman (2007) find the private information content of an institutional

investor’s trade is increasing in his stake. Brockman and Yan (2009) document that stocks with

higher total outside block ownership contain greater firm-specific information. They also recognize

the importance of blockholder heterogeneity and show that this result does not hold for ESOPs, who

are unlikely to trade on information. Gallagher, Gardner, and Swan (2013) find that blockholders

who trade frequently generate trading profits, and Yan and Zhang (2009) find that frequent traders

are more informed (in terms of their trades predicting future stock returns) than those who rarely

trade. Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2013) show that the trades made by 13D filers in the 60 days

before the filing date (which must be disclosed in the filing) are highly profitable.

     A second strand of research studies the link between blockholders and price informativeness.

Gallagher, Gardner, and Swan (2013) use Australian data that provides higher-frequency

information on institutional investor trades than 13F filings in the U.S. Institutional investor trading

leads to subsequent increases in price efficiency, which they in turn link to improvements in future

performance. These effects are stronger in the presence of multiple institutional investors; Gorton,

Huang, and Kang (2013) similarly find a positive association between the number of blockholders

                                                                                                     30
and price informativeness. Boehmer and Kelley (2009) use Granger causality tests to show a causal

relationship between total institutional ownership and price efficiency, particularly when there is

low ownership concentration (i.e., more institutional owners). Both the volume of trading and the

level of institutional holdings in the absence of trading cause greater efficiency; that the level of

holdings matters suggests that the threat of exit increases price informativeness.

     Third, a number of papers show that blockholder exit reduces the stock price, and that these

price declines are permanent and thus likely result from the sale conveying negative information,

rather than temporary price pressure effects due to downward-sloping demand curves

accommodating a sudden increase in supply. Scholes (1972) and Mikkelson and Partch (1985) find

this result for secondary issues, and Holthausen, Leftwich, and Mayers (1990) and Sias, Starks, and

Titman (2006) document that institutional trading has a permanent effect on stock prices. Collin-

Dufresne and Fos (2013) find that purchasers by eventual 13D filers in the 60 days before the filing

date increase prices.

     While the above papers study the effect of blockholders on financial markets (I2), another

financial market test relates liquidity to blockholders.        Fang, Noe, and Tice (2009) use

decimalization to show that liquidity causes increases in firm value, and Bharath, Jayaraman, and

Nagar (2013) show that this effect is stronger for firms with greater block ownership, measured

either by the share of all blockholders, the share of the largest blockholder, or the number of

blockholders. This result supports the idea that blockholders improve firm value (I2).          It is

consistent with liquidity enhancing either exit (Admati and Pfleiderer (2009), Edmans (2009),

Edmans and Manso (2011)) or voice (Maug (1998), Faure-Grimaud and Gromb (2004)) (I1).

Supporting the former interpretation, Bharath, Jayaraman, and Nagar show that the link between

firm value and the interaction of liquidity and blockholdings is stronger where the manager has



                                                                                                  31
greater equity incentives20, and remains strong even in firms where the manager is entrenched and

thus voice is less likely to be effective.

      Edmans, Fang, and Zur (2013) use decimalization to show that liquidity encourages the

acquisition of blocks by activist hedge funds, as in the exit theory of Edmans (2009) and the voice

theories of Kyle and Vila (1991), Kahn and Winton (1998), and Maug (1998). Supporting exit

theories in particular, the effect of liquidity is stronger where the manager has greater sensitivity to

the stock price. Moreover, liquidity increases the likelihood that the hedge fund blockholder files a

13G rather than a 13D.21 A 13G filing indicates that the blockholder will not be engaging in

activism. It can thus suggest either that the blockholder is abandoning governance altogether, or is

governing through the alternative mechanism of exit. Supporting the latter explanation, liquidity is

particularly likely to induce a 13G filing (rather than a 13D filing) where the manager has greater

sensitivity to the stock price. Moreover, a 13G filing leads to a positive event-study reaction,

positive holding period returns for the blockholder, and positive improvements in operating

performance, particularly for firms with high liquidity. The authors then extend the analysis to all

activists, which includes institutions less effective at intervention or trading than hedge funds (e.g.,

due to flatter compensation structures). The effect of liquidity on block formation continues to

hold, but its effect on the choice of governance mechanism and the consequences of a 13G filing are

weaker, again highlighting the importance of blockholder identity. Gerken (2009) similarly finds

no correlation between liquidity and governance choices for blockholders in general (which

includes non-activists).




20
   High equity holdings will not induce the CEO to be sensitive to the current stock price if his equity has very long
vesting periods, but vesting periods are typically short in practice (see, e.g., Kole (1997)).
21
   Even though liquidity reduces the likelihood of a 13D filing, conditional upon block formation, this effect is
outweighed by the positive effect of liquidity on the likelihood of a block being acquired in the first place. Thus,
liquidity has an unconditionally positive effect on a 13D filing, as documented in Section 3.2.

                                                                                                                   32
      Roosenboom, Schlingemann, and Vasconcelos (2013) study the link between liquidity and

blockholder governance in the particular setting of M&A. Liquidity is correlated with lower M&A

returns where there is a single blockholder (and thus governance through voice is most likely) but

not when there are multiple blockholders (and thus governance through exit is most likely).

      Dimmock, Gerken, Ivković, and Weisbenner (2013) study a different dimension of liquidity:

the capital gains tax liability when selling a stake. Importantly, this liability varies across different

investors in the same stock, depending on when they acquired their stake, addressing omitted

variables concerns. They find that a greater capital gains lock-in increases the likelihood of voting

against management (a form of intervention) but reduces the likelihood of exit.



3.4 Evidence on the Costs of Blockholders


There are four main approaches to identifying a negative effect of blockholders on firm value.22

The simplest one is to investigate the correlation between blockholdings and firm value, or firm

outcomes (such as liquidity) that are likely linked to firm value. Studies using this approach are

covered in Section 3.1.

      A second approach is to estimate the private benefits of control, i.e., the additional value that

blockholders derive from ownership over and above minority shareholders. (Note, however, the

earlier caveat that private benefits need not be at the expense of other shareholders.) Barclay and

Holderness (1989) find that negotiated block trades (owned by insiders or outsiders) occur at a 20%

premium to the market price, reflecting the private benefits of control. The premium is higher for

firms with larger cash holdings, and thus greater potential for expropriation. Albuquerque and

22
   I use “firm value” to refer to the value of the firm available to minority shareholders. This equals the market
capitalization of the firm in an efficient market, and is referred to by Holderness (2003) as “exchange value”. It is a
different concept from the total value of the firm available to all shareholders, which will include private benefits of
control accruing to blockholders and also to any managers who are shareholders.

                                                                                                                    33
Schroth (2010) study block trades between 10-50% where the ownership of the buyer rises from

below 20% to above 20%, which they estimate as the threshold required to enjoy private benefits.

They estimate private benefits as 10% of the value of the block or 3-4% of the value of the target

firm’s equity. Private benefits create a deadweight loss, as firm value falls by $1.76 for every $1 of

private benefit on average. They also find that block trades increase firm value by 19%, consistent

with the Barclay and Holderness (1991) finding that blockholder identity matters.          Thus, the

deadweight loss created by private benefit extraction is likely outweighed by the monitoring

provided by blockholders.

     Third, researchers can study firm outcomes where the blockholder is likely to be misaligned

with minority shareholders. Faccio, Marchica, and Mura (2011) hypothesize that undiversified

large shareholders will be excessively conservative, and indeed find that the portfolio concentration

of the largest shareholder is associated with reduced volatility of return-on-assets (although they do

not investigate the effect on firm value). To identify causality, they study the effect of a block

passing to a successor (who is typically less diversified than the previous owner) and the effect of

acquiring additional firms to a portfolio (which increases diversification) on the risk-taking of

existing firms.

     A fourth approach is to examine the behavior of blockholders themselves. Davis and Kim

(2007) study the proxy voting behavior of mutual funds. At the fund family level, funds with more

business ties (aggregated across all firms that they invest in) are more likely to vote with

management. However, at the individual firm level, funds are no more likely to vote with the

management of a client than a non-client. Agrawal (2012) finds that pension funds affiliated with

the AFL-CIO labor union becomes significantly less opposed to directors once the union no longer

represents a firm’s workers. Since opposition by AFL-CIO pension funds is negatively associated



                                                                                                   34
with valuations, this result suggests that they vote for directors who protect workers’ interests at the

expense of shareholders.



4   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH


     The effect of blockholders on corporate governance is a rich and varied literature, covering

many topics in financial economics. Theoretical models examine topics such as the free-rider

problem, informed trading and market microstructure, strategic information transmission, the trade-

off between the ex-post costs and ex-ante benefits of monitoring, and the role of managerial and

blockholder incentives.    Empirical studies have linked blockholdings to both corporate finance

outcomes (such as firm value, profitability, leverage, investment, and risk-taking) and financial

market variables (such as liquidity and price informativeness), studied the market reaction to block

trades, and estimated the private benefits of control. Identifying causal effects for either the

consequences or determinants of blockholders is particularly challenging, and a number of

approaches have been employed.

     There are several potential avenues for future research. Starting with voice, recent empirical

research has significantly enhanced our understanding on activism through hand-collection of data

(e.g., 13D filings, private letters to management, and surveys), and further data entrepreneurship

will hopefully shed even more light. In particular, while the theoretical literature typically assumes

a single blockholder and an unspecified interventionist action, in reality there are several types of

blockholders who engage in various forms of activism, which meet with different management

responses. Gathering finer data (as recent papers focusing on activist hedge funds have done) will

help us understand which types of activism are successful, under which circumstances, and by

which blockholders.     A particular challenge is to identify causal effects, due to the lack of


                                                                                                     35
instruments for blockholder presence or actions. Even a question as fundamental as the impact of

blockholders on firm value remains unanswered.

     The exit mechanism implies a new way of thinking about blockholders – as informed traders

rather than controlling entities – which gives rise to a number of new research directions linking

blockholders to microstructure, and more generally, corporate finance to financial markets. Future

theories could incorporate more complex features of informed trading, which have previously been

analyzed in microstructure models that treat firm value as exogenous. Current exit theories consider

a single trading round, but in reality there may be multiple periods across which the blockholder

may trade on her information. Moreover, while some existing single-period models feature the

blockholder being forced to trade due to a liquidity shock (in addition to voluntarily trading on

information), combining liquidity shocks with multiple periods and multiple informed traders may

lead to additional interesting insights, such as the possibility of front-running (e.g., Brunnermeier

and Pedersen (2005)). Empirical investigation of exit may similarly benefit from studying variables

typically analyzed in the microstructure literature, such as trading volume, price informativeness,

and the extent of information asymmetries between blockholders and the market (or the manager).

In addition, the recent financial crisis has led to a number of regulatory changes (e.g., short-sale

restrictions) that affect financial markets, and thus may be used to identify casual effects.

     While voice and exit have largely been studied independently, it would be interesting to

examine their interactions theoretically. The few papers that study voice and exit together assume

the same blockholder engages in both, but in reality, different blockholders have expertise in

different strategies. Moreover, it would be fruitful to study how voice and exit interact with other,

non-blockholder governance mechanisms. For example, the manager’s contract is a governance

mechanism in itself and also affects the effectiveness of exit. It is typically taken as exogenous, but

in reality may be jointly determined with blockholdings. Cohn and Rajan (2012) study how the

                                                                                                    36
board moderates conflicts between the activist investor and manager and show that, surprisingly,

internal governance (by the board) and external governance (by the activist) can be complements.

     For both the voice and exit channels, a particular empirical challenge is that there is no widely

accepted definition of a blockholder. While most empirical papers define a blockholder as a 5%

shareholder, theory models do not predict a discontinuity at 5%. Particular attention could be paid

to how the effectiveness of governance depends on block size. In addition, other data sources such

as 13F filings may allow researchers to consider blockholders with stakes below 5%.             Such

blockholders may still have incentives to engage in monitoring, particularly in large firms where

their dollar stakes will be significant. Relatedly, while the percentage stake is the most common

measure of block size, the dollar stake may be more relevant, particularly in settings in which

blockholder governance is likely to scale with firm size.

     Our theoretical and empirical understanding of both voice and exit may be further enhanced

by considering agency problems at the blockholder level (as some recent papers have done). Many

blockholders are agents themselves, who may have objectives other than shareholder value

maximization. On the theoretical side, while there are some early papers on the private benefits of

control, studying the interaction between private benefits and governance through voice or exit

would be interesting.    Empirically, gathering data on blockholder agency problems (e.g., the

alignment of the blockholder with her target firm’s performance, her concern for fund flows, and

her ownership of other firms with business ties) is a potentially fruitful avenue.

     There is also scope for both theory and empirics to study new categories of blockholders that

are emerging. For example, exchange-traded funds actively engage in proxy voting, but do not

engage in discretionary trading (Davis (2013)). Similarly, researchers can analyze new practices

that blockholders are recently beginning to engage in, such as empty voting (establishing separate



                                                                                                   37
positions in cash flow ownership and voting rights, for instance through borrowing shares). See

Brav and Mathews (2011) for a theoretical analysis and Hu and Black (2007) for empirics.

     Overall, while the literature on blockholders and corporate governance is nearly thirty years

old, many new and exciting strands have recently developed due to data entrepreneurship and the

study of a new governance channel. These strands are still in their infancy and there is substantial

scope for future research, not only in understanding these strands in and of themselves, but also how

they interact with other governance mechanisms. I hope that this review will help stimulate this

research going forward, and look forward to learning from it.


DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might
be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am grateful to Bo Becker, Jerry Davis, Christine Dobridge, Vivian Fang, Slava Fos, Todd
Gormley, Cliff Holderness, Sudarshan Jayaraman, Giorgia Piacentino, Enrique Schroth, and Luke
Taylor for valued comments, David Schoenherr for research assistance, and Janet Chater for help in
preparing this manuscript.

LITERATURE CITED

Admati AR, Pfleiderer P. 2009. The “Wall Street Walk” and shareholder activism: exit as a form of
       voice. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22(7):2445–85
Admati AR, Pfleiderer P, Zechner J. 1994. Large shareholder activism, risk sharing, and financial
       market equilibrium. J. Polit. Econ. 102(6):1097–130
Aghion P, Bolton P, Tirole J. 2004. Exit options in corporate finance: Liquidity versus incentives.
       Rev. Finance 8(3):327–53
Aghion P, Van Reenen J, Zingales L. 2013. Innovation and institutional ownership. Am. Econ. Rev.
       103(1):277–304
Agrawal AK. 2012. Corporate governance objectives of labor union shareholders: Evidence from
       proxy voting. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25(1):187–226
Albuquerque R, Schroth E. 2010. Quantifying private benefits of control from a structural model of
       block trades. J. Financ. Econ. 96(1):33–55
Amihud Y, Lev B. 1981. Risk reduction as a managerial motive for conglomerate mergers. Bell J.
      Econ. 12(2):605–617
Atanassov J. 2013. Do hostile takeovers stifle innovation? Evidence from antitakeover legislation
       and corporate patenting. J. Finance 68(3):1097–131

                                                                                                  38
Barclay MJ, Holderness CG. 1989. Private benefits from control of public corporations. J. Financ.
       Econ. 25(2):371–95
Barclay MJ, Holderness CG. 1991. Negotiated block trades and corporate control. J. Finance
       46(3):861–78
Barclay MJ, Holderness CG. 1992. The law and large-block trades. J. Law Econ. 35(2): 265–94
Baysinger B, Kosnik R, Turk T. 1991. Effects of board and ownership structure on corporate R&D
       strategy. Acad. Manag. J. 34(1):205–14
Becht M, Franks J, Mayer C, Rossi S. 2009. Returns to shareholder activism: Evidence from a
       clinical study of the Hermes U.K. Focus Fund. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23(3):3093–129
Becker B, Bergstresser D, Subrahmanian G. 2013. Does shareholder proxy access improve firm
       value? Evidence from the Business Roundtable Challenge. J. Law. Econ. Forthcoming
Becker B, Cronqvist H, Fahlenbrach R. 2011. Estimating the effects of large shareholders using a
       geographic instrument. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 46(4): 907–42
Bennedsen M, Wolfenzon D. 2000. The balance of power in closely held corporations. J. Financ.
       Econ. 58(1–2):113–39
Berle A, Means G. 1932. The modern corporation and private property. New York: Macmillan
Bharath ST, Jayaraman S, Nagar V. 2013. Exit as governance: an empirical analysis. J. Finance.
       Forthcoming
Bhide A. 1993. The hidden costs of stock market liquidity. J. Financ. Econ. 34(1):31–51
Boehmer E, Kelley E. 2009. Institutional investors and the informational efficiency of prices. Rev.
       Financ. Stud. 22(9):3563–94
Bolton P, von Thadden EL. 1998. Blocks, liquidity, and corporate control. J. Finance. 53(1):1–25
Bond P, Edmans A, Goldstein I. 2012. The real effects of financial markets. Annu. Rev. Financ.
       Econ. 4(1):339–60
Boyson N, Mooradian R. 2011. Corporate governance and hedge fund activism. Rev. Derivatives
       Research. 14 (2):169–204
Boyson N, Mooradian R. 2012. Experienced hedge fund activists. Work. Pap., Northeastern Univ.
Bradley M, Brav A, Goldstein I, Jiang W. 2010. Activist arbitrage: A study of open-ending attempts
       of closed-end funds. J. Financ. Econ. 95(1):1–19
Brav A, Jiang W, Partnoy F, Thomas R. 2008. Hedge fund activism: corporate governance, and firm
       performance. J. Finance 63(4):1729–75
Brav A, Jiang W, Kim H. 2013. The real effects of hedge fund activism: Productivity, asset
       allocation, and industry concentration. Work. Pap., Duke Univ.
Brav A, Mathews RD, Empty voting and the efficiency of corporate governance. J. Financ. Econ.
       99(2):289–307
Brockman P, Yan XS. 2009. Block ownership and firm-specific information. J. Bank. Finance
Brunnermeier M, Pedersen L. 2005. Predatory trading. J. Finance 60(4):1825–63
Burkart M, Gromb D, Panunzi F. 1997. Large shareholders, monitoring, and the value of the firm.
       Q.J. Econ. 112(3):693–728
Burns N, Kedia S, Lipson M. 2010. Institutional ownership and monitoring: Evidence from
       financial misreporting. J. Corp. Finance. 16(4):443–55
Bushee B, Goodman T. 2007. Which institutional investors trade based on private information
       about earnings and returns? J. Account. Res. 45(2):289–321



                                                                                                39
Carleton WT, Nelson JM, Weisbach MS. 1998. The influence of institutions on corporate
       governance through private negotiations: Evidence from TIAA–CREF. J. Finance
       53(4):1335–62
Chen X, Harford J, Li K. 2007. Monitoring: Which institutions matter? J. Financ. Econ. 86(2):279–
       305
Claessens S, Djankov S, Fan JPH, Lang LHP. 2002. Disentangling the incentive and entrenchment
       effects of large shareholdings. J. Finance 62(6):2741–71
Clifford CP. 2008. Value creation or destruction? Hedge funds as shareholder activists. J. Corp.
       Finance 14(4):323–36
Clifford CP, Lindsey LA. 2013. Getting what you pay for: Blockholder monitoring, CEO
       compensation, and firm performance. Work. Pap., Univ. of Kentucky
Coffee J. 1991. Liquidity versus control: The institutional investor as corporate monitor. Columbia
       Law Review 91(6):1277–368
Cohn JB, Rajan U. 2013. Optimal corporate governance in the presence of an activist investor. Rev.
       Financ. Stud. 26(4):985–1020
Collin-Dufresne P, Fos V. 2013. Do prices reveal the presence of informed trading? Work. Pap.,
       Columbia Univ.
Cronqvist H, Fahlenbrach R. 2009. Large shareholders and corporate policies. Rev. Financ. Stud.
       22(10):3941–76
Dasgupta A, Piacentino G. 2013. The Wall Street Walk when blockholders compete for flows.
       Work. Pap., London School of Economics.
Davis G. 2013. After the corporation. Pol. Soc. 41(2):283–308
Davis GF, Kim EH. 2007. Business ties and proxy voting by mutual funds. J. Financ. Econ.
       85(2):552–70
Dechow P, Sloan R, Sweeney A. 1996. Causes and consequences of earnings manipulation: An
       analysis of firms subject to enforcement actions by the SEC. Contemporary Accounting
       Research. 13(1):1–36
Del Guercio D. 1996. The distorting effect of the prudent–man laws on institutional equity
       investments. J. Financ. Econ. 40(1):31–62
Del Guercio D, Hawkins J. 1999. The motivation and impact of pension fund activism. J. Financ.
       Econ 52(3):293–340
Demsetz H, Lehn K. 1985. The structure of corporate ownership: Causes and consequences. J.
       Polit. Econ. 93(6):1155–77
Dimmock, SG, Gerken WC, Ivković Z, Weisbenner SJ. 2013. Locked-in to govern: How the capital
       gain of a stock holding affects a mutual fund’s voting decision. Work. Pap., Nanyang Tech.
       Univ.
Dlugosz J, Fahlenbrach R, Gompers P, Metrick A. 2006. Large blocks of stock: Prevalence, size,
       and measurement. J. Corp. Finance 12(3):594–618
Dow J, Gorton G. 1997. Stock market efficiency and economic efficiency: Is there a connection? J.
       Finance 52(3):1087–129
Edmans A. 2009. Blockholder trading, market efficiency, and managerial myopia. J. Finance 64(6):
        2481–513


                                                                                                40
Edmans A. 2011. Short-term termination without deterring long-term investment: A theory of debt
       and buyouts. J. Financ, Econ 101(3):621–40
Edmans A, Fang VW, Zur E. 2013. The effect of liquidity on governance. Rev. Financ. Stud.
       26(6):1443–82
Edmans A, Gabaix X. 2009. Is CEO pay really inefficient? A survey of new optimal contracting
       theories. Eur. Financ. Manag. 15(3):486–96
Edmans A, Gabaix X, Landier A. 2009. A multiplicative model of optimal CEO incentives in
       market equilibrium. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22(12):4881–917
Edmans A, Manso G. 2011. Governance through trading and intervention: a theory of multiple
       blockholders. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24(7):2395–428
Faccio M, Lang L. 2002. The ultimate ownership of western European corporations. J. Financ.
       Econ. 65(3):365–95
Faccio M, Marchica M. Mura R. 2011. Large shareholder diversification and corporate risk-taking.
       Rev. Financ. Stud. 24(11):3601–3641
Fang VW, Noe T, Tice S. 2009. Stock market liquidity and firm value. J. Financ. Econ. 94(1):150–
       69
Farber D. 2005. Restoring trust after fraud: Does corporate governance matter? Account. Rev.
       80(2):539–61
Faure-Grimaud A, Gromb D. 2004. Public trading and private incentives. Rev. Financ. Stud. 17
       (4):985–1014.
Fos V. 2013. The disciplinary effects of proxy contests. Work. Pap., Univ. of Illinois
Frydman C, Jenter D. 2010. CEO Compensation. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 2(1):75–102
Gallagher DR, Gardner PA, Swan PL. 2013. Governance through trading: Institutional swing trades
       and subsequent company performance. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 48(2):427–58
Gantchev N. 2013. The Costs of Shareholder Activism: Evidence from a Sequential Decision
       Model, J. Financ. Econ. 107(3):610–631
Gerken, W. C. 2009. Blockholder ownership and corporate control: The role of liquidity. Work.
       Pap., Auburn Univ.
Goldman E, Strobl G. 2013. Large shareholder trading and the complexity of corporate investments.
       J. Financ. Intermed. 22(1):106–22
Goldstein I, Guembel A. 2008. Manipulation and the allocational role of prices. Rev. Econ. Stud.
       75(1):133–64
Gorton GB, Huang L, Kang Q. 2013. The limitations of stock market efficiency: Price
       informativeness and CEO turnover. Work. Pap., Yale Univ.
Greenwood R, Schor M. 2009. Investor activism and takeovers. J. Financ. Econ. 92(3):362–75
Grossman SJ, Hart OD. 1980. Takeover bids, the free-rider problem, and the theory of the
       corporation. Bell J. Econ. 11(1):42–64
Heflin F, Shaw K. 2000. Blockholder ownership and market liquidity. J. Financ. Quant. Anal.
       35(4):621–633
Helwege J, Intintoli V, Zhang A. 2012. Voting with their feet or activism? Institutional investors’
       impact on CEO turnover. J. Corp. Finance 18(1):22–37
Hirschman AO. 1970. Exit, voice, and loyalty: Responses to decline in firms, organizations, and
       states. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Holden CW, Subrahmanyam A. 1992. Long-lived private information and imperfect competition. J.
       Finance 47(1):247–70

                                                                                                41
Holderness C. 2009. The myth of diffuse ownership in the United States. Rev. Financ. Stud.
       22(4):1377–408.
Holderness C, Sheehan D. 1985. Raiders or saviors? The evidence on six controversial investors. J.
       Financ. Econ. 14(4):555–79
Holderness C, Sheehan D. 1988. The role of majority shareholders in publicly held corporations: An
       exploratory analysis. J. Financ. Econ. 20:317–46
Holthausen RW, Leftwich RW, Mayers D. 1990. Large–block transactions, the speed of response
       and temporary and permanent stock-price effects. J. Financ. Econ. 26(1):71–95
Hu H, Black B. 2007. Hedge funds, insiders, and the decoupling of economic and voting ownership:
       empty voting and hidden (morphable) ownership. J. Corp. Fin. 13(2-3):343–67
Jensen MC. 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. Am. Econ. Rev.
       76(2):323–329
Kahn C, Winton A. 1998. Ownership structure, speculation, and shareholder intervention. J.
       Finance 53(1):99–129
Khanna N, Mathews R. 2012. Doing battle with short sellers: the conflicted role of blockholders in
       bear raids. J. Financ. Econ. 106(2):229–46
Klein A, Zur E. 2009. Entrepreneurial shareholder activism: hedge funds and other private
       investors. J. Finance 64(1):187–229
Kole, S. 1997. The complexity of compensation contracts. J. Financ. Econ. 43(1):79–104
Konijn SJJ, Kräussl R, Lucas A. 2011. Blockholder dispersion and firm value. J. Corp. Finance
       17(5):1330–9
Kyle A, Vila J. 1991. Noise trading and takeovers. RAND J. Econ. 22(1):54–71
Laeven L, Levine R. 2007. Complex ownership structures and corporate valuations. Rev. Financ.
       Stud. 21(2):579–604.
Lambert RA. 1986. Executive effort and selection of risky projects. RAND J. Econ. 17(1):77–88
La Porta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 1999. Corporate ownership around the world. J.
       Finance 54(2):471–517
Lee P. 2005. A comparison of ownership structures and innovations of U.S. and Japanese firms.
       Manag. Decis. Econ. 26(1):39–50
Levit D. 2013. Soft shareholder activism. Work. Pap., Univ. Penn.
Lins KV. 2003. Equity ownership and firm value in emerging markets. J. Financ. Quant. Anal.
       38(1):159–184
Maug E. 1998. Large shareholders as monitors: Is there a trade–off between liquidity and control?
       J. Finance 53(1):65–98
Maug E. 2002. Insider trading legislation and corporate governance. Eur. Econ. Rev. 46(9):1569–97
Maury B, Pajuste A. 2005. Multiple large shareholders and firm value. J. Bank. Fin. 29(7):1813–34
McCahery J, Sautner Z, Starks LT. 2011. Behind the scenes: The corporate governance preferences
       of institutional investors. Work. Pap., Univ. Amst.
McConnell JL, Servaes H. 1990. Additional evidence on equity ownership and corporate value. J.
       Financ. Econ. 27(2):595–612
Mehran H. 1995. Executive compensation structure, ownership, and firm performance. J. Financ.
       Econ. 38(2):163-84
Mikkelson W, Partch M. 1985. Stock price effects and costs of secondary distributions. J. Financ.
       Econ. 14(2):165–94
Miller MH, Rock K. 1985. Dividend policy under asymmetric information. J. Finance 40(4):1031–
       51.

                                                                                               42
Murphy KJ. 1999. Executive compensation. In Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 3, ed. O
        Ashfelter, D Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Murphy KJ. 2013. Executive compensation: Where we are, and how we got there. In Handbook of
        the Economics of Finance, Vol. 2, ed. G Constantinides, M Harris, R Stulz. Amsterdam:
        Elsevier
Narayanan MP. 1985. Managerial incentives for short-term results. J. Finance. 40(5):1469–84
Noe TH. 2002. Investor activism and financial market structure. Rev. Financ. Stud. 15(1):289–318
Norli Ø, Ostergaard C, Schindele I. 2013. Liquidity and shareholder activism. Work. Pap., Nor.
        Sch. Manag.
Pagano M, Röell A. 1998. The choice of stock ownership structure: Agency costs, monitoring, and
        the decision to go public. Q. J. Econ. 113(1):187–225
Parrino R, Sias R, Starks L. 2003. Voting with their feet: Institutional ownership changes around
        forced CEO turnover. J. Financ. Econ. 68(1):3–46
Porter ME. 1992. Capital choices: Changing the way America invests in industry. J. Applied Corp.
        Fin. 5(2):4–16
Roe M. 1990. Political and legal restraints on ownership and control of public companies. J.
        Financ. Econ. 27(1):7–41
Roosenboom P, Schlingemann FP, Vasconcelos M. 2013. Does stock liquidity affect the incentives
        to monitor: Evidence from corporate takeovers. Work. Pap., Erasmus Univ. Rotterdam
Rubin A. 2007. Ownership level, ownership concentration and liquidity. J. Financ. Mark. 10(3):
        219–248
Scharfstein D, Stein J. 1990. Herd behavior and investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 80(3):465–79
Scholes M. 1972. The market for securities: Substitution versus price pressure and the effects of
        information on share prices. J. Bus. 45(2):179–211
Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1986. Large shareholders and corporate control. J. Polit. Econ. 94(3):461–88
Sias R, Starks L, Titman S. 2006. Changes in institutional ownership and stock returns: Assessment
        and methodology. J. Bus. 79(6):2869–910
Stein JC. 1988. Takeover threats and managerial myopia. J. Polit. Econ. 96(1):61–80
Stein JC. 1989. Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate behavior.
        Q. J. Econ. 104(4):655–69
Stein JC. 1996. Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world. J. Bus. 69(4):429–55
Thurow L. 1993. Head to head: The coming economics battle among Japan, Europe and America.
        New York: Warner Books
Winton A. 1993. Limitation of liability and the ownership structure of the firm. J. Finance
        48(2):487–512.
Yan X, Zhang Z. 2009. Institutional investors and equity returns: Are short-term institutions better
        informed? Rev. Financ. Stud. 22(2):893–924
Yermack D. 2010. Shareholder voting and corporate governance. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 2:103–
        25
Zwiebel J. 1995. Block investment and partial benefits of corporate control. Rev. Econ. Stud. 62(2)
        161–85




                                                                                                 43
