                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT SHORT AND LONG TERM EFFECTS OF EARLY
                    LIFE EXPOSURE TO POLLUTION?

                                             Janet Currie
                                         Joshua S. Graff Zivin
                                            Jamie Mullins
                                          Matthew J. Neidell

                                         Working Paper 19571
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19571


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




Currie thanks the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur foundation for financial support. Graff Zivin
and Neidell are grateful for funding from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
(1R21ES019670-01). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19571.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Janet Currie, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Jamie Mullins, and Matthew J. Neidell. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Do We Know About Short and Long Term Effects of Early Life Exposure to Pollution?
Janet Currie, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Jamie Mullins, and Matthew J. Neidell
NBER Working Paper No. 19571
October 2013
JEL No. I1,I12,J24,Q5,Q53

                                             ABSTRACT

Pollution exposure early in life is detrimental to near-term health and an increasing body of evidence
suggests that early childhood health influences health and human capital outcomes later in life. This
paper reviews the economic research that brings these two literatures together. We begin with a conceptual
model that highlights the core relationships across the lifecycle. We then review the literature concerned
with such estimates, focusing particularly on identification strategies to mitigate concerns regarding
endogenous exposure. The nascent empirical literature provides both direct and indirect evidence that
early childhood exposure to pollution significantly impacts later life outcomes. We discuss the potential
policy implications of these long-lasting effects, and conclude with a number of promising avenues
for future research.


Janet Currie                                        Jamie Mullins
Princeton University                                University of California, San Diego
316 Wallace Hall                                    9500 Gilman Drive
Princeton, NJ 08544                                 La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER                                            jmullins@ucsd.edu
jcurrie@princeton.edu
                                                    Matthew J. Neidell
Joshua S. Graff Zivin                               Department of Health Policy and Management
University of California, San Diego                 Columbia University
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519                          722 W 168th Street, 6th Floor
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                             New York, NY 10032
and NBER                                            and NBER
jgraffzivin@ucsd.edu                                mn2191@columbia.edu
I. Introduction

The protection of human health is a principal motivation for environmental regulation around

the world. Children are particularly vulnerable to environmental exposures because their

immune and other bodily systems are still developing and they often engage in behaviors that

increase their exposure to toxic chemicals and organisms, e.g. they spend more time outside

than adults (U.S. EPA 2013; Bateson & Schwartz 2007; Makri et al. 2004; Schwartz

2004). Rapid cell division and an intense phase of epigenetic programming make the

prenatal and immediate postnatal period an especially sensitive one (Baccarelli & Bollati

2009; Gluckman et al. 2008; Holt 1998). As such, the protection of children has become a

driving force behind many environmental regulations.1

         The impacts of early life pollution exposure are of interest for non-health reasons as

well. Early life health affects long-term outcomes including human capital accumulation,

labor force participation and earnings (see Almond & Currie 2011 for a review of this

literature). Thus, the marginal returns to regulations that protect children may be both large

and rather diffuse in that they affect many outcomes.2

         In addition to broadening the focus beyond health, economists have made two

important methodological contributions to the study of pollution impacts on children. First,

economists have developed a conceptual framework for considering the effects of pollution

within the larger frame of health production and investments. The framework implies, for

example, that a lifetime of investments may strengthen or attenuate the pure biologic insults

experienced early in life. It also highlights that optimizing behavior, through residential

sorting, can lead to non-random assignment of pollution. For example, as discussed further

1
  In the U.S., for example, Executive Order 13045 directs the EPA and other federal agencies to “ensure that its
policies, programs, activities, and standards address disproportionate risks to children that result from
environmental health risks or safety risks” (Clinton 1997).
2
  Large returns to early life interventions have been found in a number of settings outside of environmental
health (Currie 2001; Heckman 2000, Schweinhart et al. 1993; 2005).
below, individuals with higher incomes are both less likely to raise their families in areas of

poor environmental quality, and more likely to make greater investments in their children’s

health. Failing to account for the correlation of higher health investments with living in an

area with better environmental quality will bias estimates of the effects of pollution.

        Similarly, an optimizing framework leads to the consideration of avoidance behavior.

Since the consequences of toxic exposures are costly, particularly to children, parents may

engage in activities to prevent them. Avoidance behavior can muddy the measurement of

biologic effects in epidemiologic research. Ignoring avoidance behavior can also lead to

significant underestimation of the social welfare costs of pollution since a narrow focus on

the costs of morbidity and mortality will exclude the costs of avoidance activities (Courant &

Porter 1981; Harrington & Portney 1987; Bartik 1988).

        A second, and related contribution in light of concerns regarding endogenous

exposure to pollution, is the use of quasi-experimental techniques to develop causal estimates

of the effects of early-life pollution. The shorter possible exposure period and more limited

geographic mobility of children make it easier to use quasi-experimental methods to

determine the effects of pollution on children relative to adults. Such causal inference has

enabled the detection of effects at markedly low levels of pollution.

        A third contribution of economists involves the explicit consideration of welfare and

willingness-to-pay (WTP) for reductions in pollution. As discussed below, the data

requirements for a complete WTP calculation are seldom met, but partial calculations may

still be useful for policy.

        This paper reviews the recent economic literature on the effects of early life exposure

to pollution. We focus primarily on air pollution since it has received the most attention in

the literature, largely due to greater data availability. The remainder of the paper is organized

as follows. The next section describes the contribution of economics to our understanding of


                                                                                                  1
the impacts of early life pollution exposure. We begin with a conceptual model, followed by

a discussion of identification and welfare. Section III provides a structured review of the

literature that organizes papers into common themes. Section IV offers some concluding

remarks and suggestions for future research.



II. What Do Economists Bring to the Table?

1. Conceptual Model

         In this section, we develop a simple three-period model that builds upon earlier work

on human capital accumulation and investments (Grossman 1972; Cunha & Heckman 2007;

Almond & Currie 2011) to highlight the salient features that link pollution and birth

outcomes to health and human capital later in life.

         Our framework divides life into three distinct stages: early childhood, late childhood,

and adulthood. To fix ideas, one can view early childhood as beginning in utero and ending

at age 5. Late childhood would comprise the school years, and adulthood can be viewed as

the post-schooling period when people have typically entered the labor force. For simplicity,

we model the human capital production function of a representative individual and abstract

from the endogeneity of pollution exposure, though we return to this problem in the next

section (Neidell 2009; Graff Zivin et al. 2011; Currie et al. 2011).3

         Assume that early childhood human capital HE is dependent on early childhood

pollution exposure PE and time-invariant family characteristics X, such as genetics.

              ,                                                                                     (1)

Late childhood human capital HL depends on late childhood pollution exposure PL and the

human capital accumulated during early childhood.                       Importantly, families can make


3
  Individuals may differ in their susceptibility to pollution for a variety of reasons apart from the explicit
differences by stage of life that we attend to here. This heterogeneity will affect the gradient between childhood
and adult outcomes, but the basic insights from the model remain the same.

                                                                                                                 2
investments IL in their child that influence the legacy of those early childhood outcomes.

Those investments will depend upon realizations of human capital in the first stage of life.

                 ,                                                                   (2)

Finally, assume that adult outcomes HA depend on both early and late childhood human

capital. Given our focus on children, we ignore adult exposure to pollution and investments

in human capital, such that adults in our model should be viewed as ‘fully formed.’ Human

capital in adulthood is broadly construed to reflect the fact that pollution can affect cognitive

attainment and earnings as well as health (Graff Zivin & Neidell 2013).

             ,                                                                       (3)

       Equations (1)-(3) imply that the impacts of early childhood pollution exposure on

adult human capital will depend upon its short-run effects as well as the propagation of those

effects through the rest of the life cycle. These pathways are easily shown by taking the total

derivative of (3):

                                                                                     (4)




Note that PE (or PL) may also have a direct, latent effect on HA, which does not act through

changes in HE or HL. For the time being we ignore the partial derivatives of HA with respect

to PE and PL though we return to the question of latent effects below.

       Our model of human capital accumulation can be used to illustrate several points

regarding childhood exposure to pollution. As discussed above, it is reasonable to assume

that the early childhood period is one of greater sensitivity to pollution. The nine months in

utero is a critical period for physiological development and an increasing body of evidence

suggests that fetal programming can be adversely impacted by toxic exposures (Almond &

Currie 2011; Barker 1990; Bateson & Schwartz 2007). All else equal, this suggests that an

equal dose of pollution will have a bigger effect (in absolute value) in early childhood:

                                                                                                 3
                ∀          .                                                        (5)

       In addition to greater contemporaneous health effects, early life exposures can result

in latent health impacts. In particular, pollution may have epigenetic effects – permanent

alterations in gene expression – that can negatively impact intellectual growth and maturity

later in life (Petronis 2010). Someone with latent epigenetic damage might initially appear to

be in perfect health so that it might be possible to observe the following:

        0                  0.                                                       (6)

       The long potential latency period between exposure and the outcomes of interest also

provides ample opportunity for effects to be amplified or dampened. Self-productivity and

dynamic complementarities in health and learning, whereby capabilities beget capabilities in

a multi-stage framework, suggest that early health shocks will be multiplied over the life

cycle (Cunha & Heckman 2007). The early manifestation of health and cognitive deficits

could induce parental (dis)investments in early childhood that will also impact later life

outcomes. Whether parents compensate for poor endowments at birth by increasing

investments in those children or reinforce poor endowments by directing their efforts toward

children with better prospects is an open empirical question in the literature (Behrman et al.

1994; Datar et al. 2010). If we expand the last term of equation (4) above, the role of these

investments can be made more explicit:

                                                                                    (7)

Assuming that the effects of pollution exposure are detrimental, self-productivity and

dynamic complementarities imply that        is large and negative – early deficits compound

over the life cycle such that the impacts later can be quite large. Compensatory investments

correspond to the case where      is negative, while reinforcing ones imply that this term is

positive.

                                                                                                 4
        The principal value of equation (7) is conceptual. Data limitations imply that all

empirical investigations in this area will paint a partial picture of this total derivative.

Nonetheless, the equation underscores the connections across a wide range of empirical

literatures within economics, including the environmental, education, labor and health fields.

This basic model also highlights the policy importance of the question addressed in this

review. If the legacy effects of early pollution exposures are large, then even modest

interventions to protect young children may have profound impacts on societal well-being

and future economic growth. Of course, such benefits would have to be weighed against the

costs of any regulatory efforts to protect children, and a proper welfare calculation should

incorporate the costs borne by households seeking to avoid pollution and/or to compensate

for its effects.



2. An Emphasis on Identification

        While the conceptual model just described intentionally eschewed concerns about the

endogeneity of pollution exposure, empirical economic studies on the effects of the

environment on child health have not. Endogeneity can arise through two primary channels.

The first is Tiebout sorting (Tiebout 1956), through which people “vote with their feet” by

choosing residential locations based on area characteristics, such as pollution levels or

attributes coincidentally correlated with pollution levels. A growing body of empirical

evidence suggests that sorting based on environmental quality is indeed a major factor

affecting residential location. For example, Banzhaf & Walsh (2008) find that high income

families tend to move away from highly polluted areas, while Currie (2011), Currie et al.,

(2011), and Currie & Walker (2011) find that improving environmental quality in an area

increases the share of pregnant women who are white and college-educated. As a result of

this sorting, areas with higher levels of pollution may also have other unobserved


                                                                                               5
characteristics correlated with health, suggesting that omitted variable bias is likely to

confound estimates.4

         The second source of endogeneity arises from avoidance behavior. If individuals take

actions to protect their children’s health when pollution is high, these actions will lead to non-

random assignment of ex post pollution exposure. These kinds of actions require knowledge

of pollution levels, either through experiential changes in health or, as may be more likely for

younger children, through publicly provided information. The dissemination of pollution

information to the public is mandated in many large cities, and is often accompanied by

recommended strategies for pollution avoidance, such as staying indoors or shifting activities

to times of the day when pollution is expected to be lower.

         Since avoidance behavior is an ex post decision– it occurs in response to realized

pollution levels -- its omission from analysis does not introduce a bias per se in estimates, but

rather affects the interpretation of estimated relationships. Estimates that account for

avoidance behaviour uncover the direct biological effect of pollution on health (∂HA/∂PE).

Estimates that do not account for avoidance measure a reduced form effect of pollution on

health, which consists of the biological effect plus the degree to which avoidance behavior

(AB) is successful in averting detrimental health effects (dHA/dPE = ∂HA/∂PE + ∂HA/∂AB

∂AB/∂PE). Both estimates can be used to monetize the benefits from improvements in

environmental quality, so the focus of estimation depends on the research question.

         Economists have addressed endogeneity concerns with quasi-experimental techniques

such as finding natural experiments that result in unexpected “shocks” to environmental

quality. These shocks can be driven by government regulation (such as the Clean Air Acts in

the United States), unexpected changes in industrial production (such as strikes and plant

closings), or catastrophic events (such as temperature inversions or wildfires). Another

4
  We also note that pollution, rather than people, may “sort” whereby polluting industries locate in areas with
lower land prices, which also tend to be areas with residents of lower socioeconomic status.

                                                                                                                  6
approach consists of exploiting high frequency variability in pollution over short periods of

time in conjunction with local area fixed effects, under the assumption that sorting in

response to environmental changes occurs more slowly than health changes. A final approach

consists of within family designs, such as sibling comparisons, which hold fixed many

unobserved characteristics common to children from the same family.

           While each approach has its advantages, there are important limitations that must be

recognized. For example, although an unexpected productivity shock can affect air pollution,

it may also directly affect health through job losses or the loss of health insurance (von

Wachter & Sullivan 2009). And the more time is allowed to elapse from the time of the

shock, the greater the probability that residential sorting will complicate the picture. Natural

experiments also do little to directly address ex post avoidance behaviour. Despite these

limitations, we will show below that the weight of the evidence suggests that early life

exposure to pollution has negative long term effects.



3. Welfare Calculations to Guide Policy

           Environmental economics research often aims to develop measures of willingness-to-

pay for reductions in pollution. Such estimates are necessary to inform environmental policy.

While the theory underlying the computation of WTP is clear (Harrington & Portney 1987;

Cropper & Freeman 1991), there are few studies that combine an emphasis on quasi-

experimental identification strategies with WTP calculations. One likely explanation is the

massive data requirements to compute a complete WTP – in principal, WTP must include

measures of all outcomes affected, all types of avoidance behavior undertaken, and the

disutility (such as pain and suffering) associated with any health effects.5 As a result,

economists often compute partial cost-benefit analyses, noting that the computed benefits


5
    See Deschênes et al. (2012) for an example of one of the most comprehensive estimates of WTP.

                                                                                                    7
understate the complete WTP for a particular policy. It is also worth noting that, since

economic studies are typically designed to test whether a null hypothesis can be rejected, the

common practice is to employ conservative assumptions that bias estimated effects of the

particular outcome of interest toward zero.6 Hence reported magnitudes often provide only a

lower bound on the magnitude of the effect. In the end, a policy recommendation is only

clear if even these understated benefits exceed costs.



III. Literature Review

        Tables 1 to 4 summarize the existing quasi-experimental research in economics on the

effects of pollution on children’s well-being. Tables 1 through 3 focus on air pollution,

which is often the most reliably recorded measure of environmental quality. Table 4

summarizes the much smaller literature on water pollution. A general feature of this

literature is that, while impacts are often attributed to a single pollutant, emissions of many

pollutants tend to be highly correlated and may come from the same sources. For example,

an analysis of the effect of carbon monoxide exposure on birth weight may really be

measuring the effect of automobile exhaust, which includes particulate matter, nitrogen

oxides, and other chemicals in addition to carbon monoxide. Even analyses based on multi-

pollutant models rarely have measures of all relevant emissions. If all pollutants are emitted

from the same source, this may not matter from a policy perspective but it will certainly limit

generalizability across settings.


1. Long Term Effects of Air Pollution

        Table 1 shows that relatively few studies make a direct connection between childhood

exposure to pollution and long-term outcomes such as educational attainment and earnings.


6
 An example is sibling fixed effects estimates which are known to be biased towards zero in the presence of
random measurement error.

                                                                                                              8
The small number of studies is largely due to limitations in data availability: Data that allows

the linkage of adult outcomes with childhood environmental quality is rare. In the absence of

such data, some researchers have employed a cohort approach to exploit differences between

cohorts of children born just before and after an environmental shock. This approach

generally works best in the case of a large shock.

         Almond et al. (2009) studied the fallout from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster using

detailed Swedish administrative data. Although Sweden is more than 500 miles away from

Chernobyl, weather conditions forced some of the plume of radioactive particles to pass over

Sweden. Local variation in rainfall levels led to stark geographic variation in the levels of

fallout throughout the country. By comparing cohorts in affected and unaffected areas, and

cohorts in utero just prior to the disaster and during the disaster, they demonstrate that

radiation exposure reduced overall grades by 2.5 percentage points and mathematics test

scores by 6 percentage points despite the fact that the amounts of radiation involved were

below thresholds widely considered, at the time, to be safe. They also found no immediate

effects on health, as measured by birth outcomes and childhood hospitalizations,

underscoring the latent nature of these effects.7

         Black et al. (2013) conduct a similar analysis of the effect of radiation exposure in the

8th to 16th weeks of pregnancy due to fallout from nuclear tests. Using data from Norway,

they first show that test frequency, proximity to the coast, and rainfall patterns influenced the

deposition of fallout. They find that a one standard deviation increase in exposure decreased

IQ scores by .025 of a standard deviation. Exposure also led to reductions in years of

schooling and adult earnings.

         Using a large dataset that follows Chilean children from birth, Bharadwaj et al. (2013)

examine the relationship between air pollution exposure in each month of pregnancy and 4th
7
  It is notable that the radiation levels found in Sweden are quite comparable to those emitted by radon and used
in medical radiation. However, policy levers for influencing exposure from such sources are quite different from
typical environmental policy.

                                                                                                               9
and 8th grade test scores. They find significant effects of exposure to carbon monoxide (and

its correlates) and ozone in the 3rd and 4th months of pregnancy, a timing that is consistent

with the results found in Black et al. (2013) and Almond et al. (2009).

          Nilsson (2009) investigates the long-term impact of banning leaded gasoline in

Sweden during the 1970s. In an innovative design, he used measures of lead from moss

samples, to infer ambient lead levels in different areas of the country and is able to show a

wide geographic dispersion of lead across space and over time. Linking the decline in

ambient lead around the time of birth to later outcomes for the affected cohorts, his estimates

imply that reducing lead levels from 10 to 5 micrograms per deciliter (the current regulatory

standard in the U.S. is 15) increased high school graduation rates by 2.3% and earnings

among young adults by 5.5%. The effects were larger for children of lower socioeconomic

status.

          Sanders (2012) builds on the work of Chay & Greenstone (2003b; discussed below)

by asking whether cohorts affected by the reductions in U.S. pollution caused by the

recession of the early 1980s scored better on high school tests. A drawback to his analysis is

that he cannot identify where the mother resided when the children were born, so he is forced

to assume that children were born in the place they attended high school. Despite this

potential source of measurement error, he finds that a one standard deviation decrease in

Total Suspended Particles around the time of birth increases high school test scores by 1.87

standard deviations.

          Isen et al. (2013) are able to go further with a similar approach by using restricted

access data on adult earnings that includes information on the actual county and date of birth

of each worker. Their identification strategy follows Chay & Greenstone (2003a) in using

the pollution reductions due to the passage of the 1970 U.S. Clean Air Act Amendments as a

source of variation in pollution levels. Counties that were out of compliance with the new


                                                                                                  10
CAA pollution thresholds were identified as non-compliant and were required to lower

pollution, while counties with pollution levels just below the thresholds were not required to

implement any changes. Comparing counties initially just below the threshold to those just

above, they find that each 10 ug/m3 decrease in Total Suspended Particles during pregnancy

and early childhood resulted in a 1% increase in annual salaries. Of course, ambient levels of

particulates have fallen greatly since the 1970s, so it is not clear that a similar decline in the

U.S. today would have the same impact.


2. Air Pollution and Infant Health

        Given the difficulty in making a direct connection between early life exposure to

pollution and later outcomes, much of the literature focuses on the effects of pollution on

fetal and infant health and then relies on the growing literature linking health at birth to long-

term outcomes in order to make inferences about the likely long-term effects. The most

commonly used measures of early childhood health are birth weight (especially low birth

weight, defined as less than 2500 grams), prematurity (defined as gestation less than 37

weeks), and either infant mortality (death within the first year of life) or neonatal mortality

(death within the first month of life). The literature focusing on the effects of pollution on

infant health is summarized in Table 2. The studies in Table 2 are organized according to

whether the country is a developed or a developing country, and whether the pollutant is a

criterion air pollutant or another type of pollutant.


i. Developed countries

        Chay & Greenstone (2003a, b) conducted two landmark studies on the effects of air

pollution. The first study (Chay & Greenstone 2003a) pioneered the research design based

on the Clean Air Acts discussed above and used in subsequent studies. Applying this design

to county level data, they estimated that a one unit decline in particulates led to 5-8 fewer


                                                                                                     11
infant deaths per 100,000 live births. Sanders & Stoecker (2011), using the same natural

experiment, examine the effects of pollution on sex ratios at birth. Since male fetuses are

thought to be more fragile than female fetuses, a decrease in the ratio of male live births to

female live births is suggestive of an increase in fetal losses. Consistent with this hypothesis,

they find that a reduction in pollution increases the fraction of male fetuses. The second

Chay & Greenstone study (2003b) looked at the recession of 1982, which lowered pollution

in areas that experienced larger declines in manufacturing (i.e.- the research design followed

by Sanders 2012). These pollution reductions led to significant decreases in infant mortality.8

        The levels of particulates studied by Chay and Greenstone are much higher than those

prevalent today; for example, U.S. PM10 (particulate matter of 10 microns or less) levels fell

by nearly 50 percent from 1980-2000. Moreover, the Chay and Greenstone studies are only

able to examine the effects of particulates since other pollutants were not yet widely

measured. In a similar inquiry, Currie & Neidell (2005) focus on a more recent time period

when additional pollution measures are available. For identification they use high-frequency

variation in pollution within zip codes over time. A disadvantage of this approach is that

people living in persistently more polluted or higher variance areas may be systematically

different from other people in ways that might correlate with their children’s health. In order

to control for these differences, Currie and Neidell include zip code fixed effects and zip code

specific time trends and demonstrate that decreases in CO led to improvements in infant

mortality.

        In a related study, Currie et al. (2009b) used a large sample of infants born in New

Jersey from 1989-2006 who were subjected to different levels of pollution in utero. They

control for fixed elements of family background shared by siblings by including family fixed

8
  Arguably, Chay and Greenstone were inspired by a series of epidemiological studies investigating the health
effects of the opening and closing of a steel mill in Utah in the 1980s (Pope 1989; Pope et al. 1992; Ransom and
Pope 1995). Others have been inspired by these studies as well, for example Parker et al. (2008) returned to the
same natural experiment and found that preterm births declined when the mill was closed but rebounded when it
reopened.

                                                                                                             12
effects. They also focused on a sample of mothers who lived near pollution monitors in order

to improve their assignment of pollution exposure. They found that babies exposed in utero

to higher levels of carbon monoxide suffered reduced birth weight and gestation length

relative to their siblings, even though ambient CO levels were generally lower than current

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) standards. Their estimates imply that on average,

moving from a high to low CO area would have a larger effect on infant health than having a

pregnant woman reduce her smoking from ten cigarettes a day to zero.

       Since many papers find negative health effects of CO, and CO comes mostly from

cars, Currie & Walker (2011) exploited the introduction of electronic toll collection devices

(E-ZPass) in New Jersey and Pennsylvania to directly examine the effect of automobile

exhaust on infant health. Much of the pollution produced by automobiles occurs during

idling and acceleration, so the introduction of E-ZPass greatly reduced auto emissions near

toll plazas. For example, E-ZPass reduced CO by about 40% in the vicinity of toll plazas.

Comparing mothers near toll plazas (<2 km) to those who lived along the same busy

roadways but further away from toll plazas (2-10 km), they found that E-Zpass reduced the

incidence of low birth weight and prematurity by about 10%.      In a related paper, Knittel et

al. (2011) examined the effect of traffic congestion in California using data on traffic jams

that temporarily increased pollution levels. They also found significant effects of even

relatively low levels of pollution on infant mortality rates.

       Recently, the number of studies conducted outside of the U.S. has grown

considerably. Using a design similar to Currie & Neidell (2005), Coneus & Spiess (2010)

found large effects of CO on infant health in Germany. Luchinger (2010), also focusing on

Germany, used the mandating of SO2 scrubbers in power plants as a natural experiment. He

found that reductions in SO2 led to significant decreases in the rate of infant mortality. Janke

et al. (2009) examine the relationship between localized pollution levels in Great Britain


                                                                                                  13
between 1998 and 2005 and the deaths of children under 15.9 They estimate that a reduction

of 10 ug/m3 in PM10 is associated with 4 fewer deaths per 100,000.


ii. Developing countries

         The impacts of pollution in developing countries are of independent interest since

pollution levels are generally higher and infant health is often much worse than in more

developed countries. Thus, the same health insults may have larger effects, and the data may

also be used to test for potential non-linear effects of pollution. However, while data on

pollution and health are often reliably recorded in more developed nations, such data may be

more difficult to obtain in less developed countries. Jayachandran (2009) overcomes this

obstacle by using satellite aerosol measures to track smoke from fires in Indonesia in 1997,

and using data on “missing children” to infer infant mortality. She finds a reduction in cohort

size for those exposed to the fires’ smoke during the third trimester of pregnancy, and

calculates that the fires resulted in a 20% increase in deaths among fetuses and children less

than 3 years of age.

         Foster et al. (2009) also use satellite measurements to approximate pollution levels

throughout Mexico. Using participation in a voluntary pollution reduction program as an

instrumental variable, they show that reductions in pollution improve infant mortality from

respiratory causes. Also focused on Mexico, Arceo-Gomez et al. (2012) use thermal

inversions, which trap pollution, as an instrumental variable, and find that CO has stronger

per unit effects on infant mortality than in the U.S.

         Cesur et al. (2013) examined the switch from coal to natural gas in Turkey and found

that a one percentage point increase in subscriptions to natural gas was associated with a four

percent decline in infant mortality. A notable feature of this study is that instead of focusing

on the effect of a pollutant per se, they focus on a change in fuel delivery, which is perhaps
9
 We have included this in the infant health table since the vast majority of such deaths are for infants under 1
year of age.

                                                                                                                   14
more relevant from a policy perspective. Greenstone & Hanna (2011) use air pollution data

from 140 Indian cities and find that air pollution regulation reduced pollution substantially.

These regulations also led to a statistically insignificant decrease in infant mortality, though

they note several data limitations that suggest their results should be interpreted with caution.


iii. Non-criteria pollutants

        Most of the studies in Table 2 focus on so-called criteria pollutants, including ozone,

particulate matter, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide and lead, all of which

are regulated under the Clean Air Acts in the U.S. Much less is known about other hazardous

pollutants. Industrial plants in the U.S. emit approximately four billion pounds of toxic

pollutants annually, including over 80,000 different chemical compounds (U.S. Gov.

Account. Off. 2009). Regulation of these toxics is in its infancy and most have not

undergone any form of toxicity testing (U.S. Cent. Dis. Control and Prev 2009). For

example, it has been known for decades that mercury is highly toxic, yet the first regulation

of mercury compounds in the United States - the Mercury and Airborne Toxics Standards -

was unveiled in December 2011.

        Two studies have used U.S. county-level data from the EPA’s Toxic Release

Inventory to document a correlation between higher emissions and infant death (Currie &

Schmeider 2009; Agarwal et al. 2010). Currie et al. (2013a) further examined the effects of

toxic emissions using openings and closures of more than 1,600 industrial plants that reported

toxic emissions. By matching 1989-2003 data on 11 million individual birth records from

five large states (Florida, Michigan, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Texas) with pollution

monitor data, they first show that toxics can be detected up to a mile away from a plant, and

that the “average” mother in these states lived within a mile of these plants. They then show

that infants within a mile of a plant have a two percent higher incidence of low birth weight

compared to infants one to two miles away, despite the fact that the two groups share equally

                                                                                                 15
in the economic benefits of plant operation. While housing values were also reduced, this

only occurred within a half mile of a plant, suggesting that some people at risk of poor health

outcomes are unaware of the hazards.

           Another paper that moves beyond the consideration of criterion air pollutants is

Sneeringer (2009), who examines pollution due to large-scale livestock operations. Although

these operations have generated concerns regarding the pollution of water sources, animal

wastes are also associated with the production of particulate matter as well as the non-criteria

pollutants hydrogen sulfide gas and ammonia, all of which can be harmful to the developing

fetus. She finds that a doubling of livestock production in a county is associated with an

increase in infant mortality of 7.4%. Although she cannot demonstrate a “first stage” effect

of the operations on pollution, some evidence that the effect is primarily due to air pollution

is obtained by examining causes of death (accidents and homicide vs. respiratory causes) and

by comparing counties with high and low dependence on well water, which is more subject to

contamination.



3. Air Pollution and the Wellbeing of Older children

           Table 3 summarizes studies examining the effects of pollution on the health (Panel A)

and cognitive outcomes (Panel B) of older children. Since there is no convenient summary

measure of child health that is analogous to birth weight for infant health, most studies of

child health focus on hospitalizations for respiratory infections or asthma. Respiratory

ailments are a leading cause of hospitalizations among children, comparable in incidence

only to injuries, which are unlikely to be influenced by pollution.10

           Ransom & Pope (1995) produced one of the first quasi-experimental studies of this

type, using the closure of a local steel mill as a natural experiment. They found that child


10
     As such, injuries can serve as a useful ‘control’ condition for studies examining hospitalizations.

                                                                                                           16
hospitalizations for respiratory conditions fell when the mill was closed, and rebounded when

the mill reopened. Since then a number of studies have been conducted making use of other

clever natural experiments to identify the effects of pollution. Beatty & Shimshack (2011)

look at mandatory reductions in school bus emissions; Lleras-Muney (2010) examines

children in military households who are exogenously assigned to areas with different

pollution levels based on the needs of the military; Lavaine & Neidell (2013) use strikes that

shut down oil refineries in France; Yu (2011) studies a behavior modification experiment

designed to reduce indoor air pollution from stoves; and Schlenker & Walker (2011) use

changes in pollution at California airports due to delays at east coast hubs. All of these

papers find that reductions in pollution significantly reduced child respiratory problems.

       The papers by Neidell (2004; 2009) highlight the importance of avoidance behavior,

which is an issue for the interpretation of all of the studies discussed thus far (including those

focusing on infants). People take actions ranging from changes in daily activities to moving

house in order to reduce exposures to harmful pollutants. If people act to lessen their

exposure, then the potentially harmful effects of pollution may be understated by estimation

procedures that do not take these actions into account. A growing body of evidence suggests

changes in daily actions effectively reduce exposure to pollution, even when those actions are

not directly in response to poor air quality. Both Neidell papers find evidence that the effects

of pollution exposure are much greater than is generally estimated when precautionary

actions are ignored. Neidell also stress that such behaviours must be taken into account when

calculating the costs of pollution.

       Panel B of Table 3 illustrates the fact that there are many fewer studies of the effects

of pollution on non-health child outcomes such as schooling attainment or test scores. This

reflects both limitations on the available data and conceptual difficulties in elucidating the

way pollution can be expected to affect test scores. For example, since test scores reflect


                                                                                                 17
cumulative knowledge, how should we account for the effects of cumulative exposure to

pollution? In principal, the same issue applies to long-run health outcomes, but as discussed

above, most of the research examining the effects of pollution on health outcomes has

focused on relatively short-run effects (e.g. effects of in utero pollution on birth weight, or

effects of pollution on hospitalizations for asthma).

       One potential mechanism underlying an effect of pollution on test scores is through

absence—if children are frequently absent from school because of high pollution levels, then

this may interfere with their ability to learn. Currie et al. (2009a) find some evidence that

higher pollution levels over six week attendance periods are associated with more student

absences in Texas. Zweig et al. (2009) extend this analysis by using class-school-year level

performance data to show that higher pollution levels decrease scores on annual achievement

tests. To address concerns that differences in the student populations might be correlated

with both pollution and lower test scores, they include school fixed effects as well as

observable student and family characteristics in their analysis. Reyes (2011) does not have

panel data, but shows a strong cross-sectional link between test scores in elementary schools

in the 2000s and childhood lead levels in the same areas a decade earlier. Lavy et al. (2012)

examine whether high pollution on the day of a high stakes test affects student performance.

Using multiple test results for the same student and student fixed effects, they show that

Israeli students earn lower scores when subjected to higher pollution on the day of the test.



4. Effects of Water Pollution

       While the lion’s share of studies on the effects of pollution on children is focused on

air pollution, Table 4 provides a summary of the handful of studies that examine the effects




                                                                                                  18
of water pollution.11 One reason for the small number of studies is the primitive and

fragmented state of water quality data relative to the data on air pollution. Whereas air

quality monitoring in a given country is often undertaken by a single group or coalition of

groups working together, such centralization is far less common for the monitoring of water

quality. The scenario in the United States is not atypical, with the responsibility for

monitoring water quality split between many programs, and the resulting information

fragmented into many different incompatible databases. One database keeps track of permits

for releasing chemicals into water bodies (the National Pollutant Discharge Information

System); a second keeps track of toxic releases into the ground or surface water (the Toxic

Release Inventory); a third records the results of mandatory periodic monitoring of public

water systems (the Safe Drinking Water Information System); and a fourth samples water

bodies for pollutants (the U.S. Geological Survey). Thus, it is extremely difficult to track a

chemical released in one location to water ingested in another.

         Currie et al. (2013b) examined the effects of chemical violations of drinking water

quality standards in New Jersey from 1997 to 2007. Their data enabled the comparison of

infants potentially exposed to contaminated drinking water in utero to siblings who were not.

Using birth weight and gestation as outcomes, they found small effects of drinking water

contamination for all infants, but large and statistically significant effects for infants born to

less educated mothers. A potential explanation for this difference is that more educated

mothers are more likely to be aware of the pollution and to take avoidance measures (Graff

Zivin et al. 2011).

         Troesken (2008) and Clay et al. (2010) look at the historic impact of lead from water

pipes on infant health. In order to identify effects, both papers use the fact that in places

where the water is more acidic, more lead leaches into drinking water from the pipes. The
11
  The Greenstone and Hanna paper mentioned earlier looked at the effects of water pollution regulation, but
since they did not find any evidence of a first stage effect of regulation on pollution levels, it is not surprising
that they found no effect of the regulation on health.

                                                                                                                       19
papers show that although the installation of public water systems with lead pipes reduced

deaths from disease, in many locations they increased infant deaths due to lead poisoning.

        The paper by Brainerd & Menon (2012) examines the impact of the runoff of

agricultural chemicals into water supplies in India. The effects of the chemicals are identified

using regional variations in crop cycles and rainfall. They find significant effects of this type

of water pollution on infant mortality, child height-for-age and other measures. Similar to

Currie et al. (2013b), they find larger effects among poorer households, which again is

consistent with the idea that poorer households are less likely (or less able) to take measures

to avoid pollution.



IV. Conclusions

        The research reviewed in this survey was motivated by two broader literatures

spanning several academic fields. The first suggests that events in early life have effects that

reach into adulthood. The second demonstrates that pollution, and especially discrete

episodes of intense pollution such as the “London Fog” of 1952, has significant effects on

health. Putting these observations together led researchers to probe this relationship directly.

Does early-life exposure to pollution have long-term consequences later in life? The studies

reviewed here provide strong evidence that they can. Like all good social science research

this realization leads to a further set of questions:

        First, can we identify threshold levels of particular chemicals that are “safe” for

fetuses and young children? There is a preponderance of evidence that high levels of

pollution (either historically in developed countries, or currently in developing countries) are

harmful. A particularly important question for policy is whether there is a safe level of these

substances. A more subtle issue is that the thresholds may differ across groups. For

example, children in developing countries may react more negatively to a given dose of


                                                                                               20
pollution if they are already weakened due to other health shocks. Conversely, in an

environment where the selective pressures of a hostile environment imply that only the

strongest survive, a given dose of pollution could have milder effects.

    Second, can we identify factors that protect against or exacerbate the effects of exposure?

As we have stressed above, the extent to which parents are able to avoid exposure has

important implications for the interpretation of the estimated effects of pollution. Whether

parents can affect long run outcomes by remediating or exacerbating these early effects is

similarly important.

   Third, can we provide more evidence about how the effects of early life exposure to

pollutants affect not only health, but other important economic outcomes such as education,

labor force participation and earnings? Our survey of the literature suggested that relatively

little has been done in this regard, particularly those that directly examine the long-run

impacts of pollution exposure in early life. Quantifying effects on these outcomes is

important for policy analysis.

   Given the potentially long-lasting consequences from early exposure to pollution, the

marginal returns to pollution control may be particularly high for this vulnerable segment of

the population. As economists extend their reach into this arena and shed light on these key

questions, this will better inform policy makers who must make significant decisions

regarding the different approaches to pollution control. Together, they comprise an exciting

and important research agenda.




                                                                                               21
Literature Cited

  1. Almond D, Currie J. 2011. Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis.
     J. of Econ. Perspect. 25(1):153-72

  2. Almond D, Edlund L, Palme M. 2009. Chernobyl's subclinical legacy: Prenatal
     exposure to radioactive fallout and school outcomes in Sweden. Q. J. of Econ.
     124(4):1729-72

  3. Arceo-Gomez EO, Hanna R, Oliva P. 2012. Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant
     Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from
     Mexico City. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 18349

  4. Agarwal N, Banternghansa C, Bui L. 2010. Toxic exposure in America: Estimating
     fetal and infant health outcomes from 14 years of TRI reporting. J. of Health Econ.
     29(4):557-74

  5. Baccarelli A, Bollati V. 2009. Epigenetics and environmental chemicals. Curr. Opin.
     in Pediatrics. 21(2):243-51

  6. Banzhaf SH, Walsh RP. 2008. Do people vote with their feet? An empirical test of
     Tiebout's mechanism. Am. Econ. Rev . 98(3):843-63

  7. Barker DJ. 1990. The fetal and infant origins of adult disease. Br. Med. J.
     301(6761):1111

  8. Barnett WS. 1995. Long-term effects of early childhood programs on cognitive and
     school outcomes. The Future of Children, pp. 25-50

  9. Bartik TJ. 1988. Evaluating the benefits of non-marginal reductions in pollution using
     information on defensive expenditures. J. of Enviro. Econ. and Manag. 15(1):111-27

  10. Bateson TF, Schwartz J. 2007. Children's response to air pollutants. J. of Toxicol. and
      Environ. Health, Part A. 71(3):238-43

  11. Beatty TK, Shimshack JP. 2011. School buses, diesel emissions, and respiratory
      health. J. of Health Econ. 30(5):987-99

  12. Behrman JR, Rosenzweig MR, Taubman P. 1994, Endowments and the allocation of
      schooling in the family and in the marriage market: the twins experiment.
      J. of Pol. Econ. 102(6)1131-74

  13. Bharadwaj P, Gibson M, Graff Zivin J, Neilson C. 2013. Gray Matters: Pollution and
      Human Capital Formation. Work. Pap.




                                                                                           22
14. Black SE, Butikofer A, Devereux PJ, Salvanes KG. 2013. This is only a test? Long-
    run impacts of prenatal exposure to radioactive downfall from nuclear weapon
    testing. Work. Pap

15. Bowen W. 2002. An analytical review of environmental justice research: what do we
    really know?. Environ. Manag. 29(1):3-15

16. Brainerd E, Menon N. 2012. Seasonal effects of water quality on infant and child
    health in India. Work. Pap. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA)

17. Cesur R, Tekin E, Ulker A. 2013. Air pollution and infant mortality: Evidence from
    the expansion of natural gas infrastructure. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No.
    18736

18. Chay KY, Greenstone M. 2003a. Air quality, infant mortality, and the Clean Air Act
    of 1970. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 10053

19. Chay KY, Greenstone M. 2003b. The impact of air pollution on infant mortality:
    evidence from geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession. Q. J.
    of Econ. 118(3):1121-67

20. Clay K, Troesken W, Haines MR. 2010. Lead and mortality. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur.
    Econ. Res. No. 16480

21. Clinton WJ. April 21, 1997. Executive Order 13045: Protection of children from
    environmental health risks and safety risks. Federal Register. 62(2):19885

22. Coneus K, Spiess C. 2010. Pollution Exposure and infant health: Evidence from
    Germany. ZEW-Cent. for Eur. Econ. Res. Discuss. Pap. No. 10-079

23. Courant PN, Porter RC. 1981. Averting expenditure and the cost of pollution.
    J. of Enviro. Econ. and Manag. 8(1):321-9

24. Cropper M, Freeman AM III. 1991. Environmental health effects. In Measuring the
    Demand for Environmental Quality, ed. Braden JB, Kolstad CD, pp. 140-64. New
    York: Elsevier Science Publishing

25. Currie J. 2001.Early childhood education programs. J. of Econ. Perspect. 15(1):213-
    38

26. Currie J. 2011. Inequality at birth: Some causes and consequences. Am. Econ. Rev .
    101(3):1-22

27. Currie J, Almond D. 2011. Human capital development before age five. Handb. of
    Labor Econ. Volume 4:1315-486



                                                                                         23
28. Currie J, Davis L, Greenstone M, Walker WR. 2013a. Do housing prices reflect
    environmental health risks? Evidence from more than 1600 toxic pant openings and
    closings. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 16480

29. Currie J, Graff Zivin JS, Meckel K, Neidell MJ, Schlenker W. 2013b. Something in
    the water: Contaminated drinking water and infant health. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur.
    Econ. Res. No. 18876

30. Currie J, Greenstone M, Morettia E. 2011. Superfund cleanups and infant health. Am.
    Econ. Rev. 101(3):435-41

31. Currie J, Hanushek EA, Kahn EM, Neidell M, Rivkin SG. 2009a. Does pollution
    increase school absences?. Rev. of Econ. and Stat. 91(4):682-94

32. Currie J, Neidell M. 2005. Air pollution and infant health: What can we learn from
    California's recent experience?. Q. J. of Econ. 120(3):1003-30

33. Currie J, Neidell M, Schmieder JF. 2009b. Air pollution and infant health: Lessons
    from New Jersey. J. of Health Econ. 28(3):688-703

34. Currie J, Schmieder, JF. 2009. Fetal exposures to toxic releases and infant health. Am.
    Econ. Rev . 99(2):177-83

35. Currie J, Walker R. 2011. Traffic congestion and infant health: Evidence from E-
    ZPass. Am. Econ. J.: Appl. Econ. 3(1):65-90

36. Datar A, Kilburn MR, Loughran DS. 2010. Endowments and parental investments in
    infancy and early childhood. Demography. 47(1):145-62

37. deRegnier RA, Desai S. 2010. Fetal Development. In The Wiley-Blackwell Handbook
    of Infant Development, ed. Bremmer JG, Wachs TD. (2):9-32. Wiley-Blackwell. 2nd
    ed.

38. Deschênes O, Greenstone M, Shapiro JS. 2012. Defensive investments and the
    demand for air quality: Evidence from the NOx budget program and ozone
    reductions. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 18276

39. Engle, P. (2010). Infant development in the developing world. In The Wiley-Blackwell
    Handbook of Infant Development, ed. Bremmer JG, Wachs TD. (2):140-64. Wiley-
    Blackwell. 2nd ed.

40. Evans GW. 2006. Child development and the physical environment. Annu. Rev.
    Psychol. (57):423-51

41. Foster A, Gutierrez E, Kumar N. 2009. Voluntary compliance, pollution levels, and
    infant mortality in Mexico. Am. Econ. Rev. Pap. and Proc. 99(2):191-7


                                                                                         24
42. Gluckman PD, Hanson MA, Cooper C, Thornburg KL. 2008. Effect of in utero and
    early-life conditions on adult health and disease. N. Engl. J. of Med. 359(1):61-73

43. Graff Zivin J, Neidell M. 2013. Environment, health, and human capital. Work. Pap.,
    Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 18935

44. Graff Zivin J, Neidell M, Schlenker W. 2011. Water quality violations and avoidance
    behavior: Evidence from bottled water consumption. Am. Econ. Rev. Pap. and Proc.
    101: 448-53

45. Greenstone M, Hanna R. 2011. Environmental regulations, air and water pollution,
    and infant mortality in India. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 17210

46. Grossman M. 1972. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. The
    Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223-255.

47. Harrington W, Portney PR. 1987. Valuing the benefits of health and safety regulation.
    J. of Urban Econ. 22(1):101-12

48. Heckman JJ. 2000. Policies to foster human capital. Res. in Econ. 54(1):3-56

49. Cunha F, Heckman JJ . 2007. "The Technology of Skill Formation," American
    Economic Review, 97(2):31-47.

50. Holt PG. 1998. Programming for responsiveness to environmental antigens that
    trigger allergic respiratory disease in adulthood is initiated during the perinatal period.
    Environ. Health Perspect. 106(3):795-800

51. Isen A, Rossin-Slater M, Walker WR. 2013. Every breath you take—Every dollar
    you’ll make: The long-term consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970. Work. Pap.

52. Janke K, Propper C, Henderson J. 2009. Do current levels of air pollution kill? The
    impact of air pollution on population mortality in England. Health Econ. 18(9):1031-
    55

53. Jayachandran S. 2009. Air quality and early-life mortality evidence from Indonesia’s
    wildfires. J. of Hum. Resour. 44(4):916-54

54. Knittel CR, Miller DL, Sanders NJ. 2011. Caution, drivers! Children rresent: Traffic,
    pollution, and infant health. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 17222

55. Lavaine E, Neidell MJ. 2013. Energy production and health externalities: Evidence
    from oil refinery strikes in France. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 18974

56. Lavy V, Ebenstein A, Roth S. 2012. The Impact of air pollution on cognitive
    performance and human capital formation. Work. Pap.


                                                                                            25
57. Lleras-Muney A. 2010. The needs of the army: Using compulsory relocation in the
    military to estimate the effect of air pollutants on children’s health. J. of Hum. Resour.
    45(3):549-90

58. Lüchinger S. 2010. Air pollution and infant mortality: A natural experiment from
    power plant desulfurization. Work. Pap.

59. Makri A, Goveia M, Balbus J, Parkin R. 2004. Children's susceptibility to chemicals:
    a review by developmental stage. J. of Toxicol. and Environ. Health, Part B.
    7(6):417-35

60. Neidell MJ. 2009. Information, Avoidance behavior, and health the effect of ozone on
    asthma hospitalizations. J. of Hum. Resour. 44(2):450-78

61. Neidell MJ. 2004. Air pollution, health, and socio-economic status: the effect of
    outdoor air quality on childhood asthma. J. of Health Econ. 23(6):1209-36

62. Nilsson JP. 2009. The long-term effects of early childhood lead exposure: Evidence
    from the phase-out of leaded gasoline. Work. Pap., Inst. for Labour Mark. Policy
    Eval.

63. Parker JD, Mendola P, Woodruff TJ. 2008. Preterm birth after the Utah Valley Steel
    Mill closure: a natural experiment. Epidemiology. 19(6):820-3

64. Petronis A. 2010. Epigenetics as a unifying principle in the aetiology of complex
    traits and diseases. Nature. 465(7299):721-727

65. Pope CA III. 1989. Respiratory disease associated with community air pollution and a
    steel mill, Utah Valley. Am. J. of Pub. Health. 79(5):623-8

66. Pope CA III, Schwartz J, Ransom MR. 1992. Daily mortality and PM10 pollution in
    Utah Valley. Archives of Environmental Health. 47(3):211-7

67. Ransom MR, Pope CA. 1995. External health costs of a steel mill. Contemp. Econ.
    Policy. 13(2):86-97

68. Rauch SA, Lanphear BP. 2012. Prevention of disability in children: Elevating the role
    of environment. The Future of Children. 22(1):193-217

69. Rauh VA, Garfinkel R, Perera FP, Andrews HF, Hoepner L, et al. 2006. Impact of
    prenatal chlorpyrifos exposure on neurodevelopment in the first 3 years of life among
    inner-city children. Pediatrics. 118(6):e1845-59

70. Reyes JW. 2012. Lead exposure and behavior: Effects on antisocial and risky
    behavior among children and adolescents. Work. Pap.



                                                                                           26
71. Reyes JW. 2011. Childhood lead and academic performance in Massachusetts. Work.
    Pap., N. Engl. Pub. Pol. Cen.

72. Reyes JW. 2007. Environmental policy as social policy? The impact of childhood lead
    exposure on crime. B.E. J. of Econ. Anal. and Pol. 7(1) (Contributions), Article 51

73. Sanders NJ. 2012. What doesn't kill you makes you weaker prenatal pollution
    exposure and educational outcomes. J. of Hum. Resour. 47(3):826-50

74. Sanders NJ, Stoecker CF. 2011. Where have all the young men gone? Using gender
    ratios to measure fetal death rates. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 17434

75. Schlenker W, Walker WR. 2011. Airports, air pollution, and contemporaneous
    health. Work. Pap., Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. No. 17684

76. Schwartz J. 2004. Air pollution and children's health. Pediatrics. 113(3):1037-43

77. Schweinhart L, Barnes HV, Weikart DP. 1993. Significant benefits: The High-Scope
    Perry Preschool study through age 27. Ypsilanti, MI: HighScope Press

78. Schweinhart LJ, Montie J, Xiang Z, Barnett WS, Belfield CR, Nores M. Lifetime
    effects: the High/Scope Perry Preschool study through age 40. Ypsilanti, MI:
    HighScope Press

79. Sneeringer S. 2009. Does animal feeding operation pollution hurt public health? A
    national longitudinal study of health externalities identified by geographic shifts in
    livestock production. Am. J. of Agric. Econ. 91(1):124-37

80. Sullivan D, Von Wachter T. 2009. Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using
    administrative data. Q. J. of Econ. 124(3):1265-06

81. Tiebout CM. 1956. A pure theory of local expenditures. J. of Pol. Econ. 64(5):416-24

82. Troesken W. 2008. Lead water pipes and infant mortality at the turn of the twentieth
    century. J. of Hum. Resour. 43(3):553-75

83. U.S. Cent. Dis. Control and Prev. 2009. Fourth report on human exposure to
    environental chemicals

84. U.S. Environ. Prot. Agency. 2013. America's children and the environment, Third
    Edition

85. U.S. Gov. Account. Off. 2009. Observations on improving the Toxic Substance
    Control Act

86. Yu F. 2011. Indoor air pollution and children’s health: Net benefits from stove and
    behavioral interventions in rural China. Environ. and Resource Econ. 50(4):495-514

                                                                                             27
87. Zhang J. 2012. The impact of water quality on health: Evidence from the drinking
    water infrastructure program in rural China. J. of Health Econ. 31(1):122-34

88. Zweig SJ, Ham CJ, Avol LE. 2009. Air pollution and academic performance:
    Evidence from California schools. Work. Pap.




                                                                                       28
  Table 1: Studies of air pollution and long term outcomes
 Paper / Country /
    Source of
    Variation                      Methods                           Data/Size                                  Outcomes
Almond et al.        OLS approach is used to measure Outcomes (birth, health, school, &           Significant reductions of 2.5
(2009)               outcomes of those exposed against hospitalizations) data on Swedish          percentile points for average
                     a number of comparison groups.     birth cohorts from 1983-1988 are          grades, and 6% for math grades
Sweden               Additionally, a D-in-D approach    linked with radiation data collected      measured in secondary school for
                     was used to examine compensatory from ground monitors and a                  children most highly exposed to
Chernobyl Disaster behavior effects on impacted         country wide aerial survey of             fallout in utero (ages 8-25 weeks).
                     children. Both approaches include ground deposition in 1986.                 Impacts strongest among those
                     a wide set of controls.            Analysis is at the child level. There     likely to have faced higher
                                                        are >500k observations used with          exposure levels and to children of
                                                        the aerial exposure data, and ~170k       low income parents. No
                                                        when in situ measurements are             corresponding long-term health
                                                        examined.                                 effects are found.
Bharadwaj et al.     4th and 8th grade test outcomes are   Test scores - in math, science, and    A 1 SD increase in Ozone levels
(2013)               regressed on mean ambient             language arts - for approximately      during the 3rd month of pregnancy
                     pollutant levels in each of the 9     600k children are linked to            leads to 0.0025 and 0.00173 SD
Chile                months of gestation and a large       monthly average pollution in the       reductions in 4th grade math and
                     number of controls and fixed          Santiago Metropolitan Region           language test scores respectively.
Variation in         effects. Controls for monthly         during each month of gestation.        Effects are broadly similar for 8th
ambient pollution    weather during gestation are          Pollution and weather data are         grade test performance.
during gestational   included, as are mother               taken from the Ministry of
development is       demographic controls and              Environment and the NOAA
used for             community and gender fixed            summary of the day respectively,
identification       effects.                              while test scores and child/family
                                                           data are provided by the Chilean
                                                           Health Ministry.
Currie et al.        A number of later life outcomes       Later life outcomes for ~400k          1 SD increase in ground exposure
(2013b)              (IQ, height, years of education,      individuals in the birth cohorts of    is associated with a 0.025 SD
                     high school completion and            1956-1966 are linked to                decrease in IQ score, ~0.15 fewer
United States        earnings at 35) are regressed on      measurements from 13 fallout test      years of education, and 0.1 to 0.25
                     potential fallout exposure in         stations to estimate monthly fallout   log point reduction in earnings at
Differential in      municipality of mother's residence    levels (measured in the air and        age 30. Even wealthy families are
utero exposure to    during weeks 8-16 of the              deposited) by municipality (for        unable to avoid such impacts.
drinking water       pregnancy, as well as a number of     those within 20 km of a test           Largest in utero effects are found
contamination        parental and child controls, and      station) while individuals were in     for exposures during weeks 8 to
violations between municipality and month of birth         utero.                                 16.
siblings is used for fixed effects. Other specifications
identification       also include municipality trends,
                     family fixed effects, and two
                     measures of fallout included
                     simultaneously.
Isen et al. (2013)   Non-attainment status of counties     Earnings records for 24 states from    A 1% increase in annual salaries of
                     is assigned based on observed TSP     1998-2007 - from the Longitudinal      workers aged 29-31 is attributed to
United States        levels, and is then used to           Employer Household Dynamics            a 10μg/m3 unit decrease in TSP
                     instrument for a large change in      File - are merged with county and      during pregnancy and early
Differential         TSP in counties identified as non-    date of birth, and county level        childhood. Most of this effect is
changes in TSPs by attainers. A difference-in-             annual average and 2nd max             due to increased workforce
county due to non- differences analysis is then run        observed TSP levels. In total,         participation. The CAAA of 1970
attainment status    comparing changes in outcomes to      ~900k individuals are included in      lead to an average increase in
under the Clean Air those born in non-attainment vs.       the analysis in 888 county/year        lifetime earnings of $4,300 for the
Act Amendments       attainment counties before and        observations.                          1.5 million children born in non-
of 1970              after the 1971 implementation of                                             attainment counties each year.
                     the 1970 CAAAs. Regressions are
                     weighted by # of workers.




                                                                                                                           29
  Table 1: Studies of air pollution and long term outcomes – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                     Methods                              Data/Size                            Outcomes
Nilsson (2009)       OLS regressions are estimated for Ambient lead levels for 1,000           A significant and non-linear
                     many outcome variables,               locations around Sweden in 1975,    relationship is shown between
Sweden               regressing the outcome on lead        1980, and 1985 from moss samples    municipality air lead levels in early
                     exposure, an exceedingly rich set are aggregated to provide               childhood and young adult
Geographic           of parental, child, and municipality municipality-level estimates of      outcomes. Significant
variation in         specific characteristics, and finally lead exposure. This data is linked  improvements in young adult
reduction of lead    fixed effects for year of birth and   to socio-economic and outcome       outcomes were found for the
levels due to phase municipality of birth. Conditional variables for children born in the 3    reduction in air lead levels
out of leaded        on the municipality fixed effects     years preceding each of the lead    obtained between 1972 and 1984
gasoline             parental outcomes are not             samples. Outcomes examined          in Sweden, but no significant
                     predictive of a child's lead          include high school GPA and test    effects of further reductions were
                     exposure.                             scores, high school completion and  found below estimated blood-lead
                                                           educational attainment, labor       levels of 5μg/dL. Study also finds
                                                           market earnings and teenage         that low-SES children are affected
                                                           motherhood. Sample sizes range      more for any given amount of lead
                                                           from ~250k to ~800k individuals.    exposure, and that this effect is not
                                                                                               solely due to residential
                                                                                               segregation.
Reyes (2007)       The implied first stage is supported    Creates state-year Lead exposure    A significant relationship between
                   with OLS regressions showing that       estimates from EPA monitor data lead exposure in childhood, and
United States      gasoline lead and air lead are good     and measures of Lead per gallon of violent crime rates later in life is
                   predictors of child blood lead. The     gasoline by state and year from     demonstrated with an estimate of
State specific     main specification is a state-level     DOE and private annual reports.     0.8 for the elasticity of violent
reduction in lead  regression of logged per capita         Exposure estimates are linked to    crime to childhood lead exposure.
exposure due to    crime rates (violent, property, and     crime and National Health Survey ~56% of the drop in violent crime
1970 Clean Air Act murders are run separately) for the     data by state and year. The 918     observed in the U.S. in the 1990s
removal of Lead    years of 1985-2002 on effective         observations include 50 states plus can be attributed to reductions in
from gasoline      lead exposure (estimated from           D.C. for 1985-2002, and are         lead exposure during the 1970s.
                   gasoline lead levels during ages 0-     weighted by population in the       The effects are focused on violent
                   3 of the average age of arrested        analysis.                           crimes.
                   cohorts), state dummies, and a
                   large number of additional
                   covariates that might be thought to
                   impact crime rates.
Sanders (2012)     OLS and 2SLS link changes in            TSP measures from EPA monitors       OLS regressions suggest that a 1
                   year of birth average TSP at the        are aggregated to the county-year    SD reduction in TSP during the
United States      county level and changes in             level for 1979-1985, and merged      year of birth is associated with a
                   average performance on a 10th           with weather data from the Global    2% of a SD increase in 10th grade
Early 1980s        grade standardized tests at the         Surface Summary. Employment,         test scores. The IV estimates yield
Recession and      school level. TSP measures are          income, population, and density      a 6% of a SD increase in test
related drops in   used both directly, and also            data are added from the Regional     scores (and a 3% increase in
manufacturing      instrumented using county-level         Information System, and test         county passing rates) from a 1 SD
employment         employment changes in                   scores for 1994-2002 10th grade      reduction in TSPs.
                   manufacturing. School-level and         cohorts are provided from the
                   year-of-birth-by-year-of-test fixed     Texas Education Agency. Sample
                   effects are included as well as         sizes are ~100k students per year
                   controls for school-level student       born in 1979-1985 at 416 schools
                   characteristics, county-level           in 30 counties.
                   weather, and
                   economic/demographic
                   characteristics in year of birth and
                   year of test. In the IV specification
                   where manufacturing jobs are used
                   to instrument for TSP, county-level
                   income is also instrumented using
                   national crude oil prices.

                                                                                                                         30
  Table 2: Studies of air pollution, fetal health, and infant mortality
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                     Methods                              Data/Size                                Outcomes
Arceo-Gomez et al. Weekly levels of pollution and          For the period from 1997-2006,           1ppb more CO leads to .0032 more
(2012)               infant death by municipality in       weekly average levels of pollution,      infant deaths per 100,000 births,
                     Mexico City are analyzed using        infant and neonatal mortality, and       and 1 extra μg/m3 results in 0.24
Mexico               municipality fixed effects. Main      number of inversions are                 more infant deaths per 100,000
                     results are IV using # of days of     calculated for each of Mexico            births. PM10 effects are similar
Week-to-week         inversion layer per week to           City's 56 Municipalities. Pollution      while the CO impacts are larger.
meteorological       instrument for air pollution. An      values are interpolated from
covariation with     additional inversion is associated    observations at 10-26 stations
cyclical air         with 3.5% increase in PM and          (depending on availability) and
pollution changes 5.4% increase in CO.                     inversions are ID'd in Ministry of
is used for                                                the Environment data.
identification
Agarwal et al.         A WLS approach regressing              Annual Toxic Release Inventory        Reductions of annual toxic
(2010)                 county demeaned outcome                (TRI) data on toxic chemical          chemical releases are estimated to
                       variables on concentrations of         releases by manufacturing site are    have lead to approximately 11,694
United States          toxic releases, time fixed effects,    aggregated to the county level and    saved infant lives over the study
                       and controls for parental and          merged with county level infant       period, which the authors estimate
Variation in           county level covariates.               fetal mortality rates in the United   (using a $1.8M < VSL <$8.7M)
chemical releases                                             States for 1989 to 2002. >40,000      provided a cost savings of $21B to
is utilized for                                               county/year observations , of         $101B.
identification                                                which ~4000 have air pollution
                                                              data allowing controls for ambient
                                                              PM10 and Ozone levels.
Currie et al.          Difference-in-difference is used to    County-level data on infant health,   The majority of TSP reductions
(2013b)                link changes in TSP levels to infant   air pollution, and other              occurred in non--attainment
                       health outcomes, comparing             characteristics for the period from   counties. A 1% reduction in
United States          changes in infant mortality            1969-1974. Data comes from the        ambient average TSPs in a county
                       between non-attainment counties        National Mortality and Natality       led to a 0.5% fall in the infant
Differential in        and others. Additionally, the          Detail Files, the EPA, the Bureau     mortality rate in the county.
utero exposure to      analysis uses non-attainment status    of Economics Analysis, and the
drinking water         as an instrumental variable for TSP    Regional Economics Information
contamination          declines from 1971 to 1972, and a      System. A panel of 501 counties is
violations between     regression discontinuity               created for the analysis.
siblings is used for   comparison is made of counties
identification         just above and below the non-
                       attainment threshold.
Chay and               First differences are used to          Data from the Census, Bureau of       One percent reduction in TSP
Greenstone             identify effects from cross-county,    Economic Analysis, National           levels is associated with a 0.35
(2003b)                intra-state variation in pollution     Mortality Detail Files, and           percent reduction in infant
                       reductions due to the recession        National Natality Detail Files are    mortality at the county level.
United States          taking into account a rich set of      merged and aggregated to the          Nationwide, this suggests that the
                       covariates. Counties with "large"      county level. Observations were       recession lead to ~2500 fewer
1981-82 recession      and "medium" changes in TSPs are       then matched with EPA monitor         infant deaths during the years of
and resulting          also compared separately to            data which provided approximated      1980-1982. Health effects are non-
differential           counties with "small" changes to       1200 county-years of data between     linear in TSP exposure.
reductions in TSPs     investigate non-linearity of health    1978-1984.
between counties       impacts from TSPs.




                                                                                                                            31
  Table 2: Studies of air pollution, fetal health, and infant mortality – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                      Methods                            Data/Size                                Outcomes
Coneus and Spiess Mother Fixed Effects models with Data from the German Socio-                     CO has negative impacts on birth
(2010)               year-zip code effects as well as      Economic Panel (SOEP) on socio-         and health outcomes (esp. in 3rd
                     limited sets of covariates are        economic conditions and health of       trimester). High exposure to CO
Germany              estimated for a number of health      newborns and 2-3 year olds in the       leads to a 289g lower birthweight.
                     outcomes for both infants and 2-3 birth cohorts from 2002-2007 is             Marginally significant results for
Cross time and       year olds ."Indoor air pollution"     merged with data on total-              Ozone and high levels of NO2 and
location variation   proxied for by cigarette use.         pregnancy, trimester-specific, at-      SO2 through pregnancy. In utero
in pollutant levels Models are estimated for pollution birth, and first-year-of-life               exposure to PM10 is not found to
used for             at birth, during pregnancy, and for pollution levels from observations        have negative impacts. Ozone
identification       latent values during pregnancy and of the 5 pollutants of interest from       exposure at a young age is
                     longer term exposure variables for Germany's Federal Environment              correlated with negative health
                     the older children. Outcome           Agency. Cohort sizes are ~1100          outcomes - such as a 0.70 %
                     variables include a number of         newborns and ~700 2-3 year olds         increase in bronchitis with a one
                     physical developmental measures per year.                                     unit increase in the 3-year average
                     and illness indicators. Observation                                           O3 level - as is exposure to PM10
                     level is child/quarter.                                                       (although less robustly), while no
                                                                                                   clear relationships are found
                                                                                                   between early-life CO, SO2, or
                                                                                                   NO2 exposure and the health
                                                                                                   outcomes studied.
Currie et al. (2011) Difference-in-Differences analysis      Florida, Michigan, New Jersey,        Following clean ups, significant
                     comparing the change in birth           Pennsylvania, and Texas births        reductions (from 20-25%) in
United States        outcomes before and after               between 1989 and 2003 with            congenital anomalies to mothers
                     Superfund site cleanup for mothers      mother addresses within 5 km of a     living within 2 km of a site are
Superfund site       within 2 km of the site to mothers      Superfund site that was cleaned up.   observed. Also, when only a
cleanup              between 2 and 5 km of the site. A       154 sites are included in the         subsample of the most
                     broad set of mother and child           analysis providing ~600k mothers      contaminated sites is used,
                     covariates are included and site-       in the sample, of which ~92k lived    significant (4.5 deaths per 1,000
                     level or zip-code fixed effects are     within 2 km of a cleaned up site.     live births) reductions in infant
                     also included in some                                                         death are found across
                     specifications. Additional analyses                                           specifications, authors note this
                     are run for a subset of the most                                              result seems too large and may be
                     contaminated Superfund sites.                                                 due partly to sorting.
Currie and Neidell Pollution levels are assigned to zip      California EPA monitor data is        A 1 unit reduction in CO leads to
(2005)               codes by weighting monitor              used to create weekly ZIP code        2.89 fewer deaths per 1000 live
                     averages for monitors within 20         averages of ambient pollution         births, leading to ~991 fewer infant
United States        miles with the inverse of the           levels which are merged with          deaths in CA attributable to the
                     monitor's distance to the zip code      weather data from the National        drop in CO over the 1990s. Results
Inter-temporal       center. A discrete-time hazard          Climatic Data Center, and health      are robust in regional and age-
variation in         model is estimated with a linear        data on births from pregnancies       specific subsamples, as well as to
pollution and infant spline in duration and pollution        that reach 26 weeks gestation from the omission of prenatal exposure
health are used to   exposure measures for all 3             the California Birth Cohort files     measures, and broader temporal
identify effects     pollutants at 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 20, and   for 1989-2000. In total, 4,593,001 baskets. Leads and lags analyses
                     32 weeks of life. Infant death is       children are in the sample. Each      also suggest harvesting is not
                     also regressed on these pollution       week of life is treated as a separate significant. Authors do not find
                     measures as well as average             observation yielding ~250 million compelling evidence of pre-natal
                     measures of pollution in each           observations for analysis.            exposure effects.
                     trimester, gestational age, birth
                     weight, demographic controls, and
                     zip code/month fixed effects. OLS
                     models which include large
                     numbers of covariates, are
                     estimated for fetal death and low-
                     birth-weight outcomes.



                                                                                                                            32
  Table 2: Studies of air pollution, fetal health, and infant mortality – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                     Methods                               Data/Size                               Outcomes
Currie et al.         OLS estimations of average           1989-2003 New Jersey Department         Negative impacts of 3rd trimester
(2009b)              exposure to the three pollutants of of Health data on births and deaths       exposure to CO are found across
                     interest during the 3 trimesters of   for infants of mothers with             specifications (with a one unit
United States        pregnancy are made controlling for addresses w/in 10 km of a                  increase in CO during the 3rd
                     weather, mother's characteristics     pollution monitoring station are        trimester leading to an average
Changes in           (including whether and how much merged with observed pollution                birth weight reduction of 16.65g).
pollution levels are the mother smoked), and child         levels from the nearest station.        Results are inconsistent and less
relied upon for      gender. Similar models are also       There are 628,874 observations in       significant for PM10 and O3. The
identification       estimated with monitor/quarter        the baseline sample, 283,393 in the     negative effects of CO exposure
                     fixed effects and mother fixed        mother fixed-effects sample, and        continue after birth in the infant
                     effects. An OLS hazard model is       61,996 children in the smoking          sample with a 1 ppm decline in
                     estimated for probability of infant mothers sample.                           avg. CO levels in the first 2 weeks
                     death in the weeks after birth with                                           after birth leading to 0.18 fewer
                     similar controls to the above, plus                                           deaths per 1000 live births. The
                     birth weight classifications and a                                            negative impacts of CO are found
                     linear spline in weeks since birth.                                           even at low levels of ambient CO.
                     Analysis is also done separately for
                     children with smoking mothers.
Currie and           Effects of toxic chemical releases ~5200 county/year observations             Significant, but small-magnitude,
Schmeider (2009) (weighted by county area) into the are created with Birth and Infant              negative effects are found for
                     air are assessed on birth weights,    health data for births in the first 3   releases of a number of toxics on
United States        gestational ages, and infant          months of the year from the Vital       gestation, birth weights, and
                     mortality. Individual regressions     Statistics Natality data. This is       probability of infant death.
Inter-year, within   are run for each outcome variable merged with the prior year's EPA            Reductions in the emissions of
county variation of against All Toxic releases,            Toxic Release Inventory data as         toluene, lead, and cadmium
toxic releases is    chemicals id'd as affecting           well as a rich set of county level      account for ~4% of the reduction
used for             development, and those not,           demographic and socioeconomic           in infant mortality that occurred in
identification       VOCs, heavy metals, and a number controls. The California Office of           the late 1980s and 1990s. Fugitive
                     of individual toxics. A broad set of Environmental Health Hazard              emissions have larger effects.
                     county-level controls are employed Assessment's list of known                 Results are much stronger for
                     including county and year fixed       developmental toxicants is used in      toxics thought to have
                     effects. Similar analyses are also    some specifications to ID toxicants     developmental effects.
                     done comparing fugitive to stack      of interest.
                     toxic emissions.
Currie and Walker A difference-in-differences              Location and date of opening of E-      Significant reduction in
(2011)               approach is used comparing            ZPass toll plaza conversions is         prematurity and low birth weight
                     changes in birth outcomes (low-       linked to Vital Statistics Natality     births of 8.6% and 9.3%
United States        birth weight and prematurity) of      records for mothers living near toll    respectively are associated with the
                     mothers living w/in 2 km of a         plazas in New Jersey and                conversion of toll plazas to the EZ-
Introduction of      converted toll plaza to changes in Pennsylvania for the years of              Pass systems. Authors show no
Congestion           birth outcomes of mothers living      1994-2003 and 1997-2002                 significant differential shift in
Reducing             between 2 km and 10 km of a toll respectively. The sample consists            housing prices near converted toll
Automated Toll       station and within 3 km of a major of mothers living within 10 km of          stations, suggesting that sorting
Payment Systems freeway. Similar pre-trends are            98 toll plazas yielding ~30k birth      isn't occurring in the short term.
                     demonstrated between treatment        observations before and after           Results are robust for non-
                     and control groups. Regressions       conversion in the treatment group,      smokers, smaller "treatment" and
                     control for mother's race, age, and and >150k observations before and         "control" areas, and to mother
                     education level, multiple births,     after conversion in the control         fixed effects. Effects are much
                     and child's gender. Plaza, year, and group.                                   stronger among African-American
                     month fixed effects are also                                                  mothers.
                     included.




                                                                                                                            33
  Table 2: Studies of air pollution, fetal health, and infant mortality – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                      Methods                              Data/Size                               Outcomes
Foster et al. (2009) Estimated air quality and infant      Daily air quality estimates for all     Authors estimate that certification
                     health outcomes are separately        of Mexico are created from              of all firms in a municipality would
Mexico               regressed onto a variable that        Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD)             lead to a 3.6% improvement in
                     captures the fraction of firms        measurements in the MODIS               AOD and a 16% reduction in
Certification of     within a municipality that have       satellite data. AOD estimates are       respiratory related infant mortality.
businesses under     been certified by a given month.      aggregated to the monthly-              These results are combined to
Mexico's Clean       Municipality and month-year fixed municipality level, and merged              suggest that a 1% increase in AOD
Industry Certificate effects, and both time varying        with estimated temperature and          leads to a 4.4% increase in infant
program              municipality controls and the         dew-point controls, infant              mortality due to respiratory
                     square of a number of time            mortality data, firm and                ailments.
                     invariant municipality                employment data, and Clean
                     characteristics are also included.    Industry Certification awards.
                     There are only 94 auditors that can 1,706 municipalities are the focus
                     grant certification, and distance to of the analysis over the period
                     these auditors is used as an          from 2000-2006, yielding ~32k
                     instrument for certification.         observations.
Greenstone and       Pollutant levels (and later infant    1987-2007 air pollution data from       Air pollution regulations reduced
Hanna (2011)         mortality rates) are regressed on a a total of 140 cities and 1986-2005       average ambient levels of
                     vector of dummies for years when river water monitor data for 162             particulates (by 19%), SO2 (by
India                each policy was in force, city and rivers from India's Central                69%), and NO2 (by an insignificant
                     year fixed effects, and               Pollution Control Board is merged       15%), but led to statistically
Implementation of consumption and literacy controls. with a city-year dataset on                   insignificant improvements in
pollution control    3 additional specifications are run pollution regulations, and city-year      infant mortality. The water
policies             to test for whether yearly average infant mortality and socio-                pollution regulations investigated
                     pollution levels (estimated in the    economic data.                          showed no statistically significant
                     first specification) are affected by                                          effects on pollution or health.
                     policy implementations.
Janke et al. (2009) Various mortality rates are            Pollution monitor data for 1998-        A 10 μg/m3 increase in PM10 is
                     regressed on annual levels of the 4 2005 from a number of sources is          associated with an increase in
United Kingdom       pollutants, a moderate number of      aggregated to annual averages at        death rate of 4 per 100,000 among
                     time-varying local authority          "local authority" level, and then       those under age 15 (on a mean
Inter-temporal       covariates, a time trend, region      linked to mortality data at the         mortality rate of 44 per 100,000).
pollutant level      specific time trends, and a local     authority/year level over the same      Other pollutants are not found to
variation used for authority fixed effect.                 period. ~2300 authority/year            have significant impacts on child
identification                                             observations are used in the            mortality.
                                                           analysis.
Jayachandran         Regress of the natural log of           2000 Indonesian Census data, with     Pollution from fires led to a 1.2%
(2009)               district/month cohort sizes on          analysis by birth-month-cohorts for   decrease in cohort size among
                     measures of smoke at (the month         December 1996 to May 1998 for         children in the third trimester of
Indonesia            of), before (the 3 months prior to),    3,751 Indonesian sub-districts.       pregnancy during the 5 month
                     and after (the 3 months subsequent      There are ~67k children in these      period of the fires. This implies
1997 wildfires on    to) birth as well as birth              ~700 cohorts. The median monthly      15,600 fetal, infant, and child
the islands of       month/year and sub-district fixed       values of daily air pollution is      deaths are attributable to the fires,
Sumatra and          effects. Dates of analysis were         proxied by aerosol measures from      a 20% overall increase in under-3
Kalimantan           chosen to avoid fertility effects the   the Earth Probe Total Ozone           mortality. Results are more
                     fires might have had.                   Mapping Spectrometer mapped           pronounced among boys, and
                                                             onto sub-districts.                   among lower income households.




                                                                                                                             34
  Table 2: Studies of air pollution, fetal health, and infant mortality – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
      Source of
     Variation                       Methods                              Data/Size                               Outcomes
Knittel et al. (2011) Strong links between traffic          1989-2000 and 2002-2007                  A one unit reduction in PM10 leads
                      congestion and pollution are          ambient air pollutant levels,            to 18 fewer infant deaths per
United States         demonstrated. The three pollutants weather conditions, and traffic             100,000 live births. There is ittle
                      of interest are instrumented using densities are merged and                    evidence of stable impacts from
Weekly variation      traffic congestion interactions with aggregated to the zip code-week           CO or Ozone.
in ambient            weather conditions. The main          level for much of Central and
pollution             specification is a discrete time      Southern California. Infants are
(instrumented) and hazard model estimated as a linear assigned to a zip-code and are
infant mortality is probability model using person-         tracked weekly through the first 52
exploited for         week observations which controls weeks of life, yielding a sample of
identification        for age in weeks with a flexible      ~150 million infant/weeks during
                      spline. Analysis is done separately the early time period and ~75
                      for the 1989-2000 and 2002-2007 million observations in the later
                      periods in order to assess whether period.
                      lower pollution levels have
                      different health effects.
Lüchinger (2010) Difference-in-Differences                  1985-2003 Infant mortality data is       Instrumenting for pollution
                      comparison of the treatment -         linked to annual monitor-level           changes leads to higher estimates
Germany               installation of a sulfur scrubber on mean SO2 levels and aggregated to         of the effects of SO2 on infant
                      a power plant - is made across        the county level. Power plant            mortality than OLS. The author
Mandated              treatment and control groups made characteristics and scrubber                 finds an elasticity of 0.08-0.13,
installation of SO2 up of counties which are                installation data is available for all   which suggests that the reduction
scrubbers on power downwind and upwind of power             303 fossil fuel plants with capacity     of SO2 observed over the study
plants                plants. The frequency of days         >100 megawatts during the time           period has led to 895-1528 fewer
                      downwind from a plant in a given period of interest, and monitor               infant deaths annually in
                      year is used to weight the            collected wind data is linked to         Germany.1/3 of the infant
                      "treatment" group. In addition to     each plant. ~7500 county-year            mortality effects of higher SO2
                      wind direction, treatment levels for observations are used for the main        exposure are realized in the first
                      a county are determined by            analysis.                                day after birth, and 50-80% of the
                      scrubber installation, plant size,                                             effects during the first month
                      and plant distance from each                                                   outside the womb.
                      county.
Sanders and           Regression discontinuity at the       Birth data from the National             Children are more sensitive to
Stoecker (2011)       time of CAAAs implementation is Center for Health Statistics Vital             exposure to TSPs in utero than post
                      implemented via a County-level, Statistics Micro-data is merged                birth. Overall it is estimated that a
United States         first difference model with state     with EPA measures of ambient             1 unit increase in annual average
                      fixed effects, which is estimated     TSPs and aggregated to the               TSP ambient pollution leads to a
1970 Clean Air Act with the change in pollution from county-year level. This yields 281              0.088 point change in the
Amendments            1970 to 1972 instrumented by          counties with full desired data,         probability of a birth being male.
(CAAAs)               county estimated nonattainment        representing 50% of live births.         This suggests that the CAAAs lead
                      status. The outcome examined is       First difference is calculated on        to a 3.1% change in probability of
                      the ratio of male to female live      changes from 1970 to 1972.               a male birth, and an estimated
                      births; male fetuses are more                                                  21,000 to 134,000 avoided fetal
                      susceptible to in utero insults. Thus                                          deaths in affected counties ( which
                      increased shares of male live births                                           is 2 to 13% of total births).
                      suggest fewer fetal deaths. A large
                      number of county-level covariates
                      are included as controls, including
                      TSP level in 1970.




                                                                                                                              35
  Table 2: Studies of air pollution, fetal health, and infant mortality – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                      Methods                             Data/Size                               Outcomes
Sneeringer (2009) Unit counts of livestock are used to Livestock-by-county information is         123 more deaths of infants <1 year
                      proxy for pollution from livestock taken from a proprietary source          old and 100 more deaths of infants
United States         farming. An OLS regression run       based on NRC data from the 1982,       <28 days old per 100,000 live
                      for health outcomes on # of          1987, 1992, and 1997 Agricultural      births result from an increase of
Identification arises livestock in a county and a large    Censuses, and merged with              100,000 animal units in a county.
from spatial          number of time-varying county        Restricted-use birth and death         The average annual unit increase
variation in          covariates capturing:                records from the National Center       from 1982 to 1997 (for counties
livestock             demographics, population and         for Health Statistics for 1980-1999.   with increases) was 35%,
operations due to     housing characteristics, weather     Additional county-level controls       suggesting a 2.8% increase in
farm consolidations controls, industrial concentrations, are taken from a variety of other        infant mortality in these counties,
                      Clean Water Act permits, and other sources. Ultimately, 9,223 county-       or a total of 3,500 additional infant
                      attributes. Year, county, and state 5-year-period observations are          deaths in the U.S. over the time
                      fixed effects are also included in   used, based on ~75M total births.      period. Effects are connected to air
                      the model.                                                                  rather than water pollution through
                                                                                                  a number of findings.

  Table 3 - Panel A: Studies of air pollution and child health
 Paper / Country /
    Source of
    Variation                      Methods                             Data/Size                               Outcomes
Beatty and           Authors first use a 2 period D-in-D Washington State data on bus             Preferred estimates demonstrate
Shimshack (2011) specification where changes in          retrofit program adoption (state         that school districts that adopt
                     health outcomes (from 2002 to       funded) from 53 school districts         emissions reducing retrofits on
United States        2006) in districts that had         (with ~4000 total buses) is linked       their school bus fleets experience
                     significantly retrofitted their bus to hospital discharge data for 1996-     23% fewer bronchitis and asthma
School bus           fleets by 2006 are compared to      2006 and Census demographic              cases, and 37% fewer children's
emissions            health outcomes in districts that   data. Then everything is                 pneumonia cases per month.
reductions           hadn't yet begun retrofits. The     aggregated to the School District-       Results are attributed to within bus
                     second specification is a month by month level with a total of ~5830         exposure to bus emissions.
                     month D-in-D (with month, year,     observations for analysis.
                     and district dummies) comparing
                     before and after periods (variously
                     defined by a school reaching a
                     number of different retrofit
                     thresholds). All specifications
                     control for a small number of
                     district and weather covariates.
                     Economic and weather controls as
                     well as county and state/year fixed
                     effects are also included in the
                     regressions.
Lavaine and          Pollution exposure of admitted        Respiratory hospitalizations data      Authors find that SO2 levels well
Neidell (2013)       patients is estimated, and then       from the French National Hospital      below current quality standards
                     census tract respiratory hospital     Discharge Database is merged with      lead to significant health impacts,
France               admissions are regressed on this      pollution, weather, and                especially among the at-risk
                     exposure measure weather controls     socioeconomic data. After              populations of the elderly and the
Temporary            and tract, month, and year fixed      dropping tracts and refineries for     young. A one month, 1 μg/m3
shutdown (due to     effects. Since exposure is            which key pieces of data are           decrease in SO2 concentrations
strikes) of oil      endogenous, it is instrumented        missing, 3,100 French census tracts    leads to a 5 gram increase in avg.
refineries           using an indicator for whether the    are left with data for 2007-2010.      birthweights and a 0.18 day
                     census tract is close to a refining                                          increase in gestational age. Impacts
                     facility affected by strikes, and                                            appear to be strongest during the
                     whether the month is October 2010                                            third trimester.
                     (when the strikes were in force).



                                                                                                                           36
  Table 3 - Panel A: Studies of air pollution and child health – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                     Methods                             Data/Size                               Outcomes
Currie et al.        Uses exogenous location             Annual Individual level data on all     No impacts are found for children
(2013b)              assignments of army personnel and enlisted men stationed in the             age 0-1 year old. For children 2-5
                     the uniform nature of               Continental U.S. from 1988-1998,        years old, increased probabilities
United States        housing/services across Army        and hospitalization data (including     of respiratory hospitalization are
                     bases to identify contemporaneous condition) for all their wives and        associated with higher levels of O3
Differential in      effects of 5 pollutants on child    children, is linked (via Kriging        in all samples, and CO also
utero exposure to    hospitalizations. A linear          methods) to annual EPA and              contributes significantly for
drinking water       probability model is estimated for weather data. This provides              children of families that didn't
contamination        whether a child was hospitalized in 159,275 annual observations of          move in a given year. A one SD
violations between a given year based on levels of the children 0-5 years old and 44,663         increase in O3 levels leads to an 8-
siblings is used for 5 pollutants, weather controls,     of children under age 1.                25% increase in the likelihood of
identification       child characteristics, base fixed                                           respiratory hospitalization among
                     effects and base/year                                                       children ages 2-5, implying an
                     characteristics, and father's                                               elasticity of 0.5 to 1.5.
                     rank/occupation/year fixed effects.
Neidell (2009)       Assesses whether behaviors          Daily attendance data for two           People respond to public
                     change when an Ozone Alert          outdoor attractions (the LA Zoo &       information about pollution by
United States        occurs using a regression           Griffith Observatory) for 1989-         spending less time outside.
                     discontinuity approach, regressing 1997 is merged with hospital             Ignoring avoidance behavior
Smog Alerts          log of attendance at the outdoor    discharge data, weather data, and       understates the negative impacts of
                     attractions on an indicator for a   data on both predicted and actual       pollutants (specifically Ozone) on
                     local Ozone, a function in forecast ozone levels in 10 Air Monitoring       health outcomes of the young and
                     ozone levels, controls for weather Zones in the Los Angeles area.           elderly. A 0.01 ppm increase in
                     and other air pollutants, and                                               the 5-day Ozone levels increases
                     indicators for holidays, summer                                             child hospital admissions by
                     schedule, and day of week. A                                                1.09%, but when smog alerts are
                     similar regression is run with the                                          controlled for, this jumps to a
                     outcome variable of asthma                                                  2.88% increase in such child
                     hospitalizations (by age), and also                                         hospital admissions.
                     includes interactions of lagged
                     ozone forecasts and levels, as well
                     as indicators for Ozone alerts.
Neidell (2004)       Zip code-month ER admissions for Zip code level data for California         CO has e a significant effect on
                     asthma are regressed on             is aggregated for hospital              asthma for kids 1-18. If 1998
United States        contemporaneous measures of four discharges due to asthma for ages          levels of CO were at their 1992
                     air pollutants, the number of air   1-18, weather monitors, and air         levels, 5-14% more hospital
Intra-zip code       quality episodes (a proxy for       pollution monitors for the period of    admissions due to asthma would
variation in         avoidance behavior), a number of 1992-1998. Demographic, home               have been expected. Avoidance
seasonal air         covariates (including weather), and values, and Ozone alerts data is        behavior significantly reduces the
pollution levels is dummy variables for each zip         also used. This provides ~50,000        negative effects of air pollution.
used for             code- year and year-month. Model zip code-month observations for            Negative air pollution effects are
identification       is estimated separately for each of analysis.                               larger among children of lower
                     5 age groups in the 1-18 age range.                                         socio-economic status.
Ransom and Pope A difference-in-differences              Data on local counts of daily           Hospital admissions for respiratory
(1995)               approach comparing logged health deaths and hospital admissions             ailments increase significantly
                     outcomes in a valley with a         (including reason for admission)        when the mill was open (relative to
United States        (intermittently shut down) steel    for individuals living in two           the control). Admissions due to
                     mill to logged health outcomes in distinct valleys in Utah (the Utah        bronchitis and asthma nearly
Temporary closure a nearby valley (with no mill) is      and Cache Valleys) is linked to         doubled among preschoolers in the
of steel mill in     used with negative binomial         data on the temporary 13-month          treatment valley when the mill was
Utah                 regression models. Regressions      closure of a large steel mill (due to   open vs. closed (compared to
                     include seasonal controls, but few a labor dispute) in 1986 and 1987.       almost no change in the control
                     other covariates.                                                           valley), and resulted in an ~ 60
                                                                                                 additional hospital admissions per
                                                                                                 year in this age group.


                                                                                                                          37
  Table 3 - Panel A: Studies of air pollution and child health – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                      Methods                               Data/Size                            Outcomes
Reyes (2012)          The relationship between blood        Individual outcome data on ~10k       Large negative impacts of early
                      lead and effective grams of lead in young adults from the NLSY 79           childhood lead exposure are found
United States         purchased gasoline is determined      and NLSY 97 surveys is linked to      on outcomes including childhood
                      via a simple OLS regression using state-month estimates of effective        behavioral problems, teenage
Differential rates of the NHANES II data (and a             grams of lead per gallon of           aggression and pregnancy, and
declines in leaded number of individual controls), and purchased gasoline (for the time           young adult criminal behaviors.
fuel usage between the resulting estimates are used to period when the child was 0-3              The elasticities between these
states are used for predict (by state, age, year of birth, years of age), and census data.        behaviors and lead exposure range
identification        and a number of other individual      Additionally, 1976-1980 blood         from 0.2 to 1.0.
                      characteristics) blood lead levels at level data from 2,322 children
                      age 0-3 for those surveyed in the     under age 6 from the NHANES II
                      NLSY. Childhood and young adult is linked to the grams of lead per
                      outcomes are then regressed (using gallon measure by state.
                      OLS, probit, ordered probit, or
                      censored tobit depending on the
                      outcome) on this estimated value
                      of blood lead and a vector of
                      individual demographics, as well
                      as dummies for mother's age and
                      birth cohorts.
Schlenker and        Examine effect of pollution from       Daily data on air pollution levels,   Increased taxiing leads to
Walker (2011)        airports on ER visits and              weather, hospital admissions, and     significant increases in ground-
                     hospitalizations for respiratory and   ER visits for zip codes surrounding   level air pollution near airports. A
United States        heart ailments. Instrument for         California's 12 largest airports is   1 SD increase in taxiing time at
                     pollution levels in zip codes near     linked to Department of               LAX increases CO levels near the
Airport delays at    airports with delays at East Coast     Transportation data on taxiing time   airport by 0.32 SDs and 0.23 SDs
East Coast hubs      hub airports (which lead to delays     at these airports and 3 major         10 km from the airport. A 1 ppb
                     and increased taxiing, and thus        eastern hubs. Zip code direction      increase in CO leads to 0.8
                     increased pollution at the             from nearest airport and wind         additional daily hospital visits per
                     California airports that are the       direction data is also included.      10 million children under 5 year
                     focus of this study). Additionally,    Main sample is ~180k day-zip          due to asthma and 5.5 additional
                     wind variation (interacted with        code observations from 2005-2007.     hospital visits among due to all
                     East Coast taxiing congestion) is                                            respiratory ailments. The elderly
                     used as an additional instrument                                             and the young to be more sensitive,
                     for pollution in zip codes near                                              but impacts of CO are found across
                     major California airports.                                                   all ages. Significant effects are not
                                                                                                  found for NO2 or O3.
Yu (2011)            A number of D-in-D models are          1050 children <5 years of age in      Both interventions were effective
                     estimated. Due to apparent non-        rural Chinese households were         in reducing acute incidence of both
China                random sample selection, assigned      examined 6 times before and 8         upper (by 9-23%) and lower (by 1
                     treatment and control groups are       times after the intervention, which   to 3%) respiratory infections
Intervention         not the preferred specification.       was implemented on 3 groups of        among small children, though the
assignment           Author employs propensity score        households. The first received        additional intervention of stove
                     matching following Abadie et al.       subsidized stoves and a behavioral    subsidization was not found to
                     (2001) to better construct matched     intervention, the second, only a      have significantly better outcomes
                     treatment and control groups. The      behavioral intervention, and the      among children.
                     matching variables are validated       third served as a control.
                     following Imbens (2010) and
                     checked using false treatments.




                                                                                                                           38
  Table 3 - Panel B: Studies of air pollution and children's schooling and cognition
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                     Methods                                Data/Size                             Outcomes
Currie et al.        A triple differences model is          1996-2001 Administrative data          CO levels below the current EPA
(2009a)              employed, holding school, year,        from schools within 10 miles of a      Air Quality Standards lead to
                     and 6-week attendance period           pollution monitoring station from      increases in school absences.
United States        characteristics constant to examine the 39 largest school districts in        Specifically, the reduction in high-
                     the effects of shifts in the # of days Texas is merged with ambient           CO days during the period of the
Changes in counts in 5 levels bins on attendance for pollution data from these monitors.           study led to a 0.8 percentage point
of binned pollution each of the 4 pollutants of interest. The attendance data from the 1,512       (on a 3.58% base) reduction in
levels used for      School demographic & age               schools is in 6 week blocks at the     absences, with large impacts for
identification       characteristics, as well as            school level, so hourly pollution      vulnerable populations such as
                     precipitation and temperatures are data is aggregated to that                 asthmatics. No statistically
                     controlled for.                        granularity, resulting in >12million   significant relationship is found
                                                            student-attendance period-year         between more days with high PM10
                                                            observations.                          or Ozone and increased absences.

Lavy et al. (2012)   Fixed effects regressions are run of  ~300k (for PM2.5) and ~150k (for        Higher levels of both PM2.5 and
                     student test scores on                other pollutants) test scores from      CO are associated with lower
Israel               contemporaneous weather and           the years of 2000-2002 are              scores. A PM2.5 Air Quality Index
                     pollution variables, with results     matched to contemporaneous              (AQI) >100 associated with ~2.5
Natural variation of presented for student, school, and    pollution and weather conditions.       points less (out of 100) and a CO
pollution on test    city level fixed effects models.      Test scores are from the Bagrut (A      AQI>100 associated with ~9.5
days is used for     Controls for student and parental     high school graduation                  fewer points scored. This effect is
identification       characteristics and month and test    requirement for academic track).        homogeneous for CO, but more
                     level fixed effects are also          Pollution data is from 139 stations     intense among groups with higher
                     included.                             across Israel, assigned to students     rates of asthma for PM2.5.
                                                           based on city of test and monitor
                                                           locations w/in 2.5 km of the city
                                                           limits.
Reyes (2011)         Cohort average test scores are        A panel of school-level cohort-yearBlood lead level data from the
                     regressed on a measure of blood       data on 3rd and 4th graders from   1990s coupled with test
United States        lead (either levels or indicator of # >1,000 public schools in Mass.     performance data from the 2000s is
                     of children over certain              between 2000-2009 is created       used to demonstrate the strong
Identification       thresholds), a broad set of           through the aggregation of         cross-sectional link between
comes from within- community, district, and school         individual-level standardized test childhood blood lead levels and
school, inter-       specific controls, and year fixed     scores and blood level             test scores in elementary schools.
temporal variation effects. An OLS regression              measurements. Additional school    However, such links are not robust
of blood lead levels weighted by cohort size is the main and community level controls are     to the inclusion of significant
                     estimation method.                    gathered from state and federal    covariates. The lead reduction
                                                           data sources. ~18k cohort-year     levels observed over the time
                                                           observations are used in the       period reduced the share of
                                                           analysis.                          children scoring unsatisfactory on
                                                                                              standardized tests by 1-2
                                                                                              percentage points.
Zweig et al. (2009) Average class test scores by          Individual, survey data from three A 10% decrease in the ambient
                    subject are regressed on a number cohorts of students from the            levels of PM10, PM2.5, and NO2 led
United States       of measures of contemporaneous        Children's Health Study (CHS) in to increased scores on standardized
                    pollution, controls for time variant 88 Southern Californian schools is math tests of 0.15%, 0.34%, and
Identification      average student, family, and          aggregated to the class-school-year 0.18% respectively. Only PM2.5
comes from inter- school characteristics, city            level and merged with publicly      levels are found to contribute
temporal variation unemployment levels, and school available data on schools,                 significantly to reading scores,
of pollution and    fixed effects. A specification with communities, and test scores.         with a 10% reduction in the annual
test scores within  year fixed effects is also estimated. These 216 observations are linked average PM2.5 level associated with
cities                                                    to contemporaneous yearly average a 0.21% increase in reading scores.
                                                          measures of air pollution for       Annual Ozone levels are not found
                                                          monitors placed by CHS.             to contribute significantly to
                                                                                              reading or math scores.

                                                                                                                            39
  Table 4: Studies of water pollution
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                     Methods                                 Data/Size                               Outcomes
Brainerd and         Statewide measures of waterborne         Estimated State/Month-level water      The instrument is validated by
Menon (2012)         agricultural pollutants in the month     quality date for 1978-2005 is          demonstrating that average
                     of conception are regressed on           merged with 3 rounds of the Indian     fertilizer levels in water are higher
India                health outcomes. Levels of non-          National Family Health Survey          in planting months. A 10%
                     agricultural water pollutants, a         (1992, 1998, & 2005), yielding in      increase in the avg. agro-chemical
Temporal and         wide range of mother, father,            utero pollutant exposure estimates     levels in the water during the
Regional Variation household, and state of residence          and health outcomes (as well as        month of conception is associated
in fertilizer use,   characteristics are controlled for.      demographic controls) for ~400k        with a 3.52% increase in infant
leading to           Interacted regional and month/year       births.                                mortality and a 6.65% increase in
differential         of conception fixed effects are also                                            neonatal mortality. A 10% increase
exposure (via        included. Preferred specification                                               in agro-chemical water pollutants
water) to young      utilizes month/region planting                                                  in the month of conception leads to
children of          seasons as instrumental variables                                               a 0.26 standard deviation reduction
different ages and for the presence of agricultural                                                  in age-five z scores.
regions              pollutants.
Clay et al. (2010)   An examination of infant mortality       City-level mortality, population,      In 1900, an all-lead-service-pipe
                     and worker productivity using            and demographic characteristics        city (~11% of the U.S. population)
United States        OLS regressions on water pH and          for 1900, 1910, and 1920 are           could reduce infant mortality by 12
                     interactions of water pH with            merged with service pipe and           to 14% with a drinking water pH
Cross city variation service pipe materials. A rich set       water chemistry data by city from      reduction from 6.7 to 7.5, (i.e.
from water           of city characteristic (including        The Manual of American                 moving from the 25th percentile to
chemistry and        water and milk quality and               Waterworks, 1897 and The Water         the 50th), ~25% of the decline in
utilization of lead  women's suffrage), regional fixed        Encyclopedia respectively.             infant mortality in these cities from
service pipes        effects, and climactic controls are      Ultimately ~200 cities are in the      1900-1920 is attributable to
                     utilized, and possible selection into    data for each of the 3 years           decreased lead exposure.
                     pipe choice is addressed by              analyzed. Wage estimates by city       Suggestive evidence is shown that
                     repeating the analysis among lead-       in 1899 1904, 1909, & 1914 are         wages were lower in cities with
                     pipe-only cities.                        from the Census of Manufacturing.      higher lead exposure and higher
                                                                                                     infant mortality.
Currie et al.          Mother fixed effect model is           1997-2007 Birth outcomes from          It is found that the children of less
(2013b)                estimated comparing sibling birth      natality records are merged with       educated women are much more
                       outcomes (birth weight &               records on drinking water              susceptible to contamination of
United States          prematurity) from the same mother      contamination violations,              drinking water in utero, with a
                       while controlling for bins of          temperature and precipitation data,    14.55% increased likelihood of
Differential in        mother's age, mother's race,           and drinking water service areas       low birth weight and a 10.3%
utero exposure to      education level, marital status, and   for the same time period. Births       increased chance of a premature
drinking water         risk factors, as well as child         from multi-child families identified   birth associated with living in a
contamination          gender, weather controls, and          as being part of a water service       district with contaminated water
violations between     year*month of birth fixed effects.     area are used, yielding 529,565        during the pregnancy.
siblings is used for   Also estimated are models              observations.
identification         analyzing characteristics of
                       mothers who move in response to
                       contamination information, and IV
                       models with instrument
                       constructed using mother's initial
                       residence.




                                                                                                                               40
  Table 4: Studies of water pollution – Cont’d
 Paper / Country /
     Source of
     Variation                     Methods                                  Data/Size                              Outcomes
Troesken (2008)      Cross sectional regressions of 1900      Lead service pipe usage for 74         Elimination of lead from drinking
                     infant mortality and still-birth rates   Massachusetts towns in 1900 is         water contributed significantly to
United States        on an indicator for city usage of        merged with age & cause specific       falling rates of infant mortality in
                     lead service pipes as well as a          death rates, population, water         the twentieth century. This paper
Differences in lead moderate number of city covariates        chemistry info, and the share of       estimates that the usage of lead
pipe usage, age of including measures of population,          water mains <10 years old. For 20      service pipes increased infant
pipes and water      infectious disease environment,          of these towns, measured levels of     mortality rates by 25-50%, and that
chemistry across     and public health infrastructures.       lead in drinking water are also        high-acidity water and new lead
municipalities is    City observations are weighted by        known.                                 pipes contributed to even higher
used for             population. A number of                                                         effects.
identification       specifications are assessed to try
                     and control for correlation between
                     avoidance of lead pipe usage and a
                     city's unobserved "health
                     consciousness".
Zhang (2012)          Individual health indicators (illness   Health and water source data is        Treated water leads to an increase
                      incidence in last month,                taken from China Health and            in the weight to height ratio of
China                 weight/height, and height               Nutrition Survey data from 7           children (avg. age of whom is 8.9
                      measures) are regressed on a            survey waves on 4500 rural             years) of 0.446kg/m and an
Rollout of treated    village-month level indicator for       households from 152 villages from      increase in height of 0.962cm on
water in rural        water from a water treatment plant,     1989-2006, and is linked to data       average. Lower incidence of recent
villages              a moderate set of individual and        (by village) on when water from a      illness is not detected among
                      household covariates, and region        treatment plant was available in the   children, although the incidence of
                      and year fixed effects.                 town. A town is defined as having      illness among adults is estimated to
                                                              plant water when a significant         decrease by 11% with the
                                                              jump in the share of households        introduction of a water plant.
                                                              claiming water plant as their
                                                              source of water is observed.




                                                                                                                             41
