                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CONSUMPTION AND CASH-FLOW TAXES IN AN INTERNATIONAL SETTING

                                         Alan J. Auerbach
                                        Michael P. Devereux

                                        Working Paper 19579
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19579


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We would like to thank Steve Bond and seminar participants at the Centre for Business Taxation, the
Oxford University Economics department, the IFS-STICERD public economics seminar, and Goethe
University for helpful discussion and comments. Devereux acknowledges the financial support of
the ESRC under grant RES-060-25-0033. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19579.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alan J. Auerbach and Michael P. Devereux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumption and Cash-Flow Taxes in an International Setting
Alan J. Auerbach and Michael P. Devereux
NBER Working Paper No. 19579
October 2013
JEL No. F23,H25

                                             ABSTRACT

We model the effects of consumption-type taxes which differ according to the base and location of
the tax. Our model incorporates a multinational producing and selling in two countries with three sources
of rent, each in a different location: a fixed basic production factor (located with initial production),
mobile managerial skill, and a fixed final production factor (located with consumption). In the general
case, we show that for national governments, there are trade-offs in choosing between alternative taxes.
In particular, a cash-flow tax on a source basis creates welfare-impairing distortions to production
and consumption, but is partially incident on the owners of domestic production who may be non-resident.
By contrast, a destination-based cash-flow tax does not distort behavior, but is incident only on domestic
residents. In the alternative case with the returns to the fixed factors accruing to domestic residents,
the only distortion from the source-based tax is through the allocation of the mobile managerial skill.
In this case, the source-based tax is also incident only on domestic residents, and is dominated by an
equivalent tax on a destination basis.


Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

Michael P. Devereux
Centre for Business Taxation
Saïd Business School
Oxford University
Park End Street
Oxford OX1 1HP
United Kingdom
Michael.Devereux@sbs.ox.ac.uk
    1. Introduction


         It is generally understood that the distortionary effects of capital income taxation

are magnified in open economies. For example, the standard theoretical model suggests

that the optimal effective marginal tax rate of a source-based capital income tax in a small

open economy is zero (see Gordon, 1986). Raising this tax rate increases the required pre-

tax rate of return in that location; this reduces the quantity of capital located there, which

in turn creates an excess burden which could be avoided by taxing immobile factors

directly.

         One alternative to income taxation is consumption-type taxation. This paper

investigates the effects of different types of consumption-type taxation on factor allocation,

production and consumption in a two-country framework. Our particular interest is in

three versions of the business cash-flow tax levied on business profit.1 These differ in how

the profit is allocated across the two countries. We analyze the case where aggregate profit

is allocated by an apportionment factor based on the location of sales; a “destination” tax

akin to VAT where exports are tax exempt, but imports are taxed; and a conventional

source-based tax. We explore and compare the efficiency properties of each of these forms

of taxation. We show that there are many potential distortions even when capital income is

excluded from the tax base, so that the tax is based only on profit or economic rent. We also

examine a game played between the two countries to consider what the non-cooperative

outcome would be if the two countries chose their tax systems independently. In particular,

starting from the most common form of taxation, the source-based tax, we analyze whether
1
 These three can be thought of, for example, as variants of the R-based tax of Meade et al. (1978), although since
we do not include debt in our model , this would be equivalent to the R+F based tax.
countries have an incentive to switch at least part of their tax system to one of the other

forms.

         We model a representative multinational company which takes all prices as given,

and which is owned equally by two representative consumers, one in each country. The

company has a production plant in each country that supplies either or both consumers.

The final good differs between countries depending on local conditions – for example, a car

must be prepared as right- or left-hand drive. The company exports an intermediate

product between the two countries, and completes the final product in the country in

which it is sold and consumed.

         The company generates profit in three ways. First, it has the use of a fixed factor in

each production location of the intermediate good, which implies that there are decreasing

returns to scale in the other two factors, capital and managerial skill. The existence of the

fixed factor generates profit in the country of production. This factor can be thought of, for

example, as a local supply network that has been built up in each country, and which is

available to the multinational to support production. Second, we also assume that there is a

fixed factor in process of adjusting the intermediate good for the local market, which

generates profit in the country of consumption. Third, the company owns a fixed supply of

managerial skill, which it can move freely between the two countries. The profit generated

from access to managerial skill is therefore mobile between the two countries.

         Within this framework, even taxes on business profits can affect economic behavior.

For example, consider the effects of a source-based cash-flow tax applied to the company in

each country, where the home country has a higher tax rate. Other things being equal, and

even in the absence of manipulating the transfer price of the intermediate good for tax



                                               2
reasons, the company would prefer to shift production of the intermediate good to the

lower-taxed country, and export the intermediate good back to the home country to serve

the domestic market. In addition, the company will have an incentive to inflate the transfer

price at which the intermediate good is sold, since this will raise taxable profit in the

foreign country and reduce it in the home country. This in turn creates a further incentive

to shift production to the foreign country. So even under a cash-flow tax, the company will

have an incentive to shift production to the foreign country, where the tax rate is lower.2

        By contrast, a destination-based tax implemented in both countries along the lines

of a VAT (but with labor costs deductible) would be efficient, equivalent to a lump-sum tax.

This stems from the assumption that the representative consumer is immobile. A tax based

solely on the revenue generated in each market cannot be avoided by switching factors of

production (and trade flows) between countries.

        A source-based cash-flow tax does have an attractive property, even though it

causes distortions, including to the location of production. The incidence of such a tax falls

to some extent on the owners of the company. As long as the company is at least partly

owned by non-residents, then the source-based tax is partly incident on those non-

residents. In a non-cooperative setting, then, there is generally a trade-off for governments

in setting a source-based tax rate. On the one hand, a higher tax rate induces a deadweight

cost due to distortions induced by a switch of production between countries; on the other

hand the country benefits since part of the incidence of the tax falls on non-residents.




2
 Note that this depends on production taking place in both countries. If the company chooses to produce in only one
country, then its discrete choice of which country to choose will depend on the tax rate. Bond and Devereux (2002)
compare the properties of source- and destination-based taxes in this framework.



                                                         3
       Beginning with the standard case in practice of only a source-based tax in each

country, we ask whether the home government has an incentive to switch part of its tax

base away from the source base to either a destination base or a sales tax on the good

produced by the multinational. In the general case, it is not possible to identify whether the

government should do this or not. The reason is the tradeoff just mentioned between the

benefit of taxing non-residents as against the deadweight loss imposed by the source-based

tax.

       However, this benefit of the source-based tax is not present in an alternative

framework which we model. In this framework, the rent earned by the fixed factors

(associated with initial production and final production) accrue to domestic residents

rather than to the multinational. This generates a direct benefit to the representative

residents from attracting each element of production activity, in that the prices of the fixed

factors are bid up. In this case, the only source of measured company profits (which we

continue to assume are shared equally between jurisdictions) is the returns to managerial

skill. In this setting, it is possible to show that a switch to the destination based tax would

be beneficial.

       This result appears to be at odds with several claims in the literature regarding the

equivalence of destination and source-based taxes. In the last model, the only remaining

distortion is the choice of where to locate managerial skill. That implicitly reflects a

transfer pricing decision, since in our model this factor can be allocated freely, and hence in

effect the transfer price is zero. If instead, we assumed that the factor was wholly owned in

one country, and that its transfer to the other country was appropriately priced, then even

this distortion would disappear, and the source-based tax, like the destination-based tax,



                                              4
would be equivalent to a lump-sum tax. This is implicitly the framework underlying the

contributions of Auerbach (1997), Bradford (2003) and others, resulting in the claim that

destination-based and source-based consumption taxes are equivalent.3 We show in this

paper the nature of the assumptions that need to be made for such an equivalence to hold.

           In that respect, this paper relates closely to the literature investigating the

comparison between VAT levied on a destination or origin (i.e. source) basis. A

comprehensive analysis of alternative locations of the VAT base was provided by

Lockwood (2001), who synthesized a number of earlier contributions. Our model differs

substantially, focusing particularly on firm-level decisions and several variations in tax

structure as opposed to modeling the consumption side in more detail. Nevertheless, the

results are broadly consistent: Lockwood finds that destination and origin bases are only

equivalent in the presence of perfect competition and factor immobility. This would also be

true in our model, though as noted above, mobile managerial skill would not overturn this

result under appropriate transfer pricing. Beyond this, Lockwood (building on Lockwood,

1993, and Keen and Lahiri, 1998) also finds that the introduction of imperfect competition

destroys this equivalence. We do not model imperfect competition in this paper.

           The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the base case

model, and analyzes the impact of the four taxes (a domestic sales tax on one good only,

and a cash-flow corporation tax based on formula apportionment, a destination base, and a

source base) when both countries adopt the same form of taxation. To set the scene, and

for the purposes of comparison, this section also considers a lump-sum tax, and a domestic

sales tax on all goods, which also amounts to a lump-sum tax in our model. Given that

3
    See also Avi-Yonah (2000), and Grubert and Newlon (1997).



                                                        5
source-based taxes are dominant in practice, Section 3 addresses the question of whether,

starting from the case in which both countries impose a source-based tax, the home

country has an incentive to switch part of its tax base to either a destination basis or a sales

tax on one good only. Section 4 extends the framework of the model by considering the

case in which the returns to the fixed factors accrue only to domestic residents, and not to

the company. Section 5 concludes.


   2. Properties of common tax regimes


        There are two countries. Each country has a representative agent with a utility

function of the form


(2.1)


where c1 and c2 represent consumption of goods 1 and 2 respectively, g is a local public

good, and the asterisk denotes the foreign country. To make the model tractable, we

assume that there are no income effects in the demand for good 1. In general, we allow the

shape of the utility function for good 1 to differ between the two countries, although we

also study the symmetric case in which the utility functions are the same.

        In each country there is one unit of an endowment good. Production of one unit of

good 2 in each country uses one unit of endowment. The production of good 2 is therefore

characterized by constant returns to scale, and is assumed to be perfectly competitive, so

that there are no profits. Good 2 can be used as a public good (g) or as consumption ( ),

with the remainder supplied as capital to the world capital market. Hence, the total world

supply of capital (K) is



                                               6
(2.2)


where k is the amount of capital used in the home country and k* is the amount used

abroad.

        Good 1 is produced by a single representative multinational, which takes all prices

as given. It produces the basic good in both countries, and in its production has access to

two additional factors, both in fixed supply. One factor is a local supply network that has

been built up in each country, and which is available to the multinational to support

production. The second is access to managerial skill (m), the overall stock of which is

assumed to be in fixed supply, M, and which can be used for production in either location.

Thus,


(2.3)


where m is the amount of capital used in the home country and           is the amount used

abroad. Also, the total amount of capital used by the multinational, K, is shared between the

two sites of production as shown in (2.2).

        We assume that the basic production function used by the multinational is the same

in both countries,          and that there are decreasing returns to scale because of the

fixed factor representing the local supply network. There are no transportation costs, so

without taxes the locations of production and consumption are unrelated. Hence


(2.4)




                                             7
where          and      are the output from the production processes consumed in the home and

foreign country respectively. The locations of capital production and capital use are also

unrelated.

           The final product must be prepared for sale in each country due to local tastes. For

example, cars must be adjusted to be left-hand or right-hand drive, depending on local law.

This links consumption of good 1 in each country with the basic output sold in that country,

according to a common second stage production function,                            ,


(2.5)                             ;


where          and      are the quantity of sales of the multinational in each country, and           is

assumed to be decreasing returns to scale.

           Although we model a representative company, we assume that there are many such

companies which determine the price in equilibrium. Any single company therefore takes

the output price as given. Conditional on the consumer price in each country, decreasing

returns to scale of            leads to different values associated with x in the two countries. If, for

example, there is a stronger demand for good-1 consumption in country 1, then this will

lead to more consumption, and higher consumption rents in that country.

           Ownership of the multinational, and hence profit (), is shared equally between the

two countries’ representative agents. The profits have three components: returns to the

fixed factor in basic production, returns to managerial skill, and returns to the fixed factor

in final production. The effective locations of these components differ. The return to the

fixed factor in basic production is located in the country hosting that fixed factor;4 the

4
    Here we assume that the fixed factor is owned directly by the multinational.



                                                            8
return to managerial skill is mobile, and depends on the location of the managerial skill

itself; and the return to the fixed factor in final production is located in the country of

consumption. The differences in location for these components of profits are important in

modeling the impact of alternative taxes.

         We now consider the effects of using different types of taxes to raise revenue to

finance public goods. Initially, we consider only cases in which both governments adopt the

same tax base; in Section 3 we consider the incentives to deviate from a common tax base.


        2.1. Lump sum tax

         To set the stage, consider first the case of lump sum taxes (T and T*) levied on the

consumer in each country, and equal to government spending, T = g; T* = g*. Individuals

choose consumption of goods 1 and 2 to maximize utility, U or U*, subject to a budget

constraint:


(2.6)                                    ;


Without income effects and assuming that the price of good 2  1, this implies


(2.7)


         The profit of the multinational is:


(2.8)                                                                                       .


Maximizing profit with respect to k, m, K, and x1 , and yields the following first-order

conditions for profit maximization of the multinational:



                                               9
(2.9)

(2.10)

(2.11)

(2.12)


          Conditions (2.9) and (2.10) call for production efficiency, with the marginal product

of capital equal across the two countries, and also the marginal product of managerial skill

equal across the two countries. Condition (2.11) calls for setting marginal revenue equal to

marginal cost. Condition (2.12) implies that marginal revenues should be independent of

consumption location.

          Given that production functions are the same in the two countries, then (2.9) and

(2.10) imply that                   and                   In turn, this implies that these four

first-order conditions imply:


(2.13)                                              .


          The home government chooses the lump sum tax T to maximize utility, U, subject to

its budget constraint, T  g . The foreign government faces the equivalent problem. This

yields:


(2.14)


          With no income effects in the demand for good 1,                           Given the

household budget constraints (2.6), this implies that                                    Thus,




                                               10
                      which implies that the optimal value of the public goods,           are

given by:


(2.15)                      ;               .


         Note that the consumer budget constraints can be rewritten as


(2.16)


with the equivalent for the foreign country. These two constraints represent only one new

equation, given Walras’ law. Equation (2.2), combined with (2.4), (2.5), (2.13) and (2.16)

represent seven equations in seven unknowns, the four consumption levels, the two levels

of output, and the capital stock, K, that can be solved for their equilibrium values.

         Having summarized the equilibrium conditions when both countries use lump-sum

taxes, we now consider the effects of using other tax systems.


     2.2. Uniform domestic consumption tax

               Suppose that the home country imposes a tax at tax-inclusive rate t on

consumption of goods 1 and 2, and the foreign country imposes a tax of the same form, at

rate t*. Define p1 and p2 to be the home-country consumer prices, inclusive of tax, of goods 1

and 2 respectively with the same notation convention abroad. Taxes are therefore


(2.17)                            ;


As there are no taxes on production, the producer price of the numeraire good 2 remains

equal to 1 in both countries. This implies that the consumer prices of good 2 become



                                                11
                and                . With these prices, the conditions for utility maximization

become:


(2.18)                                                                              ,


and after-tax profits of the multinational are:


(2.19)


           Combining (2.18) and (2.19) yields the same expression for profits as above, (2.8).

Thus the conditions for profit-maximization, (2.9)-(2.12), are also the same as in the case of

the lump-sum tax. Finally, the household budget constraint becomes


(2.20)                                                                          ,


with the equivalent for the foreign country.

           Since the choice of tax rate t amounts to a lump-sum tax on endowment and profits,

both of which are unaffected by the tax rate, it amounts to a lump-sum tax on domestic

residents. As a consequence,                                    the equilibrium is unchanged.


         2.3. Domestic sales tax on good 1 only

           It is useful to consider good 2 to be an untaxed good, such as leisure, so that the

sales tax will have some distortionary impact, as would be realistic. 5 With no tax on good 2

in either country, individual maximization yields the same expressions as for the lump-sum

tax, (2.7).

5
    One might also think of good 2 as local production by small producers below a taxpaying threshold.


                                                          12
         After-tax profits are therefore:


(2.21)




Maximization with respect to k and m will still yield production efficiency, since all the

terms in k and m are multiplied by (1-t*). However, conditions (2.11) and (2.12) become


(2.22)                                      , and

(2.23)


implying that condition (2.13) becomes:


(2.24)                                                          .


The consumer choice of good 1 is therefore distorted in each country.

         The government now faces a more complicated decision since increasing the tax will

have substitution effects as well as income effects. The government chooses the tax rate t,

again to maximize U, subject to the consumer’s budget constraint,


(2.25)


and the government’s budget constraint,


(2.26)                         .


Substituting (2.25) into the expression for U, and maximizing with respect to t, implies:




                                              13
(2.27)


where


(2.28)


is the change in real income due to an increase in t, resulting from the direct change in

nominal income through  , plus the change in purchasing power due to price changes.

         To take this further, consider      :


(2.29)




The first line reflects the impact on post-tax profit of an increase in the tax rate holding

everything else constant, plus the effects through changes in the output prices in the two

countries, which are not taken into consideration by the multinational, plus the effect on

post-tax profit through a possible reaction in the foreign tax rate. The second line is equal

to zero from the multinational’s first-order condition for profit maximization.

         Noting that                 and the equivalent for the foreign price, we can combine

(2.28) and (2.29) to yield an expression for the effect on real income:


(2.30)


For the effect on revenues, we have:


(2.31)                                                .


                                                 14
         Comparing these two expressions yields:


(2.32)




where                 is the sum of the first two components of              in the first line of

expression (2.29) and               is the sum of the last two components. There are three

sources of deviation from equality of |dY/dt| and dT/dt on the right-hand side of this

expression:

        The first,               represents the first-order deadweight cost from worsening

         the pre-existing tax distortion,   , which is equal to zero for t = 0. This will reduce g.

        The second and third terms,              and            account for tax exporting. The

         second (which will be positive for an increase in t) reflects the fact that only half of

         the reduction in profits from home country taxes shows up in home country income,

         even though all of it shows up in home-country taxes; this will increase g. The third

         term has the opposite sign, reflecting the fact that half of the tax-induced change in

         profits due to foreign country taxes shows up in home country income, even though

         none of it shows up in home country-taxes; this will reduce g, assuming that foreign-

         country tax revenues rise.




                                                15
      2.4. Business profits tax with apportionment by sales

         Formula apportionment has often been considered as a solution to the difficulty of

determining the location of the tax base, and has recently been proposed by the European

Commission as a replacement for existing corporation taxes in Europe. Its properties have

been analyzed by Gordon and Wilson (1986), who demonstrated that for a standard

corporate income tax, a three-factor formula based on the location of property, payroll and

sales could be examined as, in effect, three forms of distortionary taxation. It is clear that a

formula based on property or payroll would affect location incentives. We therefore focus

on the case where the apportionment factor is solely the destination of sales – that is,

where the consumer resides, as proposed by Avi-Yonah and Clausing (2008). We further

consider the case in which the tax base itself is a business cash-flow tax.6

         We assume here that the apportionment factor is based on the location of the

consumption of good 1 only, rather than on goods 1 and 2. This would follow naturally if

the multinational does not also produce good 2, or if good 2 represents leisure. This

assumption implies that sales of good 2 in either country have no impact on the firm’s tax

payments.7 Consequently, the equilibrium competitive price for good 2 will still be 1, and

the utility maximization conditions for the lump-sum tax in (2.7) still hold. Also, the

condition for pre-tax profits given in (2.8) holds. Post-tax profits are:

6
 We abstract from issues concerning debt and the treatment of interest, by implicitly assuming the multinational is
equity financed.
7
  If sales of good 2 were included in the apportionment formula, for example if the multinational were an integrated
producer of goods 1 and 2, this would lead to an additional distortion. The firm would be encouraged to shift sales
of low-margin products, in this model good 2, from the high-tax country to the low-tax country, to reduce the
share of its overall sales in the high-tax country. In a more general model with sales of intermediate
production inputs (absent from our model because the two stages of good-1 production occur within the
same firm), there would be a second additional distortion, through the implicit taxation of intermediate sales
along the lines of the implicit taxation of final goods sales described in expression (2.34). See Auerbach (2011)
for further discussion of these distortions.



                                                         16
(2.33)                                       ;


where                                            .


         Using (2.8) and (2.33), we can derive the firm’s optimal conditions with respect to k,

m, K, and x1. For the condition with respect to k, we have:


(2.34)


                          
Hence, the term f1  f1* must equal 0 and (2.9) still holds; likewise, so does condition

(2.10), so there is still production efficiency.

         The remaining two conditions, with respect to K and c1, imply


(2.35)



where we have here used the conditions for production efficiency. Expression (2.35)

indicates that there will be an effective tax or a subsidy on consumption according to

whether the home tax rate is higher or lower than the tax rate abroad. So if t  t * , for

example, sales are discouraged at home and encouraged abroad by the incentive to shift the

location of profits for tax purposes.

         As to the choice of public goods, we again have                            , with the

numerator again reflecting the changes in                 and   Following the same approach as

above, and again using the production efficiency conditions then, after some algebra, it is

possible to show that




                                                     17
(2.36)




where  is pre-tax profits, and the envelope theorem implies that only terms in      and

enter this expression from changing either pre-tax profit or the effective tax rate. Also, we

have:


(2.37)


         Comparing these two expressions yields:


(2.38)




         As in the case of the domestic sales tax on good 1 only, there is a deadweight loss

term and fiscal externality terms in addition to dT/dt. In summary, although a cash-flow tax

in a domestic context is equivalent to a non-distortionary lump-sum tax, apportioning a

cash-flow tax internationally based on the destination of sales will generally distort

consumption in both countries, although it will not distort production in this particular set-



                                             18
up with intermediate inputs not involved in the tax computation. It thus has impacts

similar to sales taxes in our model. Since sales taxes are more straightforward to analyze,

we focus on those in Section 3 of the paper.


     2.5. Destination-based cash-flow tax

         We now consider a tax with the same cash-flow base, but with the tax base

determined directly by the destination of sales using border adjustments, as under a VAT.

         Consider first the tax treatment of sector 2. In the absence of any trade in good 2,

profits are zero and tax from this sector is zero. But with trade then an import of good 2

would be subject to the import tax at rate t or t*. The price of the domestically produced

good 2 must be the same as for imported goods. Further, if the sector is a net exporter, then

its tax will be negative. The tax liability in sector 2 and on imports together is:


(2.39)


where w is the producer price of the endowment. If                                then the home

country exports good 2 (or capital) and               If                  then         is a tax on

imports. The opposite holds for the foreign country. If                       , the post-tax zero-

profits condition is:


(2.40)


which is solved by                         and                     . That is, the prices of good 2

and the endowment good are grossed up by                   in the home country and          in the

foreign country. The goods exported to the foreign country are taxed at rate          , and so are

the same price as domestically produced goods in that country. Condition (2.18) therefore


                                                 19
holds, as for the uniform domestic consumption tax. If                      , post-tax profit is

zero, but the price of good 2 must reflect the import tax and so is again grossed up.

         After tax profits in sector 1 are:


(2.41)


This is identical to the expression for lump-sum taxes. Since the tax is all spent on g, all the

results for lump-sum taxes continue to hold, though with all prices (including wages and

those for government purchases) grossed up by           in the home country and          in the

foreign country.

         The household budget constraint is:


(2.42)




with an equivalent condition for the foreign country.

         This expression makes it clear that the destination-based tax is equivalent to a tax

on the pure profits received by domestic residents. As this is a lump-sum tax on domestic

residents, it has no impact on government spending, i.e.,                         In summary,

a destination-based cash-flow tax acts as a lump-sum tax.

         This result differs from the analysis of a destination-based VAT in Keen and Lahiri

(1998) and Lockwood (2001). Keen and Lahiri assume that the tax is levied only on the

imperfectly competitive sector; like a sales tax only on good 1 (or the sales-apportioned




                                               20
cash-flow tax), this would clearly would distort consumption choices in our model.8

Lockwood assumes that consumers are internationally mobile, which would introduce a

new, and distorted, margin of consumer choice under the destination-based tax.


      2.6. Source-based cash-flow tax

         We now consider a third version of the cash-flow tax, in this case one allocated using

the source principle.

         For this tax, there would be no taxes in the competitive sector 2, so p2 = 1. Hence, the

prices of good 1 in the two countries are governed by expression (2.7). We assume that the

final level of production, turning x into the final good 1, takes place in the country of

consumption.9 Define e to be exports of the unfinished good 1 (i.e. x) from the home

country plant to the foreign country plant at price q and e* to be exports of good 1 from the

foreign country plant to the home country plant at price                    . Then profit earned by the home

country plant is                                                                             and that earned by

the foreign plant is:                                                                                 . Total profit

after tax is:


(2.43)


         Conditional on production and consumption in the two countries,                                             is

determined, but not the individual gross exports. This arises because there are no


8
  Note that, if one thinks of good 2 as leisure, then the lack of distortion in our model can also be thought of a
relating to the fact that our destination-based cash-flow tax excludes labor from the tax base, unlike a standard VAT.
With a labor-leisure trade-off, of course, a uniform VAT on market consumption expenditures would distort labor
supply.
9
 In addition to customization for local markets, one can think of this final production stage as including advertising,
distribution, and other activities that take place in the proximity of consumption.



                                                          21
transportation costs, which implies that the firm can choose where to produce for each

market. With production and consumption in each country given, unit increases in both e

and    lead to a net increase in after-tax profits of                  .

       The prices q and      are internal transfer prices of the multinational company. Since

there are no observable arms’ length prices, it may be open to the company to manipulate

these internal prices to reduce its tax liability. But it is useful first to consider a benchmark

price. A natural benchmark arises if we treat the multinational as having four independent

plants, two in each country, each of which takes prices as given. In each case plant A uses k

to produce x and plant B uses x to produce the final good c. Consider the case where there

are no exports, in which case the profits of the two home country plants are

                  and                                   . Plant A chooses k to maximize its profit

and plant B chooses                  to maximize its profit. What value of q would yield the

same outputs as in the case where these two plants were combined, i.e., the value of

for which                         ? The answer is                          , the marginal cost of

producing x. That is, if the transfer price is set equal to the marginal cost of plant A, then

outputs would not be affected by splitting the home plant into two parts. The same applies

to the case in which the intermediate good is exported, and holds even in the presence of

the two cash flow taxes analyzed here, so                                                    .

       We discuss below the possibility that the multinational can exploit the absence of an

arms’ length price to manipulate its transfer prices in order to shift profit between the two

countries. But while we allow the firm considerable latitude in its choice of transfer prices

q       , we assume that it cannot choose different values for the two, for example

exporting at a high price from the low-tax country and then exporting back from the high-



                                               22
tax country at a low price. This means that, even in the absence of transportation costs, the

firm can gain no benefit from cross-hauling.

          With q      in expression (2.43), there are four possible regimes:


Case A:                 and e                                       and

Case B:                and                                           and

Case C:                 and e                                       and

Case D:                and                                           and


In the first two cases, the high-tax country is importing, so the firm will wish to maximize q.

In the last two cases, the high-tax country is exporting, and the firm will wish to minimize q.

          In all four of these cases,                      . Making this substitution in (2.43)

generates general first order conditions as follows:


(2.44)      :

(2.45)


(2.46)

(2.47)


          With marginal cost pricing,            , these conditions simplify to:



(2.44’)                   ,

(2.45’)

(2.46’)




                                                23
(2.47’)


In this case, there is no distortion to the allocation of capital, but there is to the allocation of

managerial skill.

          More generally, consider first Case A, with              , where the home plant is

exporting, and where the firm wishes to maximize q. From the k condition                    implies

that           . That is, with transfer pricing manipulation, production is shifted from the

foreign country to the home country, reducing            and increasing      , increasing exports

from the home country. Relative to the marginal cost pricing case, in this case              would

also increase               , also pushing more intellectual property to the home country. By

symmetry, the same result, that exports from the low-tax country increase, will hold for

Case B. Now consider Case C, with           , where again the home firm is exporting, but now

the firm wishes to minimize q. From the k condition              again implies that          . That

is, with transfer pricing manipulation, production is again shifted from the foreign country

to the home country, reducing          and increasing      , increasing exports from the home

country. Relative to the marginal cost pricing case, in this case                   would reduce

              , again pushing more intellectual property to the home country. By symmetry,

the same result, that exports from the high-tax country increase, will hold for Case D.

          Thus, we have the interesting result that, regardless of whether the high-tax or low-

tax country exports, the ability to manipulate transfer prices makes export activity more

attractive and causes the firm to adjust the location of production accordingly. Thus, the

ability of the firm to manipulate transfer prices does not necessarily lead the firm to shift




                                                24
production to the low-tax country, unless it also leads the firm to export from the low-tax

country in the absence of transfer pricing manipulation. Certainly, by expression (2.47’),

the firm already will have the tendency to locate intellectual property in the low-tax

country, making that country more likely to export. On the other hand, the low-tax country

might also have a stronger demand for good 1, increasing the likelihood that it would

import.

       For Cases A and B, where the firm would like to maximize q, in the extreme where

the firm can raise q arbitrarily, a profit constraint that binds the choice of q. That is, the

firm raises q to the point at which there are zero profits in the importing, high-tax country.

This assumption alters the first-order conditions, because it makes q endogenous with

respect to production decisions. In fact, things become very simple, because all profits now

appear in the low-tax country. For example, for Case A, in which           and       , profits

are:


                                                                                       .


This leads to first-order conditions:


(2.44A)

(2.45A)

(2.46A) :

(2.47A)


That is, all tax distortions disappear, since all profits are effectively taxed at the low-tax

country’s tax rate. Comparing this for the more general case discussed above, an initial rise


                                             25
in q above    shifts production to the exporting country and drives an increasing wedge

between      and   . However, eventually as a smaller and smaller share of profit is taxed in

the high tax country, the wedge falls, until it reaches zero where all profit is taxed in the

low tax country.

       For Cases C and D, an obvious natural lower bound for q is q = 0. Whether this is

feasible depends not only on the respective governments’ enforcement and information,

but also on whether setting q this low drives profits below zero in the exporting country. If

we assume not, i.e., that the constraint that the exporting country’s profits are non-negative

is not binding at q = 0, then the first-order conditions imply that:


(2.44C)

(2.45C)


(2.46C)

(2.47C)


Condition (2.46C) indicates that the country with the lower tax rate, which is the importing

country, has a higher marginal product of capital. The shift of capital to the exporting

country occurs because it gives the firm an opportunity to export more and shift more

profits to the low-tax importing country. Condition (2.47C) indicates that the marginal

product of intellectual capital is no longer lower in the low-tax country; so much

intellectual capital is shifted to the exporting country that the initial bias in the location of

intellectual capital disappears.




                                               26
           Because of the complexity of the analysis for source-based taxation, in particular the

four cases and the need to specify how transfer prices might be manipulated, we will not, at

this point, analyze the choice of government spending. However, the nature of the

distortions present, which we have seen influence the choice of government spending, will

be discussed in the next session.


       3. Would Countries Choose to Deviate from a Source-Based Tax?


           Since source-based taxes are a standard form of taxation, it is worth asking whether

an individual country would have an incentive to move to a different tax base, starting from

an equilibrium in which each country relies only on a source-based tax.

           Because of the complexity of the question, we begin by assuming in analyzing it that

the two countries have the same utility functions, so that there will be a symmetric

equilibrium under the initial source-based tax, with the same initial tax rate and no net

exports.10 We then go on to consider the more complex case without symmetry.

           We also assume a Nash equilibrium, that is, that each country chooses its tax policy

assuming that the policy of the other country is fixed. In this environment, we ask whether

the home country would wish to deviate from the equilibrium by introducing either a small

destination-based tax cash-flow tax or a small sales tax on good 1, which we showed to

have similar effects to a cash-flow tax with formula apportionment. By the envelope

theorem, we can ignore the benefits of changes in the level of government spending,

assuming that the government always sets spending at its optimal level. Thus, we consider




10
     When symmetric equilibria exist we limit our attention to these and do not consider other possible equilibria.



                                                            27
in each case the substitution of the new tax for the old, keeping the level of public goods

fixed.


        3.1. Would the home country adopt a destination-based cash-flow tax?


         3.1.1. Symmetric case

         Suppose that we start with a symmetric equilibrium in which both countries have

equal source-based taxes, levied at rates            and no other taxes. So that we do not have

to keep track of associated prices changes, we assume for simplicity that the destination-

based tax is implemented in its equivalent form of a lump-sum tax, at rate z, on the home

country’s share of profits. Let  be the experiment. Then the change in welfare with respect

to  equals         , since government spending g is unchanged and hence              = 0. To

keep revenue the same, the changes in s and z must satisfy:


(3.1)                          ,

from which it follows that              if and only if


(3.2)

         From (2.28), the effects of a change in the tax rate on real income are:


(3.3)                              ;   and

In this case,             and at the symmetric equilibrium


(3.4)                                                                  ,

We evaluate this at        .


                                                28
        Since an increase in z is a lump-sum tax, its only behavioral impact will be to reduce

g and    ; prices, consumption of good 1 and capital are all unaffected. As a result,


(3.5)

This is true for any of the regimes for the source-based tax, and so condition (3.2) therefore

reduces to                       ; that is, the increase in real income from reducing the

source-based tax is larger than the decline in revenue.

        With respect to the effects of a change in the source-based tax, the effect on real

income is :


(3.6)                                                                                   ,

where other terms in          are zero by the envelope theorem.

        Total tax levied is


(3.7)


Before differentiating this expression with respect to s, we must consider which of the four

regimes applies, since even though e and e* will be zero in the initial symmetric

equilibrium, this will not be the case once s and z change. By expression (2.47’), the

reduction in s would shift production to the home country, absent any adjustment in q. And,

as noted above, manipulating transfer pricing will only serve to increase exports from the

home country. Given that a reduction in s implies that             and that the home country




                                               29
will export, this implies that case A must hold, i.e., that                     and e                   .11 In this

case,


(3.8)


and so, (using                    and                          ):


(3.9)




In the initial symmetric equilibrium,                               . Also, because in this equilibrium the

firm wishes neither to overstate nor understate its transfer price, we may assume that

             . Hence, (by (2.44’),              . With these taken into account, (3.9) becomes:


(3.9’)


           Combining (3.6) with (3.9’) generates the following condition for an increase in

welfare under a switch to the destination-based tax, i.e.:                                       :


(3.10)



We can solve for                        from equations (2.44)-(2.47) using comparative statics, again

assuming that we start at a symmetric equilibrium with marginal cost transfer pricing.

From these four equations, we obtain:




11
     We show below that the pattern of production and consumption is consistent with this assumption.



                                                          30
(3.11)


(3.12)


(3.13)

(3.14)



where the right-hand side of the last expression uses the fact that               from (2.45).

Combining the first three of these expressions implies that


(3.15)


That is, starting from marginal-cost transfer pricing, there is no distortion of capital

allocation because of the cash-flow tax base, even under source-based taxation. From

(3.11), we have:


(3.16)


However, given that marginal utility equals the price in each country, it also is the case that


(3.17)


Since              and           , these two equations can hold simultaneously only if

                . Hence,               and expression (3.10) becomes


(3.10’)



                                              31
The left-hand side of this expression, which will be positive, represents the increased

revenue generated from attracting managerial capital by reducing the source-based tax.

This term reflects the efficiency gain from reducing the tax on a mobile factor. The right-

hand side of the expression, equals the net tax exporting that is given up by switching to

the destination-based tax. We do not have a definitive result about whether the inequality

holds, although, ceteris paribus, a higher initial value of s would make the result more likely.

         Note that, even though relative consumption doesn’t change, production does shift.

Combining (3.14) and (3.15), we obtain:


(3.18)


(3.19)


where                             is the determinant of the Hessian of the production function.

Since both m and k shift abroad with an increase in s, it is obvious that the first stage of

production shifts abroad. Put another way, as the home country lowers its source based

tax, production shifts to the home country and the home country begins exporting,

consistent with the assumption that Case A applies.


         3.1.2. Asymmetric case

         Now consider the more general case without imposing symmetry. Then the transfer

price would affect the tradeoff in (3.10). Begin with the general expression for profit,


(3.20)




                                               32
evaluated at z = 0. We now have



(3.21)



while            is the same as in (3.9). Combining, these expressions, rearranging and using

               (from (2.45)12), we can write the condition for welfare improvement as:


(3.22)




The first line of this expression is similar to that in (3.10). Compared to (3.10), the first

term on the right-hand side is adjusted simply to reflect the fact that profits based on

domestic production must now incorporate the difference between domestic consumption

and domestic production. The only other difference in the first line is that we do not use the

assumption of symmetry in combining the effects on the two output prices (and cannot

generally show that these two price changes are equal). However, the interpretation of this

line is similar to that above.

         The introduction of asymmetry also introduces the second line. There are two new

terms, both relating to the transfer prices associated with exports, and both reflecting the

change in home country tax revenue. The first element reflects the effect on net exports

from the home country of a change in s; this term is zero with marginal cost pricing. The

second term reflects effect of the tax on net profits, and is thus divided by 2, since half of

12
  While this expression refers to the foreign country, the symmetry of the analysis implies that it holds for the home
country as well.



                                                         33
the profit accrues to non-residents. This term reflects the effect of a change in tax on the

value of exports through a change in the transfer price, again in response to a change in s.

To interpret the impact of these new terms in this expression, it is useful to distinguish the

effects of asymmetry per se and the separate effects of the deviations from marginal cost

transfer pricing that arise as a result of cross-border trade and differences in tax rates.

          In an asymmetric equilibrium with marginal cost pricing, expressions (3.11)-(3.13)

still hold (although (3.14) is different because s and s* need not be equal). Thus, it will still

be the case that                , so the second term on the right-hand side of (3.22) reduces

to                                . The third term on the right-hand side vanishes with

marginal cost pricing, since          . The final term equals                 (where q changes

with s only because of a change in f1). So, we may rewrite (3.22) as



(3.22’)


Compared to (3.10’), the first term on the right-hand side is adjusted simply to reflect the

presence of exports. The second and third terms, which each equal zero starting in a

symmetric equilibrium, no longer do so here, even though it is still the case that              .

These two terms pick up further effects on after-tax profits occurring indirectly through

price changes.

          The net effect of these terms relating to changes in p1 and q will generally be

indeterminate. For example, consider the case in which preferences are the same in the two

countries, so that equal prices for good 1 translate into equal consumption of good 1 and

the term in square brackets simplifies to              . In this case (with equal preferences),


                                               34
the exporting country will be that with a lower tax rate. Thus,           and          will be

of the opposite sign. Assuming that prices move in the same direction (i.e., an increase in

input prices induces an increase in output prices), the second and third terms on the right-

hand side of (3.22’) will have the opposite sign regardless of which country starts with a

lower tax rate.

       For the more general case with transfer-pricing manipulation expression (3.22) may

be rewritten as:



(3.22”)




Compared to the case where marginal cost transfer pricing was assumed, we now have two

new terms, in the second line. To assess the signs of these, we have to consider the effects

on the volume of exports and the transfer price separately the four cases described above.

In general, a rise in s has both direct and indirect effects on the volume of exports and the

transfer price.

       Case A. Here           , the firm is exporting from the home country so that

              and the firm is consequently maximizing the transfer price, so that             .

Given a transfer price, the reduction in the tax rate differential would have a direct impact

on the incentive to export, leading to a reduction in exports over and above the reduction

we would expect to arise even with marginal cost pricing due to the higher domestic tax

rate. And given the volume of exports, the reduction in the tax rate differential would also

directly reduce the incentive to overstate the transfer price, so that q would fall relative to




                                              35
    . In addition to these direct effects would be interactions: a lower volume of exports

would reduce the gains from manipulating the transfer price, which would tend to reduce q

still further. And the direct effect on the transfer price would reduce the benefit of

exporting, which would tend to reduce exports still further.

       Combined, therefore, these effects reinforce each other, so that both the volume of

exports, and the transfer price, fall. As a consequence both the new terms should be

negative, increasing the chance of the reform being undertaken. Lowering the source-based

tax would increase the benefits derived by the low-tax home country from transfer-pricing

manipulation.

       Case B. In this case the home country is the net importer, so that                   ;

      , and the firm is consequently maximizing the transfer price, so that, again,         .

A rise in s would increase the tax rate differential. An increase in the differential would

have the direct effect of inducing more production to take place abroad (both because of

the incentive to shift production abroad due to a higher tax at home and the greater payoff

to trade-based transfer pricing manipulation), raising imports. It would also probably have

a direct effect by raising the transfer price further. These two effects are again self-

reinforcing. The higher volume of imports would induce a further rise in the transfer price,

and the rise in transfer price would further increase imports. These effects again imply that

both terms are unambiguously negative, making the condition more likely to hold. Here,

lowering the source-based tax limits the damage that the high-tax home country suffers

from transfer-pricing manipulation.

       Case C. This is a case where the firm is exporting from the home country, so that

             . But, unlike in Case A,       , and the firm is consequently minimizing the



                                             36
transfer price, so that          . A rise in s would now increase the tax rate differential

between the two countries. For a given transfer price, a rise in the tax differential would

have an ambiguous direct effect on exports from the home country, since the transfer-

pricing gain from exporting is increased, but the increase in domestic production costs

discourages domestic production and exports. Conditional on the volume of exports, a rise

in s would also probably directly induce a reduction in the transfer price, to take advantage

of the increased tax differential. As to interaction effects, the direct reduction in the

transfer price would increase the value of exports, and so would lead indirectly to higher

exports, but the direction of the effect of exports on the transfer price is uncertain because

of the uncertain direct impact on exports. The net effects on both the volume of exports and

the transfer price are therefore ambiguous. Neither of the additional terms can therefore be

signed.


       Case D. The home country is the net importer, so that                 . Now         , and

the firm is consequently minimizing the transfer price, so that            . As with case C, the

effects on the volume of imports and the transfer price of a rise in s are ambiguous. The

direct effect of a reduction in the tax rate differential would be to reduce imports because

of a lower transfer-pricing benefit of trade, but to increase imports because of higher home

production costs. Thus, the direct effect on imports is ambiguous, for the same reason given

in Case C. Also, the direct effect of the smaller tax rate differential would be to raise the

transfer price, and this would have the indirect effect of encouraging more imports. But, as

in Case C, the first term is still of ambiguous sign, and hence so is its indirect effect on the

second term. Hence, both terms are of ambiguous sign, as in Case C.




                                              37
         In sum, transfer pricing manipulation increases the incentive to move away from the

source-based tax in Cases A and B. We might consider these the “normal” cases, where the

lower-tax country is exporting. The reasoning is different in the two cases, though, with the

low-tax country in Case A lowering its tax rate to benefit more from the multinational’s

transfer pricing manipulation, and the high-tax country in Case B lowering its rate to

reduce the damage that it suffers from transfer pricing manipulation. In the other two

cases, though, the picture is less clear, because the high-tax country is also the exporting

country. These cases would arise only where the high-tax country also has a stronger

demand for the good produced by the multinational, given that the initial move away from

a symmetric equilibrium leads the higher-tax country to import.


     3.2. Would the home country adopt a sales tax on good 1?

         Suppose now that we start with a symmetric equilibrium in which both countries

have equal source-based taxes            and the home country considers introducing a sales

tax on good 1 at rate t, as an equal-yield replacement for s. As in the previous case, welfare

will increase if and only if


(3.23)                         .


         Because we are starting from the same equilibrium, the changes in Y and T with

respect to s are the same as in (3.6) with (3.9’), and the discussion relating to these

expressions holds as well. Now, consider the corresponding terms for t. Since


(3.24)                                                                                    ,




                                             38
the effect of a change in t on real income, starting at t = 0 in the symmetric equilibrium, is

therefore (following the same approach as in (2.29)):


(3.25)


Now consider the changes in T. We again may assume that case A holds, and so we have:


(3.26)


Therefore, following the logic used in deriving (3.9’), we obtain


(3.27)                                                                       ,


where the last equality comes from the fact that the sales tax does not distort the location

of intangible assets, as discussed above. We therefore may express condition (3.23) as:



(3.23’)



Using the fact that we are initially in a symmetric equilibrium and              , this further

simplifies to:



(3.23”)



Note, from expression (2.24), that




                                              39
Consider first the special case where there are no consumption rents, so that                              is constant

and equal across the two countries. Then this expression becomes:




and (3.23”) becomes:



(3.23’”)



The left-hand side of (3.23’”) equals 1 because dY/dt = -dT/dt in this case – there is neither

a production distortion nor tax exporting. This expression is satisfied if




which is the same expression as (3.10’); when there is no tax exporting under the sales tax,

the decision is the same as under the destination-based tax.13 However, if there are

consumption rents, then




since some of the sales tax wedge will show up in a reduced producer price. This reduces in

absolute value the numerator of the left-hand side of (3.23”), making it more likely that the

condition will be met (since the overall term is negative); with consumption rents, some of


13
   One might have expected the condition to differ from (3.10’) even in this special case, since the sales tax
introduces a consumption distortion that is not present under the destination-based tax. However, our experiment
here considers the introduction of a small sales tax, starting from an initial value of zero, for which there is no first-
order deadweight loss. For a larger tax change, the adoption of a sales tax would presumably be less attractive
because of the associated consumption distortion, although the analysis would also be more complicated.



                                                           40
the burden of the sales tax is shifted onto producers, and some of this burden on producers

is borne by owners in the other country.


     4. Local ownership of fixed factors


         We now modify the model, assuming that the rents to the fixed factors accrue to

domestic residents instead of to the multinational. There are two fixed factors implicit in

the two production functions                       and           . Assuming these factors are owned by

domestic residents is equivalent, in our model where there is a representative consumer in

each country, to modifying our assumption about the sharing of profits to one where

domestic profits attributable to these two factors are received by domestic residents.

         With this modification, consider again the issue of whether the home country will

wish to shift from a source-based tax to a destination-based tax, starting again from the

assumption that the initial equilibrium is symmetric. In place of equation (3.4), the

definition of overall profits, we now have profits of domestic residents, say :



(3.4’)


where the terms divided by 2 represent the domestic and foreign components of the

multinational’s remaining profits, from managerial capital.14

         Based on (3.4’), the change in domestic income with respect to s is now (as we are

assumed to be in Regime A):




14
  Note that the domestic term is subtracted to account for the fact that only half of this component of domestic
earnings goes to the domestic resident.



                                                         41
(3.6’)




Given marginal cost transfer pricing,                    , and from (3.14), we have:




and the last line in expression (3.6’) becomes:


(4.1)


Substituting this into (3.6’) and adding the resulting expression for             to     as

defined in (3.9’) yields the following condition in place of (3.10):


(3.10”)


One may interpret the right-hand side of (3.10”) as the change in “pure” profits resulting

from the shift in domestic production spurred by the change in s, with the marginal cost of

managerial skill taken into account. This will be zero for the optimizing firm, as we see by

expanding this term:


(4.2)



                                               42
where the last equality follows from the assumption of marginal cost transfer pricing.

Thus, expression (3.10”) reduces to the simple inequality condition,


(4.3)


Compared to expression (3.10’), there is no positive term on the right-hand side, because

there is no tax exporting when domestic rents are owned by domestic factors. Thus, the

home country will not wish to distort production.


   5. Conclusions


        This paper models the effects of alternative forms of consumption-type taxes in a two-

country model with trade of semi-finished goods and mobile factors of production.

        In our base case, we consider a representative multinational that produces and sells in

each of the two countries and allocates capital and managerial skill between the two countries for

production. There are three sources of rents for the multinational: a fixed factor in each country

of basic production; managerial skill, owned by the company, and mobile between the two

countries; and a fixed factor in the country of consumption, associated with preparing the semi-

finished good for the local market. We consider three main forms of cash-flow taxation, all of

which would be equivalent in a closed economy: a cash-flow tax levied on the multinational on a

source basis, the equivalent tax levied on a destination basis, and one whose base is allocated

using sales-only formula apportionment (the effects of which can be studied by analyzing a sales




                                               43
tax levied on the good produced by the multinational.) We describe the forms of distortion to

production and consumption generated by these taxes.

        We investigate whether there is an incentive for a national government to move away

from an equilibrium in which both countries use only the source-based tax. We show that the

government faces a trade-off. One the one hand, movement away from a source-based tax to a

destination-based tax reduces distortions and improves welfare. This result may be reinforced by

the presence of transfer-pricing manipulation by firms, either by pushing a high-tax country to

lower its tax to reduce the incentives for such manipulation (from which it suffers), or by leading

a low-tax country to lower its tax still further to encourage an expansion of such manipulation

(from which it benefits). On the other hand, the source-based tax is partially incident on the

owners of the multinational; since some of them may be non-residents, the tax can improve the

welfare of domestic residents, if its distortions are small relative to this shifting. For a shift to the

sales-apportioned tax, the calculus is somewhat more complicated, as the apportioned tax may

also partially be shifted to non-residents, but also introduces various distortions (not all of which

are incorporated in our analysis) absent under the destination-based tax.

        However, the potential attractiveness of the source-based tax evaporates if the returns to

fixed production factors in each country are captured by domestic residents, so that the rent of

the multinational is due solely to its ownership of managerial skill. In this case, the source-based

tax is incident only on domestic residents, and so its main potential benefit for the national

government is no longer present. This tax does, however, continue to distort the choice of where

to locate mobile managerial skill. This distortion reduces welfare, and can be reduced by a

substitution away from the source-based tax in the direction of the destination-based tax, or a

sales (or sales-apportioned) tax.




                                                   44
REFERENCES

Auerbach, A.J. (1997) “The Future of Fundamental Tax Reform”, American Economic Review
87, 143-146.

Auerbach, A.J. (2011) “Consumption Tax Options for California”, Technical Appendix, Public
Policy Institute of California Report, June.

Avi-Yonah, R. (2000) “Globalization, Tax Competition, and the Fiscal Crisis of the Welfare
State”, Harvard Law Review, 113, 1573-1676.

Avi-Yonah, R. and K. Clausing (2008) “Reforming Corporate Taxation in a Global Economy: A
Proposal to Adopt Formulary Apportionment” in Jason Furman and Jason E. Bordoff, eds. Path
to Prosperity: Hamilton Project Ideas on Income Security, Education, and Taxes, 319-344.

Bradford, D. (2003) “The X Tax in the World Economy”, CEPS Working Paper 93, Princeton.

Devereux, M.P. and S.R. Bond (2002) “Cash Flow Taxes in an Open Economy”, CEPR
Discussion Paper 3401.

Gordon, R.H. (1986) “Taxation of Investment and Savings in a World Economy”, American
Economic Review 76, 1086-1102.

Gordon, R.H. and J.D. Wilson (1986) “An Examination of Multijurisdictional Corporate Income
Taxation under Formula Apportionment”, Econometrica 54, 1357-1373.

Grubert, H. and T. S. Newlon (1997) “Taxing Consumption in a Global Economy”, Washington
D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.

Keen, M. and S Lahiri (1998) “The Comparison between Destination and Origin Principles
under Imperfect Competition,” Journal of International Economics 45, 323-350.

Lockwood, B. (1993) “Commodity Tax Competition Under Destination and Origin Principles”
Journal of Public Economics 53, 141-162.

Lockwood, B. (2001) “Tax Competition and Tax Co-ordination under Destination and Origin
Principles: a Synthesis”, Journal of Public Economics 81, 279-319.

Meade, J. et al. (1978) The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation, London: Allen and Unwin.




                                             45
