                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          HOME BIAS AND LOCAL CONTAGION:
                        EVIDENCE FROM FUNDS OF HEDGE FUNDS

                                           Clemens Sialm
                                             Zheng Sun
                                             Lu Zheng

                                        Working Paper 19570
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19570


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We thank Richard Evans, Mariassunta Giannetti, Alok Kumar, Pedro Matos, Tobias Moskowitz, Loriana
Pelizzon, Mark Westerfield, Scott Yonker, and seminar participants at the 2012 Conference of Financial
Economics and Accounting, the 2013 American Finance Association Annual Conference, the 2013
China International Conference in Finance, the 2013 European Finance Association Annual Conference,
the 2013 University of Oregon Finance Conference on Institutional Investors and Asset Management
Industry, the First Luxembourg Asset Management Conference, the Institute for Quantitative Investment
Research Conference (Inquire UK), the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Duisenberg
School of Finance and the Tinbergen Institute in Amsterdam, the University of Miami, and the University
of California at Irvine for helpful comments. Clemens Sialm thanks the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research for financial support during his Sabbatical. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Clemens Sialm, Zheng Sun, and Lu Zheng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Home Bias and Local Contagion: Evidence from Funds of Hedge Funds
Clemens Sialm, Zheng Sun, and Lu Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 19570
October 2013
JEL No. G02,G11,G23

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the geographical preferences of hedge fund investors and the implication of these
preferences for hedge fund performance. We find that funds of hedge funds overweight their investments
in hedge funds located in the same geographical areas and that funds of funds with a stronger local
bias exhibit superior performance. However, this local bias of funds of funds adversely impacts the
hedge funds by creating excess comovement and local contagion. Overall, our results suggest that
while local funds of funds benefit from local performance advantages, their local bias creates market
segmentation that could destabilize financial markets.


Clemens Sialm                                      Lu Zheng
University of Texas at Austin                      Paul Merage School of Business
McCombs School of Business                         University of California, Irvine
1 University Station; B6600                        Irvine, CA 92617
Austin, TX 78712                                   luzheng@uci.edu
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu

Zheng Sun
Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617
zhengs@uci.edu
     1. Introduction

     The hedge fund industry represents one of the fastest growing sectors in financial markets.

According to French (2008), the total assets managed by hedge funds grew by 175% from 1994

to 2007, as compared to the 81% growth rate of mutual funds over the same period. Despite the

sharp growth of hedge funds, there is relatively little understanding on how investors select

hedge funds,1 and in turn how their investment choices affect the underlying hedge funds. Our

paper fills this gap by analyzing the geographical preferences of funds of hedge funds (FoFs).

     Compared to investors of publicly traded securities, hedge fund investors may have stronger

incentives to generate private information and to monitor their investments. Many studies show

that being close to their investments may provide advantages in generating information and in

providing effective monitoring (e.g., Coval and Moskowitz (1999)). Consequently, hedge fund

investors may exhibit a stronger local preference. It is well known that hedge funds are opaque

and risky compared to public equities. They follow complex trading strategies and often trade in

illiquid assets. In addition, hedge funds are restricted from advertising publicly and face limited

disclosure requirements (Agarwal, Jiang, Tang, and Yang (2013)). These properties incentivize

investors to seek private information and to strengthen monitoring by locating close to their

investments. For example, FoFs can use soft information generated from their local social

networks to obtain information about the quality of local hedge funds. It is also possible that

FoFs can use their local connections to obtain access to reputable local managers.

1
 The academic literature on this regard mainly focuses on how investors select hedge funds based on past
performance. See, for example, Goetzmann, Ingersoll, and Ross (2003), Agarwal, Daniel, and Naik (2004), Fung,
Hsieh, Naik, and Ramadorai (2008), Ding, Getmansky, Liang, and Wermers (2009), Getmansky (2012), and Aragon,
Liang, and Park (2013).




                                                     1
    We start by investigating whether FoFs on average overweight local hedge funds.

Unfortunately, information on portfolio holdings of hedge funds is generally not available to

academic researchers. We therefore propose a novel methodology to estimate FoFs’ loadings on

local hedge funds and non-local hedge funds based on their return information. We find that

FoFs on average overweight local hedge funds to a substantial degree.

    We also document a significant cross-sectional variation in the local bias, indicating that

some FoFs exhibit a strong local bias while others tend to be more geographically diversified.

We find that the degree of local bias is related to a number of characteristics of FoFs in an

intuitive way. For example, smaller and younger FoFs invest more heavily in local hedge funds.

Also, FoFs in which managers invest their personal capital are more biased toward local hedge

funds, which is consistent with a stronger incentive to search for private information and exert

monitoring efforts. Finally, FoFs that concentrate on local portfolios impose a longer redemption

notice period to their investors, which may reflect their concerns for increased need for liquidity

due to the location concentration.

    We next test whether the local bias of FoFs is related to their performance. We find that

FoFs that tilt their portfolios more heavily toward local hedge funds on average perform better.

The result is statistically and economically significant and holds for different measures of

performance and various proxies for the local bias. A one-standard deviation increase in the local

bias is associated with a 35 basis points increase in the Fung-Hsieh seven-factor alpha over the

next quarter. Moreover, the performance predicting power of the local bias is incremental to

other fund characteristics that have been found to be important for hedge fund performance.




                                                2
These results suggest that FoFs benefit from private information, improved monitoring or better

access to skilled managers by investing in hedge funds located close to them.

    However, we also find a negative impact of the propensity to invest locally. To determine

the impact of local FoFs clienteles, we first investigate the flow comovement among local hedge

funds. We find that a fund is more likely to experience large fund flows during a quarter when

other funds in the same area are subject to large flows. The effect is robust to controlling for

style flows. Since flows tend to chase performance, the comovement in flows may simply be due

to the fact that returns are more correlated among funds in the same area. However, the flow

comovement among local funds remains strong even after controlling for funds’ past returns.

    To understand whether the correlated flows generate additional comovement in returns

beyond fundamentals, we study the extreme negative return clustering among local hedge funds.

We first filter the returns by their exposure to common factors, thus any remaining correlation on

the residual returns can be viewed as a phenomenon of contagion, as mentioned by Boyson,

Stahel, and Stulz (2010). We find that the probability of a hedge fund suffering a return in its

bottom decile is increased from 6.9% to 10.2% when 10% of other local funds fall into their

bottom deciles. The effect is both economically and statistically significant. Moreover, we find

that the probability of local contagion is significantly increased when the local FoFs experience

large outflows during the previous quarter.

    Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature. First, our paper contributes to the

“home bias puzzle” initially documented by French and Poterba (1991). An important strand of

literature has emphasized the informational advantage by local investors in explaining this puzzle.




                                                3
In their seminal papers, Coval and Moskowitz (1999, 2001) find evidence that mutual fund

managers invest more in stocks that are located closer to their funds and show that their local

picks perform better than distant picks. Similar evidence was found for retail investors by

Ivković and Weisbenner (2005) and for hedge fund managers by Teo (2009).2 On the other hand,

other studies find less support for superior performance of local investors. 3 One possible

interpretation of the mixed findings is that investors may face various distortions forcing them to

suboptimally concentrate in the local market, which would mask the effects of local

informational advantages. For example, individual investors may be subject to psychological

biases and institutional investors such as pension funds might face local political pressure.

     Focusing on the home bias of FoFs provides an unique setting for detecting the effects of

local advantages. FoFs investors are less likely to be subject to behavioral biases compared to

individual investors and they also are subject to less investment constraints and political

distortions like pension funds or more highly regulated institutional investors. Therefore a

potential local bias is more likely to be driven by local advantages.

     Second, our paper contributes to the emerging literature on hedge fund contagion. Using

hedge fund index data, Boyson, Stahel, and Stulz (2010) and Dudley and Nimalendran (2011)

document the existence of contagion across hedge fund styles, after controlling for


2
  Hau (2001), Choe, Kho, and Stulz (2005), Malloy (2005), Gaspar and Massa (2007), Bae, Stulz, and Tan (2008),
Butler (2008), and Korniotis and Kumar (2012) provide additional evidence on informational advantages of local
agents. Theoretically, Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2009) provide a rational inattention model that generates
home bias when domestic investors have an informational advantage on domestic assets.
3
  Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes (2001), Seasholes and Zhu (2010), Ferreira, Massa, and Matos (2011), Giannetti
and Laeven (2012), Hochberg and Rauh (2012), and Pool, Stoffman, and Yonker (2012) provide evidence
inconsistent with the local advantage hypothesis.




                                                       4
autocorrelation and common risk factors. However, it is unclear what causes the simultaneous

distress among these fundamentally diverse hedge funds. Klaus and Rzepkowski (2009) use

individual hedge fund data and document the contagion effect within styles. Our paper focuses

on the geographical component of the contagion phenomenon and finds evidence of extreme

return clustering among funds located in the same area, even after controlling for fund styles.

Our study also establishes a link between funds of funds’ local bias and hedge funds’ local

contagion. We find that the probability of local contagion is significantly increased immediately

after the local FoFs experience large cash withdrawals, which suggests that hedge funds located

in the same areas may be inter-connected through their common local clients. Thus, our study

provides a concrete mechanism for the contagion effect.

    Finally, our paper provides a source of alpha for FoFs. FoFs are one of the most important

players in the hedge fund industry. According to Hedgefund.net, by the end of 2009 they manage

an estimated 43% of the total hedge fund assets. Like single hedge funds, FoFs are managed by

professional money managers, facing incentive contracts that depend sensitively on performance.

Despite the strong incentives of FoFs managers, many empirical studies find that, on average,

FoFs underperform hedge funds after fees.4 One possible hypothesis for why FoFs continue to be

popular despite their average underperformance is that investors believe a subset of FoF

managers do add value. Consistent with this hypothesis, Fung, Hsieh, Naik, and Ramadorai

(2008) find that a subset of FoFs consistently deliver positive alphas. Using holdings data for a

4
 See, for example, Ackermann, McEnally, and Ravenscraft (1999), Lhabitant and Learned (2002), Amin and Kat
(2003), Kat and Amin (2003), Brown, Goetzmann, and Liang (2004), Capocci and Hubner (2004), Fung and Hsieh
(2004), Fung, Hsieh, Naik, and Ramadorai (2008), Aiken, Clifford, and Ellis (2012), and Agarwal, Lu, and Ray
(2013).




                                                     5
small sample of FoFs, Aiken, Clifford, and Ellis (2012) show that FoFs add value primarily by

skillfully monitoring their hedge fund investments. Our results suggest that examining the degree

of local bias of FoFs may provide a useful way in identifying value-adding FoFs.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the data and presents

basic descriptive statistics. Section 3 proposes the measure for FoF’s local bias and studies the

properties of the local bias measure. Section 4 examines the relation between geographical

preference of FoFs and their subsequent performance. Section 5 analyzes the impact of the local

bias of FoFs on the underlying hedge funds. Section 6 concludes.



     2. Data and Descriptive Statistics

     The hedge fund data used for this study are from the Lipper TASS database, which is

recognized as one of the leading sources of hedge fund information. The main data include

monthly hedge fund returns, as well as fund characteristics. We include both live and graveyard

funds, and our sample period ranges from 1994 to 2010. We apply several filters following the

literature. Specifically, we filter out non-monthly filing funds, funds denoted in a currency other

than U.S. dollars, and funds with unknown strategies. We then exclude the first 18 months of

observations to control for the backfill bias. To avoid double counting, we filter out off-shore

funds and multiple share classes of the same fund following Aggarwal and Jorion (2010).5 The

TASS database provides information on the location of funds’ management companies. For our


5
  Another potential bias of commercial hedge fund databases is the self-reporting bias. However, Agarwal, Fos, and
Jiang (2013) find that hedge funds choose not to report to databases for both positive and negative reasons. Thus, the
self-reporting bias does not have a material impact on performance evaluations.




                                                          6
study, we only include hedge funds whose management firms are located in the continental

United States, excluding firms and funds located in Alaska, Hawaii, or Puerto Rico.6 The final

sample encompasses 1905 management companies running 3111 unique funds, among which

573 are FoFs.

     We visualize the geographic distribution of hedge funds in Figure 1. We find that although

the locations of hedge funds spread most of the states in the U.S., they have a much higher

concentration in financial centers such as New York, San Francisco, Stamford, Chicago, Boston

and Los Angeles.7 This could be due to the increased knowledge spillovers and learning in cities,

which could eventually enhance fund performance (Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) and

Christoffersen and Sarkissian (2009)). Interestingly, the locations of FoFs largely overlap with

those of hedge funds. Areas that exhibit a high density of hedge funds also host a large number

of FoFs. At least two interpretations could be given to the large overlap between hedge funds and

FoFs. One could be that FoF managers also choose to locate in big cities to benefit from the

knowledge spillovers and learning. Alternatively, it could be that FoFs choose to be close to

hedge funds to facilitate information gathering, monitoring, or to exploit other local advantages.

It is important to differentiate these two explanations, because the first one emphasizes the

advantage of large cities in general, while the second one points to the local advantage.




6
  We exclude the three areas due to geographic distances between these three locations and the rest of the
continental United States. In our sample, there are only 8 funds that are located in the three areas, including them
does not change our results.
7
  To ensure that our results are not driven by the areas that host only a small number of hedge funds, we repeat the
entire analysis using the top six MSAs. The results are both qualitatively and quantitatively similar.




                                                         7
     Panel A of Table I presents the summary statistics of the performance and the characteristics

for hedge funds and FoFs in the sample. On average, the number of FoFs is about 24% of that of

hedge funds. They are similar in size, age, and management fees. FoFs on average charge 9.6%

incentive fees on top of the 18.4% incentive fees charged by their underlying hedge funds.

Consistent with the findings of Brown, Goetzmann, and Liang (2004), FoFs deliver lower returns

and alphas than hedge funds, suggesting that the performance does not justify the fees on fees

charged by funds of funds. On the other hand, FoFs reduce the standard deviation of net fee

returns and alphas by about 40%, hence they do offer a significant diversification benefit to their

investors, as indicated by the superior appraisal and Sharpe ratios.

     We group hedge funds by their locations. To classify locations, we first obtain the zip code,

the state, and the county associated with the management companies from TASS. Using the

state/county/zip code information, we then merge the sample of management firms with the

Metropolitan Areas and Components data defined by the Office of Management and Budget

(OMB) as of 2003.8 We define a hedge fund’s location as the Metropolitan Statistical Area

(MSA) of its management company. According to the OMB, an MSA consists of “a core area

containing a substantial population nucleus, together with adjacent communities having a high

degree of economic and social integration with that core.”




8
  One potential problem with the TASS data is that it only reports the current location of management companies.
To see how representative the current location information is with respect to historical information, we compare our
data with a version of TASS data downloaded in 2003. Among the 803 companies that exist in both versions of the
datasets, we find that 5.4% of them (i.e. 43 companies) moved to a different area over the 8-year period. Thus, the
location information for hedge funds is quite stable.




                                                         8
    Panel B of Table I presents summary statistics for the funds and MSAs in our sample at the

beginning, middle, and end of the sample period. Both the number of funds and the number of

MSAs that host hedge funds increased dramatically during the first half of the sample period.

The number of MSAs remains stable during the second half, but the number of funds drops by 20%

from 2002 to 2010. The drop in the number of hedge funds is mainly due to the recent financial

crisis that started in 2008, when we see the number decreases from 1028 to 855 during the year.

There are some further drops in 2009 and 2010.

    On average there are around 13 hedge funds per MSA. However the geographical

representation is quite unbalanced. While half of the MSAs host one or two hedge funds, there

are a few MSAs with a large number of funds.

    Panel C of Table I presents the number of styles per MSA. On average, the MSAs are well

diversified across styles. The average number of styles per area is three. For areas with over six

hedge funds, they host at least three different styles. To obtain a concrete idea of how styles are

geographically distributed within the U.S., in Panel A of Table II, we report the percentage of

funds that reside in the each of the top six MSAs for each hedge fund style. Overall, we see a

balanced distribution of styles among different areas, with a few exceptions. Managed futures

funds have a high representation in Chicago, dedicated short bias funds have a high

representation in San Francisco, and global macro funds are concentrated in Stamford. Funds of

the same styles are likely to exhibit a high return correlation. To mitigate the potential

confounding effects from styles, we directly control for the style effect when studying the return

and flow comovements among local hedge funds.




                                                 9
    3. Geographical Preference by Funds of Funds

    In this section, we study whether FoFs exhibit local bias by tilting their portfolios toward

local hedge funds. Unfortunately, information on portfolio holdings of hedge funds is generally

not available to academic researchers. We therefore propose a novel methodology to estimate

FoFs’ return exposure to local and non-local hedge funds.



    3.1. Measuring FoFs’ Local Preferences

    3.1.1. Base Measure: A Difference-in-Differences Measure

    To quantify FoF’s local bias using return information, we consider that a FoF is a portfolio

of hedge funds, so its return is a weighted average return of the hedge funds it invests in.

Assuming FoF i invests Wi,L in hedge funds located in its local area, Wi,NL in hedge funds located

in other areas in the U.S., and the rest in other assets such as cash, private equity, or international

hedge funds, then the return of the FoF can be expressed as:

    RiFOF
      ,t   Wi,L  RiLHF
                     ,t   Wi,NL  RiNHF
                                     ,t   ei,t ,                                                   (1)

where RiFOF
        ,t  is the return for FoF i at time t, RiLHF
                                                 ,t  and RiNHF
                                                           ,t  are the returns for its local hedge

funds and nonlocal U.S. hedge funds, respectively. The error term ei ,t includes the returns of

other assets, it also captures the residual component of returns due to selection within an area.

    To adjust for the uneven density of hedge funds in different locations, we benchmark each

FoF’s local investment against the investment made by the market FoFs to its local area. In

particular, for FoF i, we have:




                                                    10
     RtMKT FOF  MWi ,L  RiLHF
                            ,t   MWi , NL  RiNHF
                                               ,t   et ,                                                        (2)

where R tMKTFOF is the average return for all FoFs in the market at time t, RiLHF
                                                                              ,t  and RiNHF
                                                                                        ,t  are

defined the same as in equation (1), MWi,L and MWi,NL are the fractional allocations of the market

FoF in FoF i’s local and nonlocal areas, respectively.9

      A FoF’s portfolio weight deviation from the market is given by subtracting Equation (2)

from Equation (1):

      RiFOF
        ,t   RtMKT FOF  (Wi , L  MWi , L )  RiLHF
                                                  ,t   (Wi , NL  MWi , NL )  RiNHF
                                                                                  ,t  ~
                                                                                       ei ,t                     (3)

      Since a FoF can underinvest in both local and non local U.S. hedge funds as compared with

the market FoF, yet still tilting its portfolio toward local hedge funds, we define the local bias of

FoF i as (W i , L  MW i , L )  (W i , NL  MW i , NL ) .

      Based on Equation (3), we estimate the local bias for FoF i by conducting a time-series

regression of its returns in excess of the market FoF’s returns on its local and nonlocal hedge

funds’ returns:

     RitFOF  RtMKT FOF   i   i , DL  RiLHF
                                             ,t    i , DNL  RiNHF
                                                                 ,t    i ,t .                                  (4)

      The estimated coefficients                  ,       and   ,     are the proxies for the weight deviations of a

FoF’s portfolio from the market FoF’s portfolio, ie. ( Wi , L  MWi , L ) and ( Wi , NL  MWi , NL ).10 The

local bias is then computed as (              ,       -    ,    ).


9
  Note that MW has a subscript i even though the dependent variable is the market FoF because MW is defined with
respect to the specific FoF which benchmarks against the market FoF. For example, for a New York FoF, MW
measures how much the market FoF invests in the New York area, whereas for a Boston FoF, MW measures how
much the market FoF invests in the Boston area.




                                                                     11
     Since we use a regression method to back out FoFs’ local biases, it is also important to

examine how critical our regression specification is to the local bias measure. We construct two

alternative local bias proxies based on different regression specifications, and study the

robustness of our results.



     3.1.2. Alternative Measure 1: A Measure Based on Nonnegative Weights

     Although equation (4) is transformed from equation (1) and (2), one identification

restriction is lost while doing the transformation. Since a FoF cannot short a hedge fund, the

portfolio weights in equation (1) and (2) should be nonnegative. Therefore, we separately

estimate equation (1) and (2) as follows:

     RitFOF   i   i , L  RiLHF
                                ,t    i , NL  RiNHF
                                                   ,t    i ,t ,                                              (5)

     RtMKTFOF   i   iMKT
                         ,L   RiLHF
                                 ,t    iMKT
                                          , NL  R i ,t
                                                    NHF
                                                         t ,                                                 (6)

where RiFOF
        ,t  is the return for FoF i at time t, RiLHF
                                                 ,t  and RiNHF
                                                           ,t  are the returns for its local hedge

funds and nonlocal U.S. hedge funds, and R tMKTFOF is the average return for all FoFs in the

market. We estimate equation (5) and (6) by restricting the coefficients ˆi ,L , ˆi , NL , ˆiMKT
                                                                                                , L ,  i , NL to
                                                                                                      ˆ MKT


                                                         ˆi , L               ˆ MKT           
be nonnegative.11 We then define the local bias as                       MKT i , L MKT  .
                                                    ( ˆ  ˆ ) ( ˆ               ˆi , NL ) 
                                                    i,L          i , NL   i ,L




10
   FOFs’ portfolio weights toward local and nonlocal hedge funds are likely to be time-varying, so the coefficients
estimated from the return regressions can be viewed as the historical averages of the weight deviations.
11
   This methodology is similar to the one proposed by Sharpe (1992) for mutual funds, except that FoFs can take
leverage, therefore the regression coefficients do not need to add up to one.




                                                                12
    3.1.3. Alternative Measure 2: A Measure Based on a Long-Short Local Factor

    Factor models are commonly used in investment analyses. To measure the degree of local

bias, we can also adapt a factor model approach. Specifically, for each FoF, we construct its

“local” factor by longing the portfolio of local hedge funds, and shorting the portfolio of non-

local hedge funds. FoFs can choose to invest more or less in local assets simply by combining

this zero-cost portfolio with the market portfolio. We thus regress the excess return of FoFs on

the excess return of the market FoFs and the returns of the local factor:

    RiFOF
      ,t   RtTBill   i'   i , MKT  ( RtMKTFOF  RtTBill )   i , DL  ( RiLHF
                                                                                 ,t   RiNHF
                                                                                         ,t  )   i ,t .   (7)

where RitFOF and RtMKTFOF are returns for FoF i and the market FoFs, respectively. RitLHF and RitNHF

are the average returns of the local and nonlocal hedge funds for FoF i. Coefficient ̂ i, DL

measures the degree of FoF i’s local bias.



    3.2. Properties of the Local Bias Measures

    We start by investigating whether FoFs exhibit local preferences in picking hedge funds. In

Panel A of Table III, we present the estimation results for our base measure. For each FoF that

has at least 24 months of observations, we conduct a time-series regression of its return in excess

of the market FoF’s return on the average returns of its local hedge funds and nonlocal hedge

funds. We report the cross-sectional averages of the estimated coefficients. FoFs on average

overinvest in hedge funds located in their local area by 15%. The effect is both statistically and

economically significant.




                                                               13
    Several robustness checks are in order. First, one component of the error term in the

regression specification (4) may be the return on other assets. If the return on other assets is

correlated with the returns of local or nonlocal U.S. hedge funds, the estimated regression

coefficients will be biased. To the extent that the other assets may include non-U.S. hedge funds,

they could be correlated with the U.S. hedge funds due to their exposure to common risk factors.

To mitigate the potential concern, we report in column (2) the results for which Fung-Hsieh

seven factors are included in each FoF’s time-series regressions. FoFs still exhibit significant

local bias after controlling for the Fung-Hsieh seven factors.

    Second, FoFs may also differ in their preference for hedge fund styles. For example, some

FoFs may focus on investing in managed futures funds, which have a higher concentration in

Chicago. It should be noted, however, that the preference for certain styles should not generate

local bias unless FoFs choose to locate near their preferred investment styles. Therefore, it is not

the style preference per se but the local style preference that matters. In column (3) we examine

to what extent FoFs’ preferences for local hedge funds can be attributed to their preferences for

local hedge fund styles. In each FoF’s time series regression, we include the returns for the ten

hedge fund styles defined by TASS. After controlling for different style exposures, FoFs’ local

bias decreases, suggesting that a portion of the local bias is due to preferences for local styles.

However, the coefficient for the local return remains positive and significant, implying a local

preference within styles.

    Third, we use non-parametric tests to examine whether FoFs exhibit local bias. For each

fund, we calculate their local bias as (   ,   -   ,    ), with ̂ i, DL and ̂ i, DNL estimated from their




                                                   14
individual regressions. We find that 67.35% of FoFs have positive local bias measures. The

percentage is significantly higher than the 50% under the null hypothesis of no local bias.

Furthermore, there are about 37% of the FoFs with estimated local biases that are positive and

significant at a 5% level.

    Finally, we examine FoF’s local bias using the two alternative measures. Consistent with the

base measure, both alternative measures show that FoFs tend to tilt their investments toward

local hedge funds. The three measures are also highly correlated. The base measure has a rank

correlation of 0.88 with the measure based on nonnegative weights, and 0.95 with the measure

based on the local factor.

    To study whether the local bias is a persistent characteristic of FoFs, we estimate the local

bias over two non-overlapping 24-month periods. For every other year starting from December

of 1996, we sort all FoFs in our sample into quintile portfolios according to their local bias

measures. We then compute the average local bias for each quintile during the subsequent two

years. Panel A of Table IV reports the average local bias of the quintile portfolios, both at the

sorting time and during the next two years. The levels of local bias of the high local bias

portfolios remain higher than those of the low local bias portfolios. The difference in the local

bias between two extreme portfolios decreases over time but remains highly economically

significant. Note that since we use non-overlapping data to estimate the local bias, the t-statistics

are calculated based on only seven data points. However, the difference in local bias between the

two extreme portfolios is highly statistically significant. These results suggest the local bias is a

persistent characteristic of FoFs.




                                                 15
        Finally, we examine the relation between the degree of home bias and lagged fund

characteristics. Specifically, we use a multivariate panel regression based on bi-annual data.12

The lagged fund characteristics considered include the natural logarithm of assets under

management (AUM), fund age, the net return over the prior year, the logarithm of the minimum

investment, the lengths of the redemption notice and lockup periods, an indicator variable for

personal capital commitment, management fees, incentive fees, an indicator variable for a high-

water mark provision, and an indicator variable for the use of leverage.

        Panel B of Table IV presents the panel regression results. We find that the degree of local

bias is related to a number of characteristics of FoFs in a plausible way. For example, smaller

and younger FoFs invest more heavily in local hedge funds. This could be due to that the gains

from local investment are larger for FoFs that are more agile. Also, FoFs that concentrate on

local portfolios impose higher minimum investment levels and longer redemption notice periods

on their investors, which may reflect their concerns of increased return volatility due to the

location concentration. Finally, FoFs whose managers invest their personal capital into their

funds are biased more toward local hedge funds, which is consistent with a stronger incentive to

search for private information and exert monitoring efforts.




12
     We use bi-annual data so that the local bias measure is estimated using non-overlapping data.




                                                           16
     3.3. Comparing the Return-Based and Holding-Based Local Bias Measures using

Mutual Fund Data

     To investigate how well our return-based local bias measure captures the local bias based on

actual fund holdings, we compare the two measures using holdings and return data for U.S.

equity mutual funds. In our sample period, the holding-based local bias measure suggests that

mutual funds on average invest 0.9% more toward their local stocks, a magnitude similar to the

one reported in Coval and Moskowitz (2001). Our base measure equals 1.2% and is not

statistically different from the holding-based measure. Also, the correlation between the holding-

based and return-based measures is 0.33 and is statistically different from zero at one percent

confidence level.13 The similar magnitude and relatively high correlation between the return- and

holding-based measure give some credibility to our methodology. One advantage of looking at

the mutual fund data is that the estimation error (i.e., return-based local bias relative to the

holding-based local bias) is directly observable. Therefore, we examine whether the estimation

error is related to future mutual fund alphas. At the end of each quarter, we sort mutual funds

into decile portfolios based on their estimation errors. We then compute the average alpha for

funds in each portfolio during the next quarter. Funds in the highest estimation error decile have

an average alpha of -0.04%, while funds in the lowest estimation error decile have an average

alpha of -0.07%. The difference in alphas between the two extreme portfolios is 0.03% with a t-

statistic of 0.63. Thus, the estimation errors seem to be unrelated to future fund performance.



13
  The correlation between the holding-based measure with the two alternative return-based measures are 0.33
(measure based on nonnegative weights) and 0.40 (measure based on the local factor), respectively.




                                                    17
     4. Funds of Funds’ Local Preference and Performance

     In this section, we examine whether FoFs’ local bias is related to their future performance.

Specifically, in a panel regression, we regress the next-quarter performance of a FoF on the local

bias variable and fund characteristics at the end of the previous quarter. Similar to Table IV, we

use the previous 24 months observations to estimate the local bias variable and standardize the

variable to exhibit a mean of zero and unit variance for each area and each period. We consider

three performance measures: the Fung-Hsieh seven factor alpha, the corresponding appraisal

ratio, and the Sharpe ratio. We include both time and MSA fixed effects, and cluster the standard

errors by area.14



     4.1. Main Finding

     Table V demonstrates that the local bias measure has a significant predictive power toward

future abnormal performance, even after controlling for other fund characteristics. For the Fung-

Hsieh seven-factor adjusted alphas, the estimated coefficient for the local bias variable is 0.35,

with a t-statistic of 5.49. Since the local bias variable is already normalized to have a unit

standard deviation, the estimated coefficients also directly reveal the economic significance of

the results. A one-standard deviation increase in the local bias predicts an increase in the

annualized FH seven-factor alpha of 1.41% in the univariate setting and 1.04% in the presence of

a host of control variables.15 FoFs may also differ in their exposures to different hedge fund


14
   We also cluster the standard errors by time or by funds, and double cluster by time and funds. Our results are
robust across these specifications.
15
   In the regression, we use returns at the quarterly frequency.




                                                       18
styles. When we control for fund style differences, the coefficient on the local bias variable drops

slightly to 0.19, but it remains statistically significant at the 1% level.

    We also utilize two alternative performance measures. First, we calculate the quarterly

Sharpe ratio to capture the risk-return tradeoff of hedge fund returns. It is defined as the ratio

between the average monthly net returns in excess of the risk-free rate and the volatility in the

monthly excess returns. The benefit of the measure is that it is independent of the specific

pricing models for hedge fund returns. In addition, we use a modified version of Treynor and

Black’s (1973) appraisal ratio, which we calculate by dividing the mean of the monthly alphas by

their standard deviation. Brown, Goetzmann, and Ross (1995) show that the survivorship bias is

positively related to the fund return variance. Thus, the use of fund returns scaled by their

standard deviations mitigates the survivorship problems. The scaled measure also accounts for

differences in leverage across funds. Again, the results indicate a strong positive association

between local bias and future performance. A one standard deviation increase in the local bias

results in a 0.07 and 0.05 increase in the FH seven-factor appraisal ratio and Sharpe ratio,

respectively.

    We examine the performance predictability of the two alternative local bias proxies, and

report the results in Table VI. As can be seen, the performance predictability by the home bias

variable prevails. The economic magnitude is also similar for all the measures.




                                                   19
     4.2. Robustness Checks

     We conduct several robustness checks.16 First, we break the sample into New York and Non

New York subsamples. New York has a disproportionally higher percentage of FoFs, thus it is of

interest to see whether the return predictability of the local bias variable is driven entirely by the

New York sample. As Panel A of Table VII shows, the local bias measure continues to be

positively correlated with future performance even when the New York FoFs are excluded. The

predictive power for the Sharpe ratio is significantly stronger for the non New York sample, but

there is no significant difference between the two subsamples for alphas and appraisal ratios.

     Another potential concern is that the outperformance of the locally biased FoFs may be

mechanically driven by cross-area variations in hedge fund performance. Suppose that hedge

funds in area A consistently outperform funds in other areas on a risk-adjusted basis, then FoFs

that invest more in area A will appear to earn abnormal performance. If FoFs in area A display

more home bias than other FoFs in the market, we could observe that FoFs in area A outperform

those in other areas. Furthermore, within area A, FoFs that appear to be more locally biased will

outperform those that are less locally biased. Thus, the effect could generate a mechanical

positive relation between local bias and performance, without the presence of local advantages.

     To address this concern, we look at a subsample where the local hedge funds perform worse

than the non-local hedge funds. Specifically, for each quarter, we only keep areas where their

local hedge funds earn a lower equal-weighted alpha than the non-local hedge funds during the

previous 24 months. For this subsample, the mechanical link should generate a negative
16
  We only present the robustness tests for our base measure due to space concerns. The results are qualitatively
similar for the two alternative measures.




                                                      20
association between the local bias and the performance. However, as can be seen in Panel B of

Table VII, the local bias variable is still positively correlated with performance across all

specifications, and the coefficients are significant for most of the cases. Therefore, we do not

find evidence in support of the mechanical link hypothesis.

     Finally, there are cases where a management company simultaneously runs hedge funds and

FoFs. Agarwal, Lu, and Ray (2013) systematically examine the simultaneous management, and

find that the phenomenon is associated with both value creation and agency issues. In particular,

they find that FoFs benefit from gaining access to the successful hedge funds within their own

families. To see whether the local advantage is entirely driven by this within family advantage,

we exclude the FoFs whose management companies simultaneously run hedge funds.17 As Panel

C of Table VII shows, FoFs’ local bias continues to positively and significantly associate with

future performance, even after we shut down the family advantage channel.



     5. The Impact of Local Bias on Hedge Funds

     In the previous sections, we document the existence of local bias by FoFs and establish a

link between the local bias and local advantages. However, the potential impact of the local bias

on the underlying hedge funds is unclear. In this section, we explore this question from the

perspective of hedge funds. We examine whether the local bias creates segmented local markets,

which can lead to excessive flow and return comovement.


17
  Agarwal, Lu, and Ray (2013) find that the simultaneous management of hedge funds and FoFs are more likely to
take place for off-shore hedge funds and FoFs. Our sample focuses on on-shore funds. Therefore, we identify that
only 22% FoFs are affected by the simultaneous management in our sample, as compared with 46% in their sample.




                                                      21
     5.1. Flow Comovement

     We start by investigating flow comovement between local hedge funds. We hypothesize that

the local bias by FoFs will induce comovement in flows between local hedge funds beyond

fundamentals. When a FoF sees a large inflow or outflow, it is likely to spread the liquidity

shock among several hedge funds it holds, which might create positive comovement among these

funds. Furthermore, if FoFs across different areas do not incur perfectly correlated flows, we will

observe that hedge funds are influenced more by the flows of their local FoFs due to the local

bias. Therefore, hedge funds residing in the same area are likely to face higher flow comovement

than funds located in different areas. Another mechanism that could induce local flow

comovement is a feedback effect, similar to Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009). A big loss from

a hedge fund may impact its local investors more given the local bias, forcing the local FOFs to

take out money from other local hedge funds.

     To investigate whether hedge funds located within the same area have higher flow

comovement, we compare in Panel A of Table VIII the average pairwise Pearson correlation in

flows for funds located in the same MSA, versus funds located in different areas. We find that

the average flow correlation between same-area funds and different-area funds is 2.37% and

2.02%, respectively. Thus, funds in the same area have a flow correlation 17% higher than funds

from different areas. The difference in correlation is also highly statistically significant, with a t-

statistic of 6.24.

     While the simple comparison of the flow correlation is intuitive, it may be subject to an

omitted variable problem. For example, as we have seen in Panel A of Table II, some MSAs




                                                  22
have a higher concentration in certain styles. If hedge fund investors follow a style investing

strategy as in Barberis and Shleifer (2003), there will be an excessive flow comovement among

funds in the same style, which could contribute to the local flow comovement. Moreover, funds

in the same area may follow similar strategies and generate similar returns, which is likely to

induce flow comovement since flows chase past performance. We address these concerns using a

regression framework.

     To examine flow comovement, we regress monthly percentage flows of each hedge fund on

the average flows of all hedge funds from the fund’s corresponding MSA, with several control

variables.18 The control variables include style flow, which is the average flow of all hedge funds

sharing the same TASS style as the fund, the past returns of the fund, as well as the past returns

of the other local hedge funds. We exclude the hedge fund itself from the local flow and style

flow calculation to eliminate a mechanical correlation.

     Panel B of Table VIII reports the regression results. We first run a regression of individual

flows on local and style flows. The regression coefficient on local flow is highly statistically

significant even when controlling for the style effect. In terms of economic importance, the local

effect is comparable to the style effect. A one-standard deviation increase in local flows (style

flows) is associated with an increase in individual monthly flows of approximately 0.6% (0.7%).

We then add the current and past performance information. As can be seen from the table,

controlling for fund performance significantly reduces the marginal effect of the style flows. This


18
  We also study local flow comovement following the methodology in Pirinsky and Wang (2006), where we first
estimate a time-series regression for each fund, and then compute the cross-sectional averages of the estimated
coefficients from the time-series regressions. The results are both qualitatively and quantitatively similar.




                                                      23
is not surprising since funds of the same style are likely to have correlated returns. Controlling

for fund performance also reduces the coefficients for local flows but to a much lesser degree,

suggesting most of the local flow comovement is beyond the effect of funds’ return comovement.

     Besides the local clientele effect, the higher flow comovement among local funds may also

result from funds belonging to the same fund family, as they are likely to share the same clientele.

As a robustness check, we exclude funds from the same family in the local flow calculation. The

magnitude of the local flow indeed drops after we take out the family effect. However, the local

flow remains statistically significant and economically important.



     5.2. Local Contagion

     In this section, we examine whether the flow comovement among local funds may induce

excess return correlation among local hedge funds. The literature on mutual funds finds that

flow-induced trading may have a big impact on mutual fund returns, especially on the

downside.19 However, the flow-induced trading may have an even stronger effect on hedge fund

returns given the illiquidity of hedge funds’ assets.



     5.2.1. Extreme Return Clustering

     We study how extreme negative returns, defined as returns that fall in the bottom decile of a

fund’s monthly returns, cluster among funds located in the same area. To study the clustering

effect, it is important to take out the impact of common factors for hedge fund returns, since two
19
  See, for example, Wermers (2003), Coval and Stafford (2007), Bartram, Griffin, and Ng (2010), Chen, Goldstein,
and Jiang (2010), Lou (2012), and Anton and Polk (2013).




                                                      24
funds may be more correlated if they have higher loadings on the same factor. Also, hedge fund

returns may be serially correlated due to their return smoothing behavior, which may obscure the

statistical inference of the analysis. To mitigate the impact of common factors and

autocorrelation, we follow Boyson, Stahel, and Stulz (2010) by first filtering the returns of each

hedge fund by Fung-Hsieh seven factors, the fund’s style return, and its own past quarter returns.

We then investigate whether there is any correlation among the residual returns. Bekaert, Harvey,

and Ng (2005) define contagion as “correlation over and above what one would expect from

economic fundamentals.” With this definition, the residual return comovement among local

funds can be viewed as local contagion.

     Our first test of local contagion implements a logit model, which is extensively used in the

contagion literature.20 The dependent variable is an indicator variable that is set to one if the fund

has a return in the bottom decile of its entire time series of returns and zero otherwise. The key

independent variable is an indicator variable that is set to one if the average return of the other

local hedge funds falls in the bottom decile of its return distribution. Intuitively, the logit model

estimates whether a given hedge fund is more likely to have an extreme return when the other

funds in the same area incur extreme returns.

     Panel A of Table IX reports the regression results. As can be seen in the first column, the

local extreme return dummy is positive and statistically significant. This suggests that there is

significant extreme return clustering among local hedge funds. Since Boyson, Stahel, and Stulz

(2010) find that all hedge funds comove together, we examine whether there is additional local
20
  See, for example, Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1996), Bae, Karolyi, and Stulz (2003), and Boyson, Stahel,
and Stulz (2008).




                                                     25
contagion after we control for the market level contagion. As can be seen from the second

column of the table, the market level distress indicator has a significant impact on individual

hedge funds, which is consistent with the findings in Boyson, Stahel, and Stulz (2010). However,

even after controlling for the market level contagion effect, the local hedge funds distress

variable remains positive and significant.

    The local extreme return indicator is based on the average performance of local hedge funds.

In principle, an extreme negative return by a single fund could drag the average return into the

tail range even if the rest of the local funds are doing fine. Compared with a single fund being in

distress, having multiple funds incurring significant losses at the same time may be more

devastating due to simultaneous fire sales. Therefore, we look at an alternative measure for local

distress that captures the degree of multiple local hedge fund distress. For each hedge fund, we

count the number of other local hedge funds that have extreme returns during a month, and

divide it by the total number of local hedge funds. We find a positive and highly significant

coefficient on the percentage of local funds under distress. When no other local funds are under

distress, the probability of a fund incurring its extreme return is 6.9%. However, that probability

is increased to 10.2% when 10% of the other local funds have extreme returns.



    5.2.2. Local FoFs’ Flows

    Why do hedge funds located in the same area tend to exhibit extreme returns together? One

possible interpretation is correlated money flows from common local clients, as we documented

in the previous section. In Panel B of Table IX, we examine the common local client hypotheses.




                                                26
The percentage of local funds that incur extreme returns increases from 12.0% to 13.4% when

local FoFs incur large outflows during the previous quarter. The difference is significant at a 1%

level.



    5.2.3. CoVaR

    Besides the probability of incurring a tail event, it’s also relevant for fund managers to know

how much loss their funds can incur in a tail event. One common measure is the VaR (i.e., Value

at Risk). In recognizing that financial companies intertwine and often fail together, the recent

literature suggests evaluating a financial company’s VaR conditioning on the performance of

other financial companies. In particular, Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011) propose CoVaR (i.e.,

Co-Value at Risk) to measure the Value at Risk (VaR) of financial institutions conditional on

other financial institutions being under distress. We borrow this measure to examine how a

hedge fund’s VaR changes when other local hedge funds are subject to big losses.

    To understand the CoVaR measure, let’s first recall the traditional definition of VaR. For a

hedge fund i, its q percentage VaRqi is implicitly defined as the q quantile:

    Pr( X i  VaRqi )  q                                                                       (8)

The CoVaR is simply a conditional VaR, which is given by

    CoVaRq
            i| RLHF VaRqLHF
                                             i| RLHF VaRqLHF
                                Pr Ri  CoVaRq                                 
                                                                 | RLHF  VaRqLHF  q           (9)

    Intuitively, the CoVaR measures hedge fund i’s q percent VaR conditional on other local

hedge funds is at q percent VaR.                  Following Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011), we use




                                                           27
CoVaRqi|LHF to measure how much an individual fund is impacted by the local contagion.

Specifically, CoVaRqi|LHF is given by

                          i| RLHF VaRqLHF
    CoVaRqi|LHF  CoVaRq                     CoVaRqi|RLHF  Median
                                                                       LHF
                                                                                            (10)

CoVaRqi|LHF measures fund i’s increase in Value-at-Risk in the case of a local market distress.

We estimate the CoVaRqi|LHF for each hedge fund using a quantile regression. We detail the

estimation procedure in Appendix B.

    Panel A of Table X reports the quantile regression results, which reveal a picture of local

contagion similar to what we find in Table IX. A hedge fund is exposed to a higher value at risk

(i.e., more negative VaR) when local hedge funds face poor returns. Also, when its local FoFs

experience large outflows in the previous quarter, the hedge fund faces an increase in value at

risk. Panel B calculates the average local CoVaRs. Again, it suggests a negative impact from

local hedge funds’ failure. For example, the 10%-VaR is -3.29% per month when other local

funds are at their bottom 10% returns. This is 0.15% lower compared with when other local

funds are at their median returns. Overall, the results lend further support to the phenomenon of

local contagion, and suggest that money withdrawals from the local FoFs may be a driving force

of the local contagion.




                                                         28
    6. Conclusion


    In this paper, we study the geographic preference of FoFs in selecting hedge funds. The

findings provide a better understanding of hedge fund investor behavior and offer new insights

into the causes and consequences of the well-known “home bias” phenomenon. Further, the

empirical evidence suggests that investor behavior can in turn affect the performance of the

underlying hedge funds.

    We find evidence of local bias for typical FoFs. Cross-sectionally, managers with higher

incentives and better abilities to utilize local private information exhibit stronger local

preferences. More importantly, despite the well-documented evidence on poor performance of

FoFs, we find substantial abnormal performance by locally biased FoFs. Overall, the evidence is

consistent with FoF managers’ having a local advantage, for example, superior information,

better monitoring, or better access to local hedge funds.

    Our paper also examines a related but less explored question: what is the impact of the local

bias on the underlying financial markets. In particular, we are interested in comovement that is

generated by geographically segmented markets. First, we find excessive comovement in

investor flows among local hedge funds. Moreover, we find strong evidence that large outflows

of local FoFs increase the probability of “local contagion,” i.e. funds located in the same area are

more likely to experience extreme negative returns at the same time.

    Our paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, it provides novel evidence on

the connection between investors’ local bias and local advantage. Second, it establishes a link

between the liquidity shock of local clienteles and extreme return clustering, shedding light on



                                                29
the micro foundation of the hedge fund contagion phenomenon. Finally, it offers rare evidence

on fund selection ability by FoFs, which provides some justification for the FoFs’ practice of

charging a double layer of fees.

    Our results also have direct implications for asset allocation decisions by hedge fund

investors. The evidence speaks to the tradeoff between local advantages and geographical

diversification. On the one hand, investors may want to scale up their local investments to better

exploit the local advantage; on the other hand, they may face excessive return comovement

within their local portfolio, especially during crisis periods. To the extent that part of the return

comovement is generated by the local bias behavior of their own and peers alike, it may be

useful to deliberate the degree of local bias in their asset allocation decisions.




                                                  30
References

Ackermann, Carl, Richard McEnally, and David Ravenscraft, 1999, The Performance of Hedge
Funds: Risk, Return, and Incentives, The Journal of Finance 54, 833-873.
Adrian, Tobias, and Markus Brunnermeier, 2011, CoVaR, Working paper, Princeton University.
Agarwal,Vikas, Naveen Daniel, and Narayan Naik, 2004, Flows, Performance, and Managerial
Incentives in the Hedge Fund Industry, Working Paper, Georgia State University.
Agarwal,Vikas, Vyacheslav Fos, and Wei Jiang, 2013, Inferring Reporting-Related Biases in
Hedge Fund Databases from Hedge Fund Equity Holdings, Management Science 59, 1271-1289.
Agarwal,Vikas, Wei Jiang, Yuehua Tang, and Baozhong Yang, 2013, Uncovering Hedge Fund
Skill from the Portfolio holdings They Hide, The Journal of Finance 68, 739-783.
Agarwal, Vikas, Yan Lu, and Sugata Ray, 2013, Under One Roof: A Study of Simultaneously
Managed Hedge Funds and Funds of Hedge Funds, Working paper, Georgia State University.
Aggarwal, Rajesh, and Philippe Jorion, 2010, The Performance of Emerging Hedge Funds and
Managers, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 238 -256.
Aiken, Adam, Christopher Clifford, and Jesse Ellis, 2012, Do Funds of Hedge Funds Add Value?
Evidence from their Holdings, Working paper, University of Kentucky.
Amin Gaurav, and Harry Kat, 2003, Hedge Fund Performance 1990-2000: Do the ‘Money
Machines’ Really Add Value?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 251-274.
Anton, Miguel, and Christopher Polk, 2013, Connected Stocks, Forthcoming: The Journal of
Finance.
Aragon, George, Bing Liang, and Hyuna Park, 2013, Onshore and Offshore Hedge Funds: Are
They Twins? Forthcoming: Management Science.
Bae, Kee Hong, Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2003, A New Approach to Measuring
Financial Contagion, Review of Financial Studies 16, 717-764.
Bae, Kee Hong, Rene Stulz, and Hongping Tan, 2008, Do local analysts know more? A cross-
country study of the performance of local analysts and foreign analysts, Journal of Financial
Economics 88, 581-606.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style Investing, Journal of Financial Economics
68, 161-199.
Bartram, Söhnke M., and John M. Griffin, and David T. Ng, 2010, How Important are Foreign
Ownership Linkages for International Stock Returns? Working Paper, University of Texas at
Austin.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Angela Ng, 2005, Market Integration and Contagion,
Journal of Business 78, 39-69.




                                             31
Boyson, Nicole, Christof Stahel, and Rene Stulz, 2010, Hedge Fund Contagion and Liquidity
Shocks, The Journal of Finance 55, 1789-1816.
Brown, Stephen, William Goetzmann, and Bing Liang, 2004, Fees on Fees in Funds of Funds,
Journal of Investment Management 2, 39-56.
Brown, Stephen, William Goetzmann, and Stephen Ross, 1995, Survival, The Journal of Finance
50, 853–873.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,
Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.
Butler, Alexander, 2008, Distance Still Matters: Evidence from Municipal Bond Underwriting,
The Review of Financial Studies 21, 763-784.
Capocci, Daniel, and Georges Hubner, 2004, Analysis of Hedge Fund Performance, Journal of
Empirical Finance 11, 55-89.
Christoffersen, Susan, and Sergei Sarkissian, 2009, City Size and Fund Performance, Journal of
Financial Economics 92, 252-275.
Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2010, Payoff Complementarities and Financial Fragility:
Evidence from Mutual Fund Outflows, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 239-262.
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and Rene Stulz, 2005, Do Domestic Investors Have an Edge? The
Trading Experience of Foreign Investors in Korea, Review of Financial Studies 18, 795-829.
Coval, Joshua, and Tobias Moskowitz, 1999, Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in
Domestic Portfolios, The Journal of Finance 54, 2045-2073.
Coval, Joshua, and Tobias Moskowitz, 2001, The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading
and Asset Prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811–841.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity Markets,
Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479-512.
Ding, Bill, Mila Getmansky, Bing Liang, and Russ Wermers, 2009, Share Restrictions and
Investor Flows in the Hedge Fund Industry, Working Paper, University of Massachusetts.
Dudley, Evan, and Mahendrarajah Nimalendran, 2011, Margins and Hedge Fund Contagion,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 1227-1257.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose, and Charles Wyplosz, 1996, Contagious currency crises: First
tests, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 98, 463-484.
Ferreira, Miguel, Massimo Massa, and Pedro Matos, 2011, The Geography of Mutual Funds:
The Advantage of Distant Investors, Working paper, INSEAD.
French, Kenneth, 2008, Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing, Journal of Finance
63, 1537-1573.




                                              32
French, Kenneth, and James Poterba, 1991, Investor Diversification and International Equity
Markets, The American Economic Review 81, 222-226.
Froot, Ken, Paul O'Connell, and Mark Seasholes, 2001, The Portfolio Flows of International
Investors, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 151-193.
Fung, William, and David Hsieh, 2004, Hedge Fund Benchmarks: A Risk Based Approach,
Financial Analysts Journal 60, 65-80.
Fung, William, David Hsieh, Narayan Naik, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2008, Hedge Funds:
Performance, Risk, and Capital Formation, The Journal of Finance 63, 1777-1803.
Gaspar, Jose-Miguel, and Massimo Massa, 2007, Local Ownership as Private Information:
Evidence on the Monitoring-Liquidity Trade-off, Journal of Financial Economics 83, 751-792.
Getmansky, Mila, 2012, The Life Cycle of Hedge Funds: Fund Flows, Size, Competition, and
Performance, Quarterly Journal of Finance 2, 1-53.
Goetzmann, William, Jonathan Ingersoll, and Stephen Ross, 2003, High Water Marks and Hedge
Fund Management Contracts, Journal of Finance 58, 1685-1718.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Luc Laeven, 2012, Local Bias and Stock Market Conditions,
Working paper, Stockholm School of Economics.
Hau, Harald, 2001, Location Matters: An Examination of Trading Profits, Journal of Finance 56,
1959–1983.
Hochberg, Yael, and Joshua Rauh, 2012, Local Overweighting and Underperformance: Evidence
from Limited Partner Private Equity Investments, Forthcoming: Review of Financial Studies.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey Kubik, and Jeremy Stein, 2005, Thy Neighbor's Portfolio: Word-of-
Mouth Effects in the Holdings and Trades of Money Managers, The Journal of Finance 60,
2801-2824.
Ivković , Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of
the Geography of Individual Investors' Common Stock Investments, The Journal of Finance 60,
267-306.
Kat Harry, and Gaurav Amin, 2003, Welcome to the Dark Side: Hedge Fund Attrition and
Survivorship Bias over the Period 1994-2001, Journal of Alternative Investments 57-73.
Klaus, Benjamin, and Bronka Rzepkowski, 2009, Risk Spillover among Hedge Funds: The Role
of Redemptions and Fund Failures, Working paper, European Central Bank.
Korniotis, George, and Alok Kumar, 2012, Do Portfolio Distortions Reflect Superior
Information or Psychological Biases? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48, 1-45.
Lhabitant Francois, and Michelle Learned, 2002, Hedge Fund Diversification: How Much is
Enough? Journal of Alternative Investments 5, 23-49.




                                             33
Lou, Dong, 2012, A Flow-Based Explanation of Return Predictability, Review of Financial
Studies 25, 3457-3489.
Malloy, Christopher, 2005, The Geography of Equity Analysis, Journal of Finance 60, 719–755.
Pool, Veronika, Noah Stoffman, and Stott Yonker, 2012, No Place Like Home: Familiarity in
Mutual Fund Manager Portfolio Choice, The Review of Financial Studies 25, 2563-2599.
Pirinsky, Christo, and Qinghai Wang, 2006, Does Corporate Headquarters Location Matter for
Stock Returns? The Journal of Finance 61, 1991-2015.
Seasholes, Mark, and Ning Zhu, 2010, Individual Investors and Local Bias, The Journal of
Finance 65, 1987-2010.
Sharpe, William, 1992, Asset Allocation: Management Style and Performance Measurement,
Journal of Portfolio Management 18, 7-19.
Teo, Melvyn, 2009, The Geography of Hedge Funds, The Review of Financial Studies 22, 3531-
3561.
Treynor, Jack, and Fischer Black, 1973, How to Use Security Analysis to Improve Portfolio
Selection, Journal of Business 46, 66–86.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2009, Information Immobility and the Home
Bias Puzzle, The Journal of Finance 64, 1187-1215.
Wermers, Russ, 2003, Is Money Really "Smart"? New Evidence on the Relation Between
Mutual Fund Flows, Manager Behavior, and Performance Persistence, Working paper,
University of Maryland.




                                             34
                                               Appendix A

                                         Variable Descriptions

In this appendix, we provide the detailed definitions of the variables used in our paper.

Variable Name             Definition
Local Ret                 The equal-weighted returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) from
                          the fund’s corresponding MSA, excluding the fund itself.

Local Flow                The equal-weighted flows of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) from the
                          fund’s corresponding MSA, excluding the fund itself.

Style Flow                The equal-weighted flows of all funds in the fund’s corresponding
                          TASS style, excluding the fund itself.

Local HF Ret              The average returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) from the FoF’s
                          corresponding MSA.

Non Local HF Ret          The average returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) not residing in
                          the FoF’s MSA.

MKT FoF Ret               The average returns of all funds of funds in the market, excluding the
                          fund itself.

SP500                     The Standard & Poors 500 index monthly total return.

R2000                     Russell 2000 index monthly total return - Standard & Poors 500
                          monthly total return.

Chg_cmt10y                The monthly change in the 10-year Treasury constant maturity yield
                          (month end-to-month end).

Chg_baa                   The monthly change in the Moody's Baa yield less 10-year Treasury
                          constant maturity yield (month end-to-month end).

Ptfsbd                    Bond Trend-Following Factor as constructed in Fung and Hsieh (2001).

Ptfsfx                    Currency Trend-Following Factor as constructed in Fung and Hsieh
                          (2001).

Ptfscom                   Commodity Trend-Following Factor as constructed in Fung and Hsieh
                          (2001).

Ret(t-3,t-1)              Average monthly returns during month t-3 to month t-1.

Ret(t-6,t-4)              Average monthly returns during month t-6 to month t-4.

Ret(t-12,t-7)             Average monthly returns during month t-12 to month t-7.

                                                     35
Ret(t-12,t-1)        Average monthly returns during the month t-12 to month t-1.

Management Fee       Hedge funds’ management fee in percentage.

Incentive Fee        Hedge funds’ incentive fee in percentage.

High-Water Mark      An indicator variable that equals one if a hedge fund has high
Dummy                watermark provision, and zero otherwise.

Leveraged Dummy      An indicator variable that equals one if a hedge fund uses leverage in
                     the strategy, and zero otherwise.

Personal Capital     An indicator variable that equals one if a hedge fund is invested by its
Dummy                own fund manager, and zero otherwise.

Log (AUM)            The log of assets under management.

Redemption Notice    Hedge funds’ redemption notice period in the number of days.
Period

Lockup Period        Hedge funds’ lock up period in the number of days.

Age                  The number of months of a hedge fund since its inception.

Minimum Investment   Log of (1+minimum investments).




                                               36
                                              Appendix B
                                CoVaR Estimation via Quantile Regressions

       This appendix explains how we use quantile regressions to estimate the CoVaR of a
hedge fund. First, for each hedge fund with at least 36 months of observations, we conduct the
following q-quantile regression:
                      ~
        Ri ,t  aqi   qi X i ,t                                                        (B1)
where Ri,t is the return of fund i at time t, Xi,t is an 3-by-1 vector [RLHF (t), RLHF(t-3, t-1), Local
FOF Flow (t-3,t-1)]. RLHF is the average return of hedge funds located in the same area as fund i,
excluding the fund itself. Local FOF Flow is the average flow of all funds of funds located in
the same area as fund i.

Then the CoVaR for fund i can be obtained from (B1) as:
       CoVaR LHF q ,t  ˆ i  ˆ i [VaR LHF , R (t  3, t  1), LocalFOFFlowt  3, t  1]
             i|R VaR LHF
                q ,t                q        q       q ,t     LHF                                 (B2)

where VaR qLHF
            ,t is the qth percentile VaR for local hedge funds at time t.

We then obtain the predicted value of VaR qLHF
                                            ,t
                                               by running a q-quantile regression of RLHF(t) on
information at time t-1.
                          ~
        RLHF ,t  aqLHF   qLHF [ RLHF (t  3, t  1), LocalFOFFlow(t  3, t  1)]               (B3)

Finally, we plug the predicted value of VaR qLHF
                                              ,t
                                                 obtained from (B3) into equation (B2)

                                 VaRqLHF
CoVaRqi|,LHF  CoVaRq ,t LHF                CoVaRqi|,Rt LHF  Median
                         i| R                                            LHF
                                       ,t
          t



CoVaRqi|LHF is the local contagion susceptibility measure used in Table X.




                                                               37
Figure 1. Geographical distribution of U.S. Hedge Funds and Funds of Funds. This graph
plots the locations of hedge funds and funds of funds whose management companies are located
in the continental United States. Latitude and longitude (decimal degree) data are obtained from
the 2010 Census U.S. Gazetteer Files. A negative sign for longitude and latitude denotes West
longitude and South latitude, respectively. We add a small random noise from a uniform
distribution between (-0.01, 0.01) to each location so that the mass of the companies located in a
given area can be seen.




                                               38
                                                                    Table I
                                                                Summary Statistics
Panel A of this table reports the summary statistics of the main variables used in the paper. Time series averages of the cross-sectional statistics are
reported. The sample includes all hedge funds and funds of funds whose management companies are located in the continental U.S. from 1994 to
2010. We apply several filters following the literature. Specifically, we filter out non-monthly filing funds, funds denoted in a currency other than
US dollars, and funds with unknown strategies. We then exclude first 18 months’ of observations to control for the backfill bias. Finally, we
exclude offshore funds and duplicated funds following Aggarwal and Jorion (2010). Hedge fund returns, alpha, appraisal ratio, Sharpe ratio, and
flows are winsorized at the top and bottom 0.5% level. Panel B reports the total number of funds and Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) in the
sample as well as the distribution of the number of funds per MSA. We report the time series average across the whole sample period as well as
the statistics at the end of year 1994, 2002, and 2010. Panel C of the table reports the distribution of the total number of styles in each MSA for the
same years.

                                          Panel A: Hedge Fund Performance and Characteristics
                                                         Hedge Funds                                                    FoFs
                                             (excluding FoFs, 2538 unique funds)                                  (573 unique funds)
                                      Mean      Median      P25       P75     Std.Dev.            Mean       Median      P25       P75        Std.Dev.
# Funds per period                     787         834      588      1,014       273               191        188        119       264           80
Net-Fee Return (%p.m.)                  0.84        0.74    -1.19      2.72       4.46              0.65       0.65      -0.42       1.67        2.67
Alpha FH Seven-Factor (%p.m.)           0.55        0.56    -1.56      2.64       4.94              0.42       0.48      -0.64       1.52        2.81
Appraisal Ratio                         0.54        0.29    -0.22      0.69       1.77              0.66       0.43      -0.07       0.74        1.53
Sharpe Ratio                            0.51        0.27    -0.19      0.66       1.77              0.59       0.38      -0.04       0.65        1.55
Redemption Notice Period(days)         35.12      29.69     20.22    48.77       26.31             49.11      48.32      26.38     75.71        30.17
Lockup Period (months)                  4.23        0.00     0.00      7.96       6.61              3.55       0.00       0.00       7.31        5.85
Personal Capital Dummy                  0.47        0.39     0.00      1.00       0.49              0.47       0.44       0.00       1.00        0.49
High-Water Mark Dummy                   0.59        0.61     0.35      1.00       0.46              0.49       0.56       0.00       0.84        0.46
Management Fee (%)                      1.43        1.16     1.00      1.76       0.88              1.43       1.20       1.01       1.63        0.77
Incentive Fee (%)                      18.44      20.00     19.63    20.00        5.53              9.62      10.13       1.15     14.76         7.60
Minimum Investment (M$)                 1.09        0.71     0.23      1.00       2.35              1.04       0.59       0.23       0.98        2.40
Age (months)                           73.32      61.78     37.23    98.69       46.49             76.01      63.18      39.81    102.38        47.44
AUM (M$)                              129.70      33.68     10.29 108.21       375.77             101.31      33.69      12.65     91.64       216.33
Flow (%p.m.)                            0.36        0.05    -0.97      1.33       9.36              0.35       0.03      -0.84       1.08        7.68
Leveraged Dummy                         0.64        1.00     0.00      1.00       0.48              0.49       0.50       0.00       1.00        0.49



                                                                          39
                                                 Table I - Continued
                                        Panel B: Number of Funds and MSAs
                                                                              Number of Funds per MSA

Year      Number of Funds
          (excluding FoFs)        Number of MSAs          Mean      Min       P25       Median       P75        Max    Std.Dev.

1994            284                     34                    8      1         1          2           6         113       20

2002            966                     68                   14      1         1          2           7         404       51

2010            776                     72                   11      1         1          2           7         312       38

Average         804                     61                   13      1         1          2           7         331       43


                                                 Panel C: Number of Styles
                                                                      Number of Styles per MSA

Year           Number of Funds
               (excluding FoFs)         Mean            Min         P25        Median         P75          Max        Std.Dev.

1994                  10                     3           1           1             1             4         10            2

2002                  10                     3           1           1             2             3         10            2

2010                  10                     2           1           1             2             3         10            2

Average               10                     3           1           1             2             3         10            2




                                                              40
                                                                  Table II
                                                                Top Six MSAs
This table reports the summary statistics of hedge fund styles and performance for the six MSAs that host the largest number of hedge funds. Panel
A presents a cross-tabulation of fund styles and MSAs. Panels B and C present the performance distribution of hedge funds and funds of funds,
respectively. Time series averages of the cross-sectional statistics are reported. The sample selection procedure is the same as in Table I.

                                                         Panel A: Style Distribution
                                                                             Column Percentages
Style\MSA                         Boston          Chicago        Los Angeles     New York      San Francisco         Stamford           Total
Convertible Arbitrage               0.00            7.64             9.35           3.39            3.47                6.93             4.43
Dedicated Short Bias                1.68            0.64             0.72           0.80            3.96                0.00             1.08
Emerging Markets                    8.40            2.55             4.32           7.17            6.44                3.90             6.16
Equity Market Neutral              13.45            8.92             7.91           5.78            7.92                3.03             6.59
Event Driven                        9.24            5.73            11.51          18.63            7.92               13.42            14.58
Fixed Income Arbitrage              0.84            4.46             7.91           4.48            2.48                8.66             4.81
Global Macro                        5.88            7.64             5.76           5.08            5.45               12.55             6.37
Long/Short Equity Hedge            50.42           23.57            41.73          38.15           56.93               32.90            39.36
Managed Futures                     7.56           24.84             4.32           8.47            3.47               13.42             9.56
Multi-Strategy                      2.52           14.01             6.47           8.07            1.98                5.19             7.07
Total Count                         119             157              139           1004             202                 231             1852




                                                                       41
                                                    Table II - Continued
                               Panel B: Return Distribution for Hedge Funds (excluding FoFs)
MSA              Number of       Net-Fee Return    Alpha FH            Median     Median       Std.Dev.   Std. Dev.
                Funds/Period        (% p.m.)      Seven-Factor        (Net-Fee    (Alpha)      (Net-Fee    (Alpha)
                                                    (% p.m.)           Return)                  Return)
Boston            28                 0.78             0.45              0.63       0.38          4.32       4.79
Chicago           44                 0.86             0.59              0.78       0.57          4.83       5.09
Los Angeles       43                 0.78             0.52              0.66       0.45          3.70       4.35
New York         324                 0.83             0.58              0.74       0.59          4.07       4.56
San Francisco     64                 0.80             0.46              0.69       0.52          4.96       5.37
Stamford, CT      78                 0.80             0.54              0.71       0.58          3.98       4.39

                                      Panel C: Return Distribution for Funds of Funds
MSA              Number of       Net-Fee Return    Alpha FH            Median     Median       Std.Dev.   Std. Dev.
                Funds/Period        (% p.m.)      Seven-Factor        (Net-Fee    (Alpha)      (Net-Fee    (Alpha)
                                                    (% p.m.)           Return)                  Return)
Boston             3                 0.48             0.50              0.54       0.56          1.50       1.69
Chicago           10                 0.80             0.60              0.66       0.57          2.07       2.24
Los Angeles        9                 0.73             0.55              0.70       0.55          1.68       1.97
New York         100                 0.63             0.44              0.63       0.48          2.65       2.60
San Francisco      8                 0.82             0.39              0.81       0.39          1.70       2.21
Stamford, CT      17                 0.58             0.36              0.61       0.42          2.02       1.98




                                                                 42
                                            Table III
                                 Funds of Funds’ Local Preference
This table represents FoFs’ return comovement with local and nonlocal hedge funds. In Panel A, for each
FoF in the sample, we estimate time-series regressions of monthly (FoF Ret -MKT FoF Ret) on Local HF
Ret, Non Local HF Ret, Fung-Hsieh seven factors, and the ten TASS Hedge Fund Styles. We require at
least 24 months observations for each time series regression. Cross-sectional averages of the estimated
coefficients from the time-series regressions are reported in the table. Local HF Ret is calculated as the
equal-weighted average returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) from the FoF’s corresponding MSA.
Non Local HF Ret is calculated as the average returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) not residing in
the FoF’s MSA. MKT FoF Ret is the average return of all funds of funds in the market. We cluster the
standard errors by MSA. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. We also report the percentage of
positive local bias, as well as the percentage of positive significant local bias, where the local bias is
defined as the coefficient on Local HF Ret minus the coefficient on Non Local HF Ret. The t-statistics
reported below the percentage of positive LB are for testing the hypothesis that the percentage is 50%,
and the t-statistics below the percentage of positive and significant LB at 5% level are for testing the
hypothesis that the percentage is 2.5% (for double-sided tests). In Panel B and C, we estimate two
alternative measures of local bias as described in Section 3.1.2 and Section 3.1.3, respectively. ***
Statistical significance at 1%. ** Statistical significance at 5%. * Statistical significance at 10% level.

            Panel A: Base Measure: Local Bias Based on Difference in Differences
                                                            (1)               (2)                (3)
Local HF Ret                                              0.15***           0.17***             0.10***
                                                          (2.87)           (2.79)              (2.81)
Non Local HF Ret                                          -0.14***         -0.16***            -0.12*
                                                         (-3.72)          (-3.44)             (-1.92)
Control for FH Seven Factors                                 No              Yes                  No
Controls for Ten TASS Hedge Fund Styles                      No               No                 Yes

Non Parametric Tests:
Percentage Positive LB                                    67.35***         67.81***           60.50***
                                                          (7.26)           (7.45)             (4.40)
Percentage Positive and Significant LB                    36.99***         22.83***           18.49***
At 5% Level                                              (46.23)          (27.25)            (21.44)
Adj. R2                                                   0.25              0.34                0.45
N                                                          438               438                 438




                                                    43
                                   Table III - Continued
          Panel B: Alternative Measure 1: Local Bias Based On Nonnegative Weights
                                                      (1)           (2)               (3)
Local Bias                                          0.24***       0.14***         0.31***
                                                    (5.04)       (8.09)          (9.12)
Control for FH Seven Factors                           No          Yes              No
Controls for Ten TASS Hedge Fund Styles                No           No             Yes

Non Parametric Tests:
Percentage Positive LB                             65.75***      64.15***        60.05***
                                                   (6.94)        (6.18)          (4.29)
Percentage Positive and Significant LB              7.07***       2.97           17.12***
At 5% Level                                        (6.14)        (0.62)         (19.60)


N                                                     438          438                438



             Panel C: Alternative Measure 2: Local Bias Based on Local Factor Model
                                                      (1)           (2)               (3)
Local Factor                                        0.14***       0.13***         0.09***
                                                    (2.80)       (2.61)          (3.06)
Market Factor                                        1.01***      1.00***         0.99***
                                                   (21.30)      (27.29)         (21.50)
Control for FH Seven Factors                          No           Yes              No
Controls for Ten TASS Hedge Fund Styles               No            No             Yes

Non Parametric Tests:
Percentage Positive LB                              62.10***     62.56***        56.16***
                                                    (5.06)       (5.26)          (2.58)
Percentage Positive and Significant LB              31.96***     18.26***        11.87***
At 5% Level                                        (39.50)      (21.13)         (12.56)
Adj. R2                                             0.54          0.61            0.66
N                                                     438          438                438




                                              44
                                             Table IV
                           Properties of Funds of Funds’ Local Preference
This table summarizes the persistence and determinants of FoFs’ local bias. To construct the Local Bias
variable, for each FoFs we run the following time-series regression using the previous 24 months’ data:
(FoF Ret –Market FoF Ret) = c0 + c1 * Local HF Ret + c2* Non Local HF Ret, where Local HF Ret is
calculated as the average returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) from the FoF’s corresponding MSA.
Non Local HF Ret is calculated as average returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) not residing in the
FoF’s MSA. We then calculate the Local Bias as (c1-c2). Finally, we standardize the Local Bias measure
to have zero mean and unit standard deviation for each MSA and each period. We require an area to have
at least five FoFs to be included in the analysis. Panel A reports the time-series means of the average
Local Bias for the current quarter and the subsequent two years for each of the quintile portfolios sorted
on the current quarter Local Bias. We report the difference between the high and low portfolios and the
corresponding t-statistics. In addition, we report the time-series means of number of funds per period at
the sorting and holding period. Panel B reports the panel regression of the FoFs’ local bias on lagged-
quarter fund characteristics using bi-annual data. Time and location fixed effects also are included, and
the standard errors are clustered by location. We multiply the regression coefficients for variables Age,
Redemption Notice Period, and Lockup Period by 10 for exhibition purpose. *** Statistical significance
at 1%. ** Statistical significance at 5%. * Statistical significance at 10% level.

                              Panel A: Persistence of Local Preference
                   Diff-in-Diff Measure          Measure Based on Non              Local Factor Based
                                                  Negative Weights                      Measure

                   Year 0        Year 2           Year 0         Year 2            Year 0        Year 2

Low Port           -1.44         -0.80            -1.38          -0.62             -1.38        -0.41
2                  -0.24         -0.25            -0.70          -0.36             -0.29        -0.05
3                   0.15          0.08             0.02           0.09              0.06         0.08
4                   0.40          0.22             0.80           0.31              0.37        -0.01
High Port           1.13          0.40             1.25           0.43              1.24         0.23
High-Low            2.57          1.20***          2.62           1.07***           2.62         0.64***
                                 (6.59)                          (4.19)                         (2.62)
#Fund/Period        167           114               160            110              167           114




                                                   45
                                   Table IV - Continued
                         Panel B: Determinants of Local Preference
                                       Diff-in-Diff   Measure Based on   Local Factor Based
                                        Measure        Non Negative           Measure
                                                          Weights

Log (AUM) (t-1)                          -0.05**            -0.06**            -0.06*
                                        (-2.42)            (-2.15)            (-1.77)
Age (t-1)/10                             -0.03***           -0.02**            -0.01**
                                        (-4.36)            (-2.08)            (-2.26)
Ret (t-12,t-1)                            0.87***            0.14               0.28*
                                         (3.73)             (0.22)             (1.70)
Minimum Investment                        0.11***            0.09**             0.10***
                                         (4.46)             (2.19)             (4.78)
Redemption Notice Period/10               0.03**             0.03**             0.04*
                                         (2.42)             (1.99)             (1.89)
Lockup Period/10                         -0.03               0.00              -0.03
                                        (-0.61)             (0.03)            (-0.94)
Personal Capital Dummy                    0.13**             0.18**             0.01
                                         (2.00)             (2.49)             (0.07)
Management Fee                           -0.12**            -0.27**            -0.02
                                        (-2.15)            (-2.16)            (-0.09)
Incentive Fee                            -0.01               0.00               0.00
                                        (-1.54)             (0.04)             (0.87)
High-Water Mark Dummy                    -0.01              -0.01              -0.10
                                        (-0.09)            (-0.07)            (-1.25)
Leveraged Dummy                           0.08               0.06               0.07**
                                         (1.17)             (0.90)             (2.00)
Adj R2                                    0.09               0.08               0.02
Number of observations                   1,043              1,043               999




                                             46
                                                               Table V
                                      Funds of Funds’ Local Bias and Performance: Base Measure
This table reports the panel regression results for FoFs’ performance on local bias and other fund characteristics at a quarterly frequency. Three
performance measures are examined. Alpha is the Fung-Hsieh (2001) seven-factor adjusted return over the subsequent quarter. AR is the
corresponding appraisal ratio. SR is the Sharpe Ratio over the next quarter. To construct the Local Bias variable, for each FoF in the sample, we
run the following time-series regression using the previous 24 months’ data: (FoF Ret –Other FoF Ret) = c0 + c1 * Local HF Ret + c2* Non
Local HF Ret, where Local HF Ret is calculated as the equal-weighted returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) from the FoF’s corresponding
MSA. Non Local HF Ret is calculated as equal-weighted returns of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) not residing in the FoF’s MSA. We then
calculate the Local Bias variable as the difference of estimated coefficients c1 and c2. Finally, we standardize the Local Bias measure by
subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the Local Bias variable for each MSA and each period. We require a fund to have at
least 12 months of observations within the 24 month window to be included in the analysis. All the other control variables are defined in Table A
in the appendix. The TASS style exposure controls are not reported due to space concerns. We lag all the control variables by one quarter. We
include time and location fixed effects. The numbers in parentheses are the t-statistics, with standard errors clustered by location. The sample
selection procedure is the same as in Table I. We multiply the regression coefficients for variables Log(AUM), Age, Incentive Fee, Redemption
Notice Period, and Lockup Period by 10 for exhibition purpose. *** Statistical significance at 1%. ** Statistical significance at 5%. * Statistical
significance at 10% level.




                                                                        47
                                                    Table V – Continued
                                    Fung-Hsieh                         Sharpe Ratio                      Appraisal Ratio for
                              Seven Factor Alpha (%)                                              Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factor Model
Local Bias                0.35*** 0.26***        0.19***     0.05***     0.02***        0.02**     0.07***     0.05***      0.04***
                         (5.49)     (6.44)      (4.72)      (7.40)      (3.43)         (2.54)     (4.94)      (5.01)       (3.80)
Log (AUM) (t-1)/10                   0.01        0.01                    0.09           0.06                   0.12**       0.09
                                    (0.03)      (0.03)                  (1.50)         (0.89)                 (2.47)       (1.45)
Age (t-1)/10                         0.01*       0.01*                   0.00           0.00                   0.00         0.00
                                    (1.73)      (1.80)                 (-1.39)        (-0.86)                 (0.43)       (0.62)
Ret (t-12,t-1)                       3.47***     3.61***                 0.37***        0.48***                0.25***      0.42***
                                    (5.29)      (5.00)                  (2.86)         (3.51)                 (2.59)       (4.58)
Minimum Investment                   0.12***     0.09***                 0.02           0.01                   0.04**       0.03*
                                    (4.55)      (3.48)                  (0.93)         (0.74)                 (2.03)       (1.78)
Redemption Notice                    0.04**      0.02                    0.02***        0.02***                0.02***      0.02***
Period/10                           (2.17)      (1.32)                  (6.73)         (5.80)                 (5.55)       (3.93)
Lockup Period/10                    -0.02       -0.01                   -0.03***       -0.03***               -0. 04**     -0.03***
                                   (-0.31)     (-0.09)                 (-3.27)        (-5.54)                (-2.56)      (-2.98)
Personal Capital Dummy              -0.09       -0.08                    0.02           0.03                   0.02         0.04*
                                   (-0.91)     (-0.80)                  (0.69)         (1.36)                 (0.95)       (1.76)
Management Fee                      -0.41***    -0.29***                -0.05          -0.05                  -0.06**      -0.06*
                                   (-4.72)     (-3.37)                 (-1.27)        (-1.21)                (-1.97)      (-1.69)
Incentive Fee/10                     0.02        0.07                   -0.02***       -0.01*                 -0.02**      -0.01*
                                    (0.31)      (1.39)                 (-2.80)        (-1.92)                (-2.08)      (-1.82)
High-Water Mark Dummy                0.12        0.08                    0.02           0.02                  -0.00        -0.00
                                    (1.59)      (0.98)                  (1.46)         (1.58)                (-0.23)      (-0.22)
Leveraged Dummy                     -0.04       -0.02                   -0.02***       -0.02***               -0.04**      -0.04**
                                   (-0.33)     (-0.14)                 (-2.68)        (-2.73)                (-2.19)      (-2.53)
Control for TASS
Styles Exposures          No          No          Yes            No        No           Yes         No          No          Yes

Adj. R2                   0.22      0.25        0.25         0.51        0.54          0.55        0.32        0.36        0.38
N                        8,877     7,475       7,475        8,877       7,475         7,475       8,869       7,469       7,469




                                                            48
                                                              Table VI
                                  Funds of Funds’ Local Bias and Performance: Alternative Measures
This table reports the panel regression results for FoFs’ performance on local bias and other fund characteristics at a quarterly frequency. Three
performance measures are examined. Alpha is the Fung-Hsieh (2001) seven-factor adjusted return over the subsequent quarter. AR is the
corresponding appraisal ratio. SR is the Sharpe Ratio over the next quarter. We use two specifications to construct the Local Bias variable. In
panel A, for each FoF in our sample, we run the following two time-series regressions using the previous 24 months’ data: FoF Ret = c0 + c1 *
Local HF Ret +c2*Non Local Ret and Market FoF Ret = c0’ +c1’*Local HF Ret + c2’* Non Local HF Ret, restricting c1, c2, c1’ and c2’ to be
                                                 c1      c1'
nonnegative. The local bias is defined as (                     ). Local HF Ret, Non Local HF Ret and Market FOF Ret are defined similarly as in
                                              c1  c 2 c1' c 2'
Table V. In panel B, for each FoF in the sample, we run the following time-series regression using the previous 24 months’ data: (FoF Ret –TBill
Ret) = c0 + c1 *(Local HF Ret- Non Local HF Ret)+c2*(Market FoF Ret-TBill Ret). The Local Bias variable is estimated as the coefficient c1.
We standardize the Local Bias measure by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the Local Bias variable for each MSA
and each period. We require a fund to have at least 12 months of observations within the 24 month window to be included in the analysis. The
coefficients on the control variables are similar to Table V and are not reported due to space concerns. We lag all the control variables by one
quarter. We include time and location fixed effects. The numbers in parentheses are the t-statistics, with standard errors clustered by location. The
sample selection procedure is the same as in Table I. *** Statistical significance at 1%. ** Statistical significance at 5%. * Statistical significance
at 10% level.




                                                                          49
                                              Table VI - Continued
                               Panel A: Local Bias Based On Nonnegative Weights
                             Fung-Hsieh                          Sharpe Ratio                    Appraisal Ratio for
                        Seven Factor Alpha (%)                                            Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factor Model
Local Bias          0.20***    0.13***      0.07       0.04***     0.02**        0.02**    0.07***    0.05***       0.04***
                   (4.33)     (3.89)       (1.41)     (5.12)      (2.49)        (2.33)    (2.84)     (3.47)        (3.10)

Control for Fund
Characteristics      No          Yes         Yes           No        Yes          Yes       No          Yes         Yes

Control for TASS
Styles Exposures     No          No          Yes           No        No           Yes       No          No          Yes

Adj. R2             0.24       0.26         0.27       0.54        0.57          0.58      0.33        0.37        0.39
N                  8,264      6,960        6,960      8,264       6,960         6,960     8,257       6,955       6,955

                                Panel B: Local Bias Based on Local Factor Model
                             Fung-Hsieh                          Sharpe Ratio                    Appraisal Ratio for
                        Seven Factor Alpha (%)                                            Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factor Model
Local Bias          0.26***    0.28***      0.19***    0.03***     0.02**        0.01*     0.04**     0.03***       0.02**
                   (2.94)     (5.67)       (3.97)     (3.17)      (2.56)        (1.88)    (2.00)     (3.20)        (2.03)

Control for Fund
Characteristics      No          Yes         Yes           No        Yes          Yes       No          Yes         Yes

Control for TASS
Styles Exposures     No          No          Yes           No        No           Yes       No          No          Yes

Adj. R2             0.22       0.25         0.25       0.51        0.54          0.55      0.32        0.36        0.38
N                  8,877      7,475        7,475      8,877       7,475         7,475     8,869       7,469        7,469




                                                      50
                                                               Table VII
                                   Funds of Funds’ Local Bias and Performance: Subsample Analyses
This table reports the quarterly panel regression results for FoFs’ performance on local bias and other fund characteristics for various subsamples.
The variables and regression specifications are similar to Table V. The coefficients on the control variables are similar to Table V and are not
reported due to space concerns. Panel A reports the results for the New York and Non New York subsamples. It also tests the difference in
coefficients for the Local Bias variable between the two subsamples. Panel B reports the panel regression results for the subsample where the
equal-weighted average alpha for local hedge funds is less than that of the nonlocal hedge funds during the previous 24 months. We require a fund
to have at least 12 months of observations within the 24 month window to be included in the analysis. Panel C focuses on the subsample of FoFs
who are not managed by multi-fund families. The numbers in parentheses are the t-statistics, with standard errors clustered by location. The
sample selection procedure is the same as in Table I. *** Statistical significance at 1%. ** Statistical significance at 5%. * Statistical significance
at 10% level.

                                            Panel A: New York and Non New York Subsamples
                                          Fung-Hsieh                                 Sharpe Ratio                         Appraisal Ratio for
                                     Seven Factor Alpha (%)                                                        Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factor Model
                                  NY       Non NY Difference                 NY       Non NY        Difference        NY      Non NY Difference
Local Bias                      0.16        0.14*        0.02              0.00        0.04**        -0.04*         0.04***    0.03          0.01
                               (1.46)      (1.77)       (0.12)            (0.03)      (2.39)        (-1.91)        (2.80)     (1.33)        (0.03)
Control for Fund
Characteristics                  Yes          Yes                           Yes          Yes                          Yes          Yes

Control for TASS
Styles Exposures                 Yes          Yes                           Yes          Yes                          Yes          Yes

Adj. R2                         0.24         0.32                          0.56         0.56                        0.38         0.40
N                              4,793        2,682                         4,793        2,682                        4,791        2,678




                                                                          51
                                             Table VII - Continued
                                 Panel B: Subsample of Weak Performing Areas
                             Fung-Hsieh                            Sharpe Ratio                     Appraisal Ratio for
                        Seven Factor Alpha (%)                                               Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factor Model
Local Bias          0.15**     0.14         0.22***      0.04***     0.03*         0.03***    0.04***    0.03*         0.03***
                   (1.97)     (1.43)       (2.61)       (3.85)      (1.65)        (3.05)     (3.08)     (1.72)        (2.62)
Control for Fund
Characteristics      No         Yes          Yes            No         Yes         Yes         No          Yes         Yes

Control for TASS
Styles Exposures     No          No          Yes            No         No          Yes         No          No          Yes

Adj. R2             0.25       0.28         0.29         0.61        0.64          0.65       0.39        0.41        0.42
N                  3,279      2,790        2,790        3,279       2,790         2,790      3,277       2,789       2,789

                                      Panel C: Subsample of Stand-Alone FoFs
                              Fung-Hsieh                           Sharpe Ratio                     Appraisal Ratio for
                         Seven Factor Alpha (%)                                              Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factor Model
Local Bias          0.35***      0.42***     0.29***     0.03**       0.03***      0.02**     0.06***    0.06***       0.05***
                   (4.06)       (4.59)      (2.81)      (2.37)       (2.91)       (2.14)     (4.98)     (4.67)        (3.82)

Control for Fund
Characteristics      No          Yes          Yes           No          Yes         Yes         No          Yes         Yes

Control for TASS
Styles Exposures     No           No          Yes           No          No          Yes         No          No          Yes

Adj. R2             0.27        0.30         0.30         0.56        0.61          0.61       0.35        0.40       0.42
N                  6,555       5,400        5,400        6,485       5,400         5,400      6,548        5,395      5,395




                                                       52
                                                                  Table VIII
                                                           Local Flow Comovement
This table reports the flow comovement among local hedge funds. Panel A compares the average pairwise flow correlation for funds located in the
same MSA versus funds located in different areas. The first and third columns calculate correlations based on raw percentage flows. The second
and fourth columns calculate the correlation of residual flows orthogonalized by each fund’s past quarter, past half-year and past one-year returns.
In the third and fourth columns, the same MSA pairs exclude pairs of funds from the same fund family. In Panel B, for each hedge fund in the
sample (excluding funds of funds), we estimate panel regressions of monthly percentage flows on Local Flow, with several control variables.
Local Flow is calculated as the equal-weighted flow of all hedge funds (excluding FoFs) from the fund’s corresponding MSA, excluding the fund
itself. Style Flow is the equal-weighted flow of all funds in the fund’s corresponding TASS style, excluding the fund itself. All the other control
variables are defined in Table A in the appendix. In the fourth to sixth columns, we exclude funds from the same fund family when calculating
Local Flow. We cluster the standard errors by MSA. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. We require a fund to have at least 24 months of
observations to be included in the analysis. We exclude areas that host less than six hedge funds. The sample selection is the same as in Table I.
*** Statistical significance at 1%. ** Statistical significance at 5%. * Statistical significance at 10% level.

                                                    Panel A: Pair-wise Flow Correlation
                                               Whole Sample                                   Exclude Fund Pairs From the Same Family
                                                        Return-Adjusted                                                 Return-Adjusted
                             Flow Correlation (%)                                       Flow Correlation (%)
                                                      Flow Correlation (%)                                            Flow Correlation (%)
Same MSA                           2.37                     1.52                              2.28                           1.44

Different MSA                       2.02                        1.24                            2.02                               1.24

Same - Different                    0.36 ***                    0.28***                         0.27 ***                           0.20***
                                   (6.24)                      (5.02)                          (4.68)                             (3.56)




                                                                        53
                                             Table VIII - Continued
                                       Panel B: Regression on Local Flows
                                  Whole Sample                               Exclude Funds from the Same Family
Local Flow              0.19***       0.15***          0.17***            0.12**             0.09**           0.10**
                       (3.98)        (4.20)           (4.00)             (2.11)             (2.04)           (2.08)
Style Flow              0.26***       0.18***          0.19***            0.28***            0.19***          0.20***
                      (14.84)       (11.95)         (11.56)             (15.89)           (12.88)           (12.29)
Ret(t-3,t-1)                          0.18***          0.19***                               0.18***          0.19***
                                    (27.52)         (20.44)                               (28.31)           (21.71)
Ret(t-6,t-4)                          0.16***          0.17***                               0.17***          0.17***
                                    (20.76)         (19.21)                               (20.86)           (19.31)
Ret(t-12,t-7)                         0.20***          0.22***                               0.20***          0.21***
                                    (11.32)         (11.04)                               (11.60)           (11.07)
Local Ret(t-3,t-1)                                    -0.06***                                               -0.04*
                                                     (-2.71)                                                (-1.74)
Local Ret(t-6,t-4)                                    -0.05**                                                -0.03*
                                                    (-2.55)                                                 (-1.67)
Local Ret(t-12,t-7)                                   -0.14***                                               -0.12***
                                                    (-5.37)                                                 (-3.94)
Intercept              -0.00          -0.01***        -0.01***            0.00              -0.01***         -0.01***
                      (-1.07)       (-17.45)       (-17.44)             (-0.35)          (-16.09)          (-15.84)
Adj. R2                 0.01           0.03            0.03               0.01               0.03             0.03
N                     119,964        110,125         110,125             118,265           108,552           108,552




                                                      54
                                                                  Table IX
                                                               Local Contagion
This table reports the extreme negative return clustering among local funds. For each hedge fund (excluding FoFs), we first filter the returns by
Fung-Hsieh seven factors, average returns of all funds sharing the same style as the fund, and the fund’s own past quarter returns. We then work
with the residual returns. In panel A, we run logistic regressions, where the dependent variable indicates whether a fund’s return in a particular
month belongs to the lower 10% of the fund’s return distribution. The independent variables include an indicator variable of whether the average
returns of the other local hedge funds fall in the bottom 10% during the month, the Percentage of Local Distress variable, which is the number of
other local hedge funds that also have negative extreme returns during the month divided by the total number of local hedge funds, an indicator
variable of whether the average returns of the market portfolio of hedge funds fall in the bottom 10% during the month, an indicator variable of
whether the average returns of the local stocks fall in the bottom 10% of the return distribution, the Percentage of Market Distress, which is the
number of hedge funds in the market incurring bottom 10% returns divided by the total number of hedge funds, and the Percentage of Local Stock
Distress, which is the number of local stocks incurring bottom 10% returns divided by the total number of local stocks. In the fifth to the eighth
columns, we exclude funds from the same fund family in the Local Ret calculation. In Panel B, we regress log(Percentage of Local Stress) on an
indicator variable of whether the local funds of funds incur flows that fall in its lower 25% during the previous quarter. The numbers in
parentheses are t-statistics, where the standard errors are clustered by MSAs. The sample selection procedure is the same as in Table I. ***
Statistical significance at 1%. ** Statistical significance at 5%. * Statistical significance at 10% level.




                                                                       55
                                                     Panel A: Worst Return Clustering
                                                                     Dependent Variable: Ret (t) < bottom 10%

                                                           Whole Sample                           Exclude Funds from the Same Family
Local Ret(t) < bottom 10%                  0.25***      0.22***                                  0.14***     0.10***
                                          (5.14)       (3.83)                                   (3.87)      (2.59)
Market Ret(t)<bottom 10%                                0.11***                                              0.11**
                                                       (2.51)                                               (2.13)
Local Stock Ret(t) < bottom 10%                         0.39***                                              0.40***
                                                      (12.52)                                              (13.37)
Percentage of Local Distress(t)                                     4.29***    2.55***                                  4.26***
                                                                                                                             2.41***
                                                                   (4.67)     (5.66)                                   (4.37)
                                                                                                                            (5.16)
Percentage of Market Distress(t)                                               5.48***                                       5.61***
                                                                             (11.97)                                       (12.05)
Percentage of Local Stock Distress(t)                                          0.89***                                       0.89***
                                                                              (2.82)                                        (2.72)
Intercept                                  -2.16***    -2.22***     -2.61*** -3.12***           -2.15*** -2.21*** -2.60*** -3.12***
                                        (-481.55)   (-300.41)     (-24.47)  (-46.88)         (-417.73) (-193.58) (-23.05) (-44.99)
N                                         136,049     135,898     136,049   120,009            134,257   134,106 134,257  118,876




                                                                    56
                                          Panel B: Local Contagion and Local FoF Flows
                                                                   Dependent Variable: log(Percentage of Local Distress)
Local FoF Flow (t-3, t-1) <bottom 25%                       0.11***                        0.09***                      0.08***
                                                           (3.03)                         (2.59)                       (2.74)
Nonlocal FoF Flow (t-3, t-1)<bottom 25%                                                    0.08**                       0.01
                                                                                          (2.50)                       (0.09)
Intercept                                                  -2.12***                       -2.21***                     -2.12***
                                                         (-44.06)                       (-41.99)                      (13.35)
Time Fixed Effect                                            No                            No                            Yes
N                                                          2,095                          2,095                            2,095




                                                               57
                                               Table X
                                      Local Hedge Funds’ CoVaR
This table reports the CoVaR measure proposed by Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011) to measure a fund’s
local contagion susceptibility. We filter each hedge fund’s returns by the Fung-Hsieh seven factor model,
the fund’s style returns, and its past quarter returns. We then work with the residual returns. To construct
the CoVaR measure, we run for each hedge fund the 10% (or 25%) quantile regressions of returns on the
current and past quarter local hedge fund returns and its local FOF flows during the past quarter. Panel A
presents the average coefficents from the quantile regressions. The numbers in parentheses are the t-
statistics with the standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation. In Panel B, we
report the summary statistics of CoVaR and ΔCoVaR. ΔCoVaR is the difference between 10% (or 25%)
CoVaR and the 50% CoVaR, where q% CoVaR is the predicted value from a q% quantile regression of
the local hedge fund return on the lagged local hedge fund returns and local FOF flows. ΔCoVaR gives
the percentage point change in a hedge fund’s q% VaR when the other local hedge funds realized their q%
VaR. Appendix B provides further information on the estimation of the CoVaR variables. *** Statistical
significance at 1%. ** Statistical significance at 5%. * Statistical significance at 10% level.

                                      Panel A: Quantile Regression
                                              CoVaR (10%)                         CoVaR (25%)
Local Ret (t)                                    0.31***                             0.32***
                                                (7.07)                              (6.40)
Local Ret (t-3, t-1)                             0.05***                             0.00
                                                (2.76)                              (0.01)
Local FoF Flow (t-3, t-1)                        5.80***                             1.58*
                                                (2.85)                              (1.67)
Intercept                                       -3.21***                            -1.61***
                                               (30.55)                             (25.97)
N                                                1,348                               1,348



                        Panel B: Summary Statistics of Local CoVAR (%)
                                N         Mean      Std Dev       25th Pctl      Median        75th Pctl
CoVaR(10%)                  122,750       -3.29        2.40        -4.31         -2.76          -1.59
ΔCoVaR(10%)                 122,750       -0.15        0.84        -0.41         -0.10           0.18
CoVaR(25%)                  122,750       -1.66        1.33        -2.20         -1.37          -0.76
ΔCoVaR (25%)                122,750       -0.08        0.32        -0.16         -0.04           0.05




                                                   58
