                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM THE WEATHER? THE NEW CLIMATE-ECONOMY
                            LITERATURE

                                           Melissa Dell
                                        Benjamin F. Jones
                                        Benjamin A. Olken

                                       Working Paper 19578
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19578


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




This paper was prepared for the Journal of Economic Literature. We thank Marshall Burke, Janet Currie,
Michael Greenstone, Solomon Hsiang, Elizabeth Moyer, Robert Pindyck, Richard Schmalensee, Susan
Solomon, and 5 anonymous referees for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Melissa Dell, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Do We Learn from the Weather? The New Climate-Economy Literature
Melissa Dell, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 19578
October 2013
JEL No. Q54

                                             ABSTRACT

A rapidly growing body of research applies panel methods to examine how temperature, precipitation,
and windstorms influence economic outcomes. These studies focus on changes in weather realizations
over time within a given spatial area and demonstrate impacts on agricultural output, industrial output,
labor productivity, energy demand, health, conflict, and economic growth among other outcomes.
By harnessing exogenous variation over time within a given spatial unit, these studies help credibly
identify (i) the breadth of channels linking weather and the economy, (ii) heterogeneous treatment
effects across different types of locations, and (iii) non-linear effects of weather variables. This paper
reviews the new literature with two purposes. First, we summarize recent work, providing a guide
to its methodologies, data sets, and findings. Second, we consider applications of the new literature,
including insights for the “damage function” within models that seek to assess the potential economic
effects of future climate change.


Melissa Dell                                        Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics, E17-212
Harvard University                                  MIT
Littauer M-24                                       77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                                 Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                            and NBER
melissadell@fas.harvard.edu                         bolken@mit.edu

Benjamin F. Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Management and Strategy
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19578
1 Introduction
        The idea that climate may substantially influence economic performance is an old one,
featuring prominently in the writings of the Ancient Greeks, in Ibn Khaldun’s 14th Century
Muqaddimah (Gates 1967) and during the Enlightenment, when Montesquieu argued in The
Spirit of Laws (1748) that an “excess of heat” made men “slothful and dispirited.” To the extent
that climatic factors affect economically relevant outcomes, whether agricultural output,
economic growth, health, or conflict, a careful understanding of such effects may be essential to
the effective design of contemporary economic policies and institutions. Moreover, with global
temperatures expected to rise substantially over the next century, understanding these
relationships is increasingly important for assessing the “damage function” that is central to
estimating the potential economic implications of future climate change.

        A basic challenge in deciphering the relationship between climatic variables and
economic activity is that the spatial variation in climate is largely fixed. Canada is colder on
average than Cameroon, and it always has been. As such, while there can be large cross-sectional
correlations between a country’s climate and its economic outcomes, it is difficult to distinguish
the effects of the current climate from the many other characteristics potentially correlated with
it. The difficulty in identifying causative effects from cross-sectional evidence has posed
substantial and long-standing challenges for understanding the historical, contemporary, and
future economic consequences of climate and climate change.

        In the last few years there has been a wave of new empirical research that takes a
different approach. These new studies use panel methodologies, exploiting high-frequency (e.g.,
year to year) changes in temperature, precipitation, and other climatic variables to identify these
variables’ economic effects. As nomenclature, this new literature uses “weather variation” to
describe shorter-run temporal variation. The word climate is reserved for the distribution of
outcomes, which may be summarized by averages over several decades, while weather describes
a particular realization from that distribution and can provide substantial variability.

        The primary advantage of the new literature is identification. By exploiting exogenous
variation in weather outcomes over time within a given spatial area, these methods can
causatively identify effects of temperature, precipitation, and windstorm variation on numerous
outcomes, including agricultural output, energy demand, labor productivity, mortality, industrial
output, exports, conflict, migration, and economic growth. This literature has thus provided a
host of new results about the ways in which the realizations of temperature, precipitation, storms,
and other aspects of the weather affect the economy.

       In light of these developments, this paper has two related goals. The first goal is to take
stock of this new literature, providing a guide to its methodologies, data sets, and findings. The
second goal is to clarify the interpretation of this literature. The new approach speaks directly to
contemporary effects of weather on economic activity, and in this sense provides an unusually
well-identified understanding of channels affecting contemporary economic issues, including
economic development, public health, energy demand, and conflict.

        At the same time, this literature has important implications for the “damage function” in
climate change models, which consider how future changes in climate – i.e. future changes in the
stochastic distribution of weather – will affect economic activity. The opportunity here is to
bring causative identification to the damage functions, elucidating the set of important climate-
economy channels and their functional forms. The challenge lies in bridging from the evidentiary
basis of short-run weather effects to thinking about longer-run effects of changes in the
distribution of weather, which may be either larger (e.g., due to intensification effects) or smaller
(e.g., due to adaptation) than the short-run impacts. While certain climate change aspects are
difficult to assess, we examine a number of empirical methodologies that can help bridge toward
longer-run effects while maintaining careful identification. Examples include comparing how
the impact of a given weather shock differs depending on the locations’ usual climate, examining
whether the impact of weather shocks depends on a region’s previous experience with similar
shocks, and examining the impact of changes over longer time scales. We further reexamine the
climate damage functions used in current climate-economy models in light of the evidence
reviewed here.

         This paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we review the panel methods used in this
literature and discuss the methodological choices involved in implementing them. We further
review standard climate datasets, providing guidance on how to effectively use these resources.
Section 3 reviews the findings of the new literature, organized by the outcome variable of
interest. This section covers the effects of temperature, precipitation, and windstorms on
economic growth, agriculture, labor productivity, industrial output, health, energy, political
stability, conflict, aggression, and other outcomes. Section 4 considers applications of the new
literature to understanding the potential economic effects of climate change. This section first
considers methodological opportunities for panel methods to inform our understanding of longer-
run climate change processes. It then examines the economic damage function within Integrated
Assessment Models (IAMs), which are used to estimate the social cost of carbon and guide
climate change policy, and discusses how these damage functions can be informed by the new
findings. Section 5 offers concluding observations and suggests promising directions forward for
this literature. This paper also has two online appendices. Online Appendix I summarizes the
panel data methodologies used in the papers reviewed. Online Appendix II indicates the primary
data sources used in the papers reviewed.
2 Methods and Data
2.1 What is the new approach?
To understand the impact of climate on the economy, we would ideally like to determine the
following unknown functional relationship:

                    ,                                                                       (1)

which links vectors of climatic variables (C) and other variables (X) to outcomes, y. C may
include temperature, precipitation, and extreme weather events like windstorms, among other
climatic phenomena. Outcomes of interest include national income, agricultural output,
industrial output, labor productivity, political stability, energy use, health, and migration, among
others. X includes any characteristics that are correlated with C and also affect the outcomes of
interest, possibly by conditioning the climate response. This section discusses several different
approaches that have been used to estimate the relationship given by equation (1).

2.1.1 Estimation using the cross‐section
A classic approach to estimating (1) emphasizes spatial variation at a point in time. A linearized
version of the above model is

                                                                                            (2)

where i indexes different geographic areas, e.g. countries or sub-national entities like counties, as
dictated by the question of interest and sources of data. The outcome variable and explanatory
variables are typically measured either in levels or logs. The error process is typically modeled
using robust standard errors, possibly allowing for spatial correlation in the covariance matrix by
clustering at a larger spatial resolution or by allowing correlation to decay smoothly with
distance (Conley 1999).

The vector X typically includes several controls. For example, one may want to include other
variables that are correlated with C and impact y. The vector X could also include other
exogenous geographic controls, such as elevation and ruggedness, to the extent those are
correlated with the variables of interest in .1

To the extent that climatic variables, like other geographic variables, are exogenously
determined, reverse causation is unlikely to be a major concern.2 The more pressing econometric

1
  Related, it can be important to include a rich set of climatic variables in C. Auffhammer et al. (2013), for example,
show that temperature and precipitation tend to be correlated, with a sign that varies by region, and thus failing to
include both could lead to omitted variables bias when interpreting a particular climatic variable estimated in
isolation.
2
  Nevertheless, reverse causation may need to be considered in some settings. In the cross-section, urban areas are
known to be hotter than rural areas due to the heat-sink effects from asphalt, black roofs, etc. (Houghton et al. 2001),
though this can be corrected for using measurements of temperatures in rural areas (Nakicenovic et al. 2000). In the
panel, economic shocks in very poor countries can lead to changes in the quality of temperature measurement and
challenge for estimating from the cross-sectional equation in (2) is the potential omitted
variable bias; i.e., the correlation between the climate variables of interest and other features that
may influence the outcome. To the extent that these other variables are not adequately captured
in the control variables , or the functional form through which they are controlled for is not
exactly correct, the estimates of will be biased.

Importantly, however, adding more controls will not necessarily produce an estimate that is
closer to the true . If the X’s are themselves an outcome of C - which may well be the case for
controls such as GDP, institutional measures, and population – including them will induce an
“over-controlling problem”. In the language of the model, if is in fact         , then equation (1)
would instead be written as            ,       and estimating an equation that included both and
C would not capture the true net effect of C on y. For example, consider the fact that poorer
countries tend to be both hot and have low-quality institutions. If hot climates were to cause low-
quality institutions, which in turn cause low income, then controlling for institutions in (2) can
have the effect of partially eliminating the explanatory power of climate, even if climate is the
underlying fundamental cause.3

Beyond these identification challenges lies a more substantive question of what underlying
structural equation the econometric equation in (2) estimates. To continue the previous example,
suppose that temperature and income are correlated in the cross section today largely because
climate affected the path of agricultural development, technological exchange, and/or subsequent
colonialism (Diamond 1997; Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi 2004). If the structural equation
of interest is to estimate the very long-run historical effect of, for example, temperature on
economic outcomes, one might prefer to estimate (2) without controlling for potentially
intervening mechanisms, such as institutions. However, climate studies often seek to estimate
the contemporaneous effect of temperature on economic activity for the purposes of assessing
the potential impacts of forecasted temperature changes over the next several decades. The cross-
sectional relationship, which represents a very long-run equilibrium, may incorporate processes
that are too slow to accurately inform the time-scale of interest, or it may include historical
processes (such as colonialism) that will not repeat themselves in modern times.

2.1.2 Estimation using weather shocks
To the extent that one is interested in isolating the impact of climatic variables such as
temperature - apart from the many other factors that they are correlated with and have influenced
over the very long run - a different approach is to use longitudinal data to investigate the effects


potentially change the urban/mix of measurements, so even if actual is unaffected, observed may be. We
discuss these issues in more detail in Section 2.2.
3
  The fact that geographic characteristics, e.g. tropical climate, and institutional quality are highly correlated in the
cross-section has led to a vigorous, but ultimately hard to resolve, debate over their relative importance for long-run
economic development, where the inclusion of institutional variables in cross-sectional specifications like (2)
diminishes otherwise strong relationships between geographic variables and income. See, for example, Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2001), Sachs (2003) and Rodrik, Subramanian and Trebbi (2004).
of weather shocks. This approach, which is the focus of this review, has emerged in recent years
and emphasizes variation over time within a given spatial entity.

Using standard panel methods, the regression models in this literature typically take variations of
the form

                                                                                     (3)

where t indexes time (e.g. years, days, months, seasons, decades). The literature uses a
nomenclature of “weather variation” for shorter-run temporal variation as opposed to “climate
variation”, where the word climate is used to describe the distribution of outcomes (e.g. the range
of temperature experienced in Mexico) while weather refers to a particular realization from that
distribution.

Noting that temperature, precipitation, windstorms, and other weather events vary plausibly
randomly over time, as random draws from the distribution in a given spatial area (i.e. “weather”
draws from the “climate” distribution), the weather-shock approach has strong identification
properties. The fixed effects for the spatial areas, , absorb fixed spatial characteristics, whether
observed or unobserved, disentangling the shock from many possible sources of omitted variable
bias. Time fixed effects,      , further neutralize any common trends and thus help ensure that the
relationships of interest are identified from idiosyncratic local shocks. In practice, the time fixed
effects may enter separately by subgroups of the spatial areas (hence the subscript r) to allow for
differential trends in subsamples of the data. An alternative (and potentially complimentary)
approach to capturing spatially-specific trends is to include a spatially-specific time trend.

The approach in (3) is explicitly reduced form, focusing on the effect of weather variation on the
outcome variable per se. Other studies use weather variation as an instrument to study non-
climatic relationships, such as the link between poverty and civil conflict (e.g., Miguel,
Satyanath, and Sergenti, 2004, which uses rainfall as an instrument for GDP growth; see Section
3.7 below). While such instrumental variable studies rely on various exclusion restrictions to
make causative inference about such relationships, the simple reduced-form analysis in (3) does
not. It simply identifies the net effect of the weather shock on an outcome of interest (e.g. the
effect of rainfall on conflict). Thus, the reduced-form panel approach makes relatively few
identification assumptions and allows unusually strong causative interpretation.

There are a number of methodological decisions that arise in implementing panel models. One
methodological choice concerns the inclusion of other time-varying observables, . Including
the     may absorb residual variation, hence producing more precise estimates. However, to the
extent that the    are endogenous to the weather variation, the “over-controlling” problem that
complicates cross-sectional estimation appears in the panel context as well. For example, if
national income is the outcome of interest, then controlling for investment rates would be
problematic if the climatic variables influence investment, directly or indirectly.
As will be reviewed in Section 3 below, effects of weather shocks appear across a very wide-
range of economic and political outcomes, which suggests substantial caution when including
explanatory variables or when asserting one particular mechanism as the unique causal path
through which weather affects another one of these outcomes. Best practices suggest including
only credibly exogenous regressors as control variables , such as terms of trade shocks for a
small economy and other weather variables that are not the main focus of the analysis.
Potentially endogenous regressors should typically only be included if there is a strong argument
that these variables are not affected by climate or can otherwise be modeled appropriately in a
credible structural context.

A related issue is the inclusion of lags of the dependent variable, . Including these lags biases
coefficient estimates in short panel models,4 yet excluding the lagged dependent variable may
also bias the estimates if it is an important part of the data generating process. While what
comprises a “short” panel will depend on the data generating process, Monte Carlo experiments
suggest that the bias can be non-negligible with panel lengths of T=10 or even T=15.5 The
median panel length of studies cited in this review is 38, whereas the 25th percentile is T=18 and
the 75th percentile is T=57, so in many cases, the panel is long enough that these biases can
probably be safely considered second-order. When the panels are short, however, estimating
models with lagged dependent variables is an active area of research, and it can be helpful to
show robustness to different estimation methods. For example, further lags of levels or
differences of the dependent variable can be used as instruments for ,        (Arellano and Bond
1991), external variables can also be used as instruments when available, and ,         can be
instrumented with long differences of y (Hahn, Hausman, and Kuersteiner 2007), though these
methods only work if the data generating process is correctly specified.6

A further implementation question involves the appropriate functional form for the weather
variables. One common approach measures            in “levels” (e.g. degrees Celsius for temperature
or millimeters for precipitation). In the panel set-up, the identification thus comes from
deviations in levels from the mean.7 Another common approach, aimed at revealing non-linear


4
  This bias declines at rate 1/T, where is the number of observations within a group (Nickell 1981). To see this
more intuitively, suppose that the data generating process is:                             Consider the within estimator
from the following regression:
                                                                                      ̅
where y is the outcome of interest, w is a weather variable, is the error term, denotes the mean of the outcome,
and so forth. By definition,       is correlated with      , and hence with .̅ Therefore,             is correlated with
the error term, and all the coefficients, including the estimated weather effect , will be biased. However, as panel
length approaches infinity, the contribution of        to ̅ approaches zero and this problem disappears.
5
  Bond (2013), see also Arellano and Bond (1991) and Bond (2002).
6
  Another possible check is to include interacted with time dummies, in place of the lagged dependent variable(s).
7
  Logs might also be used, with identification thus coming from percentage deviations. The disadvantage of this
approach for temperature data is that it requires strictly positive support and that different temperature units have
different 0s (i.e. 0 degrees Fahrenheit is equal to -17.8 degrees Centigrade). Log temperature thus may truncate the
data and further raises an issue where changing units from Fahrenheit to Centigrade can substantively change the
effects, considers the frequencies at which the weather realizations fall into different bins. For
example, temperature may be accounted for via several regressors, each counting the number of
days in the year with temperatures within pre-specified degree ranges (e.g., 0-5°C, 5-10°C, etc.).
Deschênes and Greenstone (2011) is an early example of this approach. The key advantage lies
in avoiding functional form specifications since this method is relatively non-parametric. Note
that this approach demands high-resolution data: if one aggregates across either space or time
before constructing the bins, extreme days could be averaged away, and if nonlinearities are
important, this smoothing of the data may produce misleading estimates.

A different approach emphasizes “anomalies”, where the weather variable is calculated as its
level difference from the within-spatial-area mean and divided by the within-spatial-area
standard deviation. The first part – the difference in mean – is already captured in a broad sense
by the panel model. The second part – scaling by the standard deviation – takes a particular view
of the underlying climate-economy model where level changes matter not in an absolute sense
but in proportion to an area’s usual variation.8

Alternatively, outcome-specific approaches may be preferred where existing research provides
guidance. For example, knowledge of biological processes in agriculture suggest refined
temperature measures such as “degree-days” for crop growth, possibly with crop-specific
thresholds (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts 2009). Another example comes from labor productivity
studies, where laboratory evidence finds temperature effects only beyond specific thresholds
(Seppanen, Fisk, and Faulkner 2003).

As a general rule, imposing specific functional forms on the data, such as crop degree-days, is
useful to the extent one has confidence in the specific model of the process that translates
weather to economic outcomes. The more agnostic about the model, the more general the
researcher would like to be about the functional form.

Panel studies also often examine heterogeneous effects of climatic variables. Heterogeneity may
exist with regard to the climatic variables themselves. For example, positive temperature shocks
may have worse effects conditional on high average temperature. Heterogeneity may also exist
with regard to non-climate variables. For example, poor institutions or poor market integration
could increase the sensitivity to climate shocks, and certain groups - such as the elderly, small
children, and pregnant women - may also be more sensitive to weather shocks. In practice, panel
models can incorporate such heterogeneity by interacting the vector of climate variables, ,
with a variable the captures the heterogeneity of interest or by running regressions separately for
subsamples of the data.

coefficient estimates. Using a Kelvin temperature scale (0 degrees Kelvin is – 273.2 degrees Centigrade) eliminates
negative values, although this change is not innocuous in the sense that it alters the functional form.
8
  It should be noted that precisely estimating a long-run standard deviation requires more data than precisely
estimating a mean – and moreover may be particularly sensitive to data problems like weather stations entering and
exiting the record (see Section 2.2.1). Thus, anomalies measures in contexts with limited data may be relatively
noisy, leading to attenuation bias that becomes exacerbated in the panel context.
There are two notable interpretative issues with the panel models that, while not calling into
question the experimental validity of the regression design, do raise questions about their
external validity for processes such as global warming. One interpretive challenge is whether
and how the effects of medium or long-run changes in climatic variables will differ from the
effects of short-run fluctuations. A second issue is that panel models, in focusing on
idiosyncratic local variation, also neutralize broader variation that may be of potential interest,
including general equilibrium effects the spill across spatial borders or are global in nature, like
effects on commodity prices. These issues will be discussed extensively in Section 4.1.

While this review will briefly consider cross-sectional econometric analyses as in (2), its primary
purpose is to discuss the recent climate-economy literature that uses panel methodologies, as in
(3). With this focus in mind, Appendix Table 1 categorizes the panel studies cited in this review.
In addition to summarizing which weather variables and outcome variables are investigated, the
table indicates each panel study’s design according to (i) functional forms for the weather
variables, (ii) temporal resolution, (iii) spatial resolution, (iv) non-weather regressors, (v)
heterogeneity, and (vi) error structure.

2.2 What data are used to identify weather shocks?
This section outlines sources of weather data that have been used in econometric analyses. It
highlights the relative advantages and disadvantages of different types of weather data and then
discusses aggregation approaches – i.e. how one can aggregate underlying weather
measurements into variables that can be used for economic analysis.

There are currently four principal types of weather data: ground station data, gridded data,
satellite data, and reanalysis data. The most basic type of data are from ground stations, which
typically directly observe temperature, precipitation, and other weather variables such as wind
speed and direction, humidity, and barometric pressure. Gridded data provide more complete
coverage by interpolating station information over a grid. Satellite data use satellite-based
readings to infer various weather variables, and finally reanalysis data combine information
from ground stations, satellites, weather balloons, and other inputs with a climate model to
estimate weather variables across a grid. The following review will focus on temperature and
precipitation data.9 Interested readers should also consult Auffhammer et al. (2013) for a related
review and more in-depth coverage of these issues. Appendix Table 2 lists the weather datasets
used by each of the panel studies discussed in this review.

2.2.1 Ground stations
When a weather station is present on the ground in a given location, it will typically provide a
highly accurate measurement of that exact location’s climate.10 One repository for station data is

9
  Other weather events – such as windstorms – involve measurement methods that are too complex to be discussed
in this data overview. The interested reader is referred to Hsiang (2010).
10
   There could still be measurement error, for example if strong winds prevent rainfall or snow from entering the
mouth of a gauge (Goodison, Louie, and Yang 1998).
the Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN).11 For regions of the world with extensive
ground station networks and good historical coverage, such as the United States, Canada, and
Europe, as well as some developing countries, ground station data can be used even at a fairly
disaggregated level of analysis. In contexts where ground station coverage is sparse, these data
may still offer important advantages for locations near the station.

While ground station data in general provides highly reliable weather measures for the areas
where stations are located, there are some issues researchers should be aware of. Most
importantly, entry and exit of weather stations is common, especially in poorer countries which
face more severe constraints to their weather monitoring budgets.12 Figure 1 shows how the
number of stations in the Terrestrial Air Temperature database, which incorporates the GHCN
and a variety of other sources, changes over time (Willmott, Matsuura, and Legates 2010). The
decline in stations around 1990 resulted from the collapse of the Soviet Union, which funded
many weather stations in Eastern Europe, Africa, and elsewhere.13

While the exit and entry of stations in the GHCN data does not appear to substantially affect
aggregate conclusions about overall global increases in temperature (Rohde 2012), changes in
ground stations can potentially matter for estimations of (3) to the extent that they substantially
increase measurement error.14 For example, if a weather station exits from a warmer part of a
county, temperature in that county may erroneously appear to decrease. If the error is
uncorrelated with the dependent variable, this will be essentially classical measurement error,
and there will be attenuation bias reducing the estimate of in equation (3); if exit and entry of
stations is correlated with the dependent variable of interest, then biases of unknown sign could
result. In any case, correlations between ground station entry and exit and dependent variables
are testable and hence may be assessed.15 If such correlations do appear, the researcher can
explicitly address the concern raised, for example by using satellite data as a robustness check.




11
   Note that while the GHCN tries to include as much ground station data as possible, it is not necessarily an
exhaustive collection. Some countries consider their weather data to be proprietary, and there are extensive
collections of historical data available for some regions that have yet to be digitized. The National Climatic Data
Center (NCDC) is a useful online resource for downloading station data: http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-
access/land-based-station-data/land-based-datasets. Station data can also be found through other organizations, such
as NASA’s GISS.
12
   An excellent animation of station entry and exit can be found on the webpage “Visualizations of Monthly Average
Air Temperature Time Series (1900 - 2008)” (University of Delaware).
http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/html_pages/Global2_Ts_2009/Global_t_ts_2009.html
13
   More subtle changes can occur simply due to replacement of the weather sensors or slight movements in the
physical location of the weather station. The current (version 3) GHCN monthly weather dataset incorporates an
automatic procedure for detecting and correcting these changes by comparing a time series with its nearest
neighbors (see Menne and Williams 2009), although no such correction is made for daily data.
14
   To address concerns about observable station entry and exit, Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011) and Schlenker and
Roberts (2009) develop an approach that addresses station entry and attrition by estimating missing values in the
station record and then using a balanced panel constructed from the “patched” station data.
15
   See for example Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), Appendix Table 15, which examines ground station coverage.
2.2.2 Gridded data
One important challenge posed by ground station data is their incomplete coverage, particularly
in poor countries or areas with sparse population density. As a result, climate scientists have
developed a variety of gridded data products, which interpolate among the ground stations. The
result is a balanced panel of weather data for every point on a grid. Since gridded data offer a
balanced panel, they are frequently used by economists in constructing weather data.

The most frequently used gridded datasets in the studies reviewed here are the global
temperature and precipitation data produced by the Climatic Research Unit (CRU) at the
University of East Anglia and by Willmott, Matsuura and Legates (2010) at the University of
Delaware (UDEL). Both have a spatial resolution of 0.5 x 0.5 degrees, but the station records and
extrapolation algorithms used differ somewhat. CRU contains data on monthly minimum and
maximum temperature, while the Delaware data provides the monthly average temperature. A
more recently created gridded dataset for temperature is the NOAA GHCN_CAMS Land
Temperature Analysis, and the Global Precipitation Climatology Center provides gridded
precipitation data. There are also gridded monthly datasets for specific regions, such as the
Parameter-Elevation Regressions on Independent Slopes Model (PRISM) dataset for the United
States (Daly, Neilson, and Phillips 1994).16

In general, gridded datasets are a good source of temperature data for economic analysis in that
they provide a balanced panel that potentially adjusts for issues like missing station data,
elevation, and the urban heat island bias in a reasonable way. Nevertheless, there are several
issues that one should be aware of when using gridded data. First, different interpolation schemes
can produce different estimates, particularly in short time periods and particularly for
precipitation. Precipitation has a far greater spatial variation than temperature, especially in
rugged areas, and thus is more difficult to interpolate.17 This issue is important for middle-
income and developing countries, where underlying ground station data are sparse.18 When using
gridded data products in these contexts, it is useful to check for robustness across datasets,
particularly if precipitation is the main variable of interest.

A second challenge concerns cases where there are more grid cells than underlying stations. This
issue would not necessarily compromise the analysis if the gridded data are aggregated to large
enough units (e.g. countries), but it can pose challenges for inference regarding smaller

16
   Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher (2006) used PRISM and daily station data to develop an innovative dataset of
daily gridded weather data for the U.S., which has subsequently been used in a variety of applications.
17
   Interested readers are referred to Rudolf and Schneider (2005), Rudolf et al. (1994), and World Meterological
Organization (1985) for a more detailed discussion.
18
   Auffhammer et al. (2013) document how country average measures of temperature and precipitation compare
across these datasets. For average long-run temperature and precipitation between 1960 and 1999, the correlation for
temperature is 0.998 and for precipitation it is 0.985. When considering annual deviations from mean, these
correlations fall to 0.92 for temperature and 0.70 for precipitation. The correlation for precipitation is lower because
precipitation is less smooth across space, which makes the extrapolation algorithm more critical. Auffhammer et al.
note that there are significant regional differences – the precipitation deviation correlation is 0.96 for the U.S. and
thus presumably much lower for many middle income and developing countries.
geographic units, particularly in areas with sparse coverage such as Africa. Users of the data in
areas with sparse coverage should be aware of these issues, particularly when using fine
geographic units and particularly for precipitation, which is much harder to measure accurately
and much more variable than temperature. In addition to attenuation bias, it is also important to
account for the underlying spatial correlation resulting from both the weather and the
extrapolation algorithms.

2.2.3 Satellite measurements
The third source for weather data is satellite measurements. Satellite datasets, beginning in 1979,
include those produced by the University of Alabama Huntsville (UAH) and Remote Sensing
Systems (RSS). These data products are available at a 2.5 x 2.5 degree resolution, and hence are
considerably more aggregated than the datasets discussed above. If data are only required since
the early 2000s, newer satellite sensors allow significantly higher resolution to be achieved.19

While satellite data can provide important weather information for areas with a limited ground
network, satellite data are not necessarily a panacea. Satellites were launched relatively recently,
so their data does not extend back nearly as far historically as other datasets. Furthermore, an
individual ground station is more accurate than the satellite data for that particular location, in
part because satellites do not directly measure temperature or precipitation but rather makes
inferences from electromagnetic reflectivity in various wavelength bands. Lastly, a satellite-
based series is not drawn from a single satellite, but rather from a series of satellites. Sensors
have changed subtly over the years, and within a particular satellite corrections are needed due to
subtle changes in the satellite’s orbit over time and other factors.20

2.2.4 Reanalysis Data
The final type of data, reanalysis data, combines information from ground stations, satellites, and
other sources with a climate model to create gridded weather data products. The key difference
between reanalysis and gridded data is that rather than use a statistical procedure to interpolate
between observations, a climate model is used. Prominent examples of reanalysis products used
in the panel literature are those produced by the National Center for Environmental Prediction
(NCEP) (Kistler et al. 2001), the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasting, and
Ngo-Duc, Polcher and Laval (2005). While reanalysis may offer some improvements in regions
with sparse data, it is not obviously better than interpolated gridded data, since the climate
models it uses (like any model) are considerable simplifications of the climate reality.

Auffhammer et al. (2013) provide correlations between CRU and UDEL gridded data and NCEP
reanalysis data. Correlations are generally high for temperature. Correlations for precipitation,

19
   For example, NASA’s TRMM Multi-satellite Precipitation Analysis (TMPA), available at 0.25 degree resolution,
GPCP 1DD precipitation analysis available at 1 degree daily resolution, NOAA’s CMORPH data at 0.072 degree
resolution for 30 minute time steps, and MODIS data on land surface temperature and emissivity available at 1000m
resolution.
20
   For more information on these datasets, see the Third Assessment Report of the IPCC (Houghton et al. 2001) and
Karl et al. (2006).
however, fall dramatically when examining deviations from mean, especially in poor countries
where the underlying ground station data is sparse. Readers should consult Auffhammer et al.
(2013) for a more detailed discussion. For analysis at high spatial resolutions, particularly when
underlying weather stations are sparse, the terrain is rugged, or precipitation is the main variable
of interest, consulting multiple datasets that have been constructed using different approaches
provides a useful robustness check. Alternatively, when interested in precipitation in areas with
sparse ground station coverage, a more promising approach may be to focus on geographic areas
near ground stations rather than trying to interpolate.

2.2.5 Aggregating weather data into variables for analysis
Once one has an underlying source of weather data, the data typically need to be aggregated to
an economically meaningful level. Aggregation may be motivated by the substantive question,
such as an interest in country-level effects, or because economic data is not available at the same
resolution as the weather data. Note that aggregating to larger spatial areas may also be
advantageous in areas with sparse ground stations, where gridded data may otherwise give a
false sense of precision or spatial independence.

One approach is to aggregate spatially; that is, to overlay administrative or other boundaries with
the gridded weather dataset, and take a simple area-weighted average of weather variables within
the administrative unit, which can be done easily using GIS software. However, this approach
will lead large areas with little economic activity and sparse populations (such as deserts, rain
forests, or the Arctic) to dominate the weather averages of large spatial units such as the United
States, Russia, and Brazil. A second approach is therefore to aggregate using a fixed set of
population weights, so that the relevant concept is the average weather experienced by a person
in the administrative area, not the average weather experienced by a place. The difference can
matter, particularly for large and diverse geographies: in the year 2000, the average area-
weighted mean temperature for the United States was 8.3C, whereas the average population-
weighted mean temperature for the United States was 13.1C, the difference being driven by the
many cold, sparsely populated areas in Alaska and the north central United States. Which
method to use depends on the context: for analyzing agriculture, area weights may be preferable;
for analyzing the impact on labor force productivity, a fixed set of population weights may be
preferable.21

2.2.6 Climate Projection Data
Finally, in order to assess the potential impacts of future climate change, some studies have
combined weather impacts estimated from historical data with data that predict future climate
change. Estimates of future climate change rely on two major components: a time path of GHG
emissions and a General Circulation Model (GCM), which is a mathematical model simulating
the Earth's climate system. There are many such estimates; more detailed information about

21
  Note that aggregation can also create tension with the capacity to estimate non‐linear effects since aggregation
can smooth out non‐linearities across space or over time (see further discussion in Section 2.1.2).
these models can be found in the IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (Nakicenovic et
al. 2000) and more information about their use in economics can be found in Auffhammer et al.
(2013) and Burke et al. (2011).


3 The New Weather‐Economy Literature
This section provides an overview of the relationship between weather fluctuations and various
outcomes, including aggregate output, agriculture, labor productivity, industrial output, health,
energy, political stability, and conflict. It focuses on studies employing the panel methodology
outlined in Section 2. We also briefly summarize some studies using alternative methodologies
in order to provide insight into how the panel estimates relate to the broader climate-economy
literature.

Overall, the studies discussed in this section document that temperature, precipitation, and
extreme weather events exert economically meaningful and statistically significant influences on
a variety of economic outcomes. These impacts illustrate the multifaceted nature of the weather-
economy relationship, with numerous applications for understanding historical, present, and
future economic outcomes and possible policy responses. For example, the effects of weather
variables on mortality rates, labor productivity, energy demand, and agricultural output can
inform investments and policy design around public health, air conditioning, energy
infrastructure, and agricultural technologies. Moreover these studies can help inform classic
issues of economic development and especially the role of geographic features in influencing
development paths. Finally, these analyses may inform estimates of the economic costs of future
climatic change. The possibility of future climatic change has been a primary motive for the
recent, rapid growth of this literature; these applications are discussed in detail in Section 4.

3.1 Aggregate Output

3.1.1 Prior literature
Although this review focuses on panel-estimates based on weather variation, it is important to
have a basic understanding of the previous literature and debates that inspired these more recent
studies. A negative correlation between temperature and per-capita income has been noted at
least since Ibn Khaldun’s 14th Century Muqaddimah (Gates 1967). Claims that high
temperatures cause low income appear there and continue as centerpieces of prominent
subsequent works, including Montesquieu’s The Spirit of Laws (1748) and Huntington’s
Civilization and Climate (1915), both of which hinge on the idea that high temperatures reduce
labor productivity. Numerous contemporary historical analyses relate economic success to
temperate climates through advantageous agricultural technologies (e.g., Jones 1981; Crosby
1986; Diamond 1997). Modern empirical work has tested the temperature-income relationship,
initially using cross-sectional evidence and more recently using the panel models featured in this
review.
Cross-country empirical analyses show a strong negative relationship between hot climates and
income per-capita. For example, Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999) show that countries located
in the tropics (i.e. between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn) are 50% poorer
per-capita in 1950 and grow 0.9 percentage points slower per year between 1965 and 1990.
These findings have been further associated empirically with malarial prevalence and
unproductive agricultural technologies (Sachs 2001; Sachs 2003), as well as the frequency of
frost-days that may have beneficial agricultural and/or health effects (Masters and McMillan
2001). Using temperature directly, Dell, Jones and Olken (2009) show in the world sample in
the year 2000 that countries are on average 8.5% poorer per-capita per 1°C warmer.

Other cross-sectional studies examine climate variation within countries, harnessing climatic
differences that are not entangled with cross-country differences and exist within more consistent
environments, institutionally or otherwise. Nordhaus (2006) uses a global database of economic
activity with a resolution of 1° latitude by 1° longitude. Controlling for country fixed effects,
this study finds that 20% of the income differences between Africa and the world’s rich
industrial regions can be explained by geographic variables, which include temperature and
precipitation as well as elevation, soil quality, and distance from the coast. Dell, Jones and
Olken (2009) use municipal-level data for 12 countries in the Americas and find that a
statistically significant negative relationship between average temperature and income persists
within countries – and even within states (provinces) within countries. The drop in per-capita
income per 1°C falls from 8.5% (across countries) to 1-2% (within countries or within states),
and they find little or no impact of average precipitation levels either across or within countries.
Overall, geographic variation (temperature, precipitation, elevation, slope and distance to coast)
explains a remarkable 61% of the variation in incomes at the municipal level across the 7,684
municipalities studied in these 12 countries.

In general, the cross-sectional evidence finds a strong, negative relationship between temperature
and economic activity, with less clear evidence on precipitation. Of course, as discussed in
Section 2.1.1, cross-sectional estimates may conflate climate with other long-run characteristics
of an economy, such as its institutions. To more directly isolate contemporaneous impacts of
temperature, we turn to panel estimates.

3.1.2 Panel‐based estimates
Panel studies exploit the exogeneity of cross-time weather variation, allowing for causative
identification. We begin by examining those studies that focus on average weather across a year
(e.g. temperature and precipitation), and then consider those studies that examine more extreme
weather events, such as droughts and windstorms.

Studies on temperature and precipitation
In a world sample from 1950 to 2003, Dell, Jones and Olken (2012) examine how annual
variation in temperature and precipitation affects per-capita income. They show that being 1°C
warmer in a given year reduces per-capita income by 1.4%, but only in poor countries.
Moreover, estimating a model with lags of temperature, they find that this large effect is not
reversed once the temperature shock is over, suggesting that temperature is affecting growth
rates, not just income levels.22 Growth effects, which compound over time, have potentially first-
order consequences for the scale of economic damages over the longer run, greatly exceeding
level effects on income, and are thus an important area for further modeling and research (see
Section 4.2). Estimating long-difference models (see Section 4.1.2), Dell et al. further find that
over 10-15 year time scales temperature shocks have similar effects to annual shocks, although
statistical precision decreases. Variation in mean precipitation levels is not found to affect the
path of per-capita income. Temperature shocks appear to have little effect in rich countries,
although estimates for rich countries are not statistically precise.

Hsiang (2010) shows similar findings using annual variation in a sample of 28 Caribbean-basin
countries over the 1970-2006 period. National output falls 2.5 percent per 1°C warming. This
study further examines output effects by time of year and shows that positive temperature shocks
have negative effects on income only when they occur during the hottest season. Mean rainfall
variation is controlled for in this study but results are not reported.

Barrios, Bertinelli and Strobl (2010) focus on Sub-Saharan Africa over the 1960-1990 period,
using a subsample of 22 African and 38 non-African countries and weather variation occurring
across five year periods. The authors find that higher rainfall is associated with faster growth in
these Sub-Saharan African countries but not elsewhere. They estimate that worsening rainfall
conditions in Africa since the 1960s can explain 15-40% of the per-capita income gap between
Sub-Saharan Africa and the rest of the developing world by the year 2000. Unlike the majority
of studies, which consider the effect of precipitation and temperature levels, this study uses
weather anomalies (changes from country means, normalized by country standard deviations).
Other studies, like Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004) and Dell, Jones and Olken (2012) find
that anomalies-based analyses tend to provide broadly similar results to levels-based analyses
when predicting national income growth, but with weaker statistical precision.

In addition to studies focused on income effects per se, other studies use weather variation as
instruments for national income, harnessing this source of income variation to test theories about
how income affects other outcomes, such as conflict or political change. Leaving the ultimate
objective of these studies aside for the moment (we will return to them below), the first stage
regressions provide additional information on the income effects of weather variation. Miguel,
Satyanath and Sergenti (2004), seeking to explain civil conflict, study 41 African countries from
1981-1999 and show that annual per-capita income growth is positively predicted by current and


22
   Bansal and Ochoa (2011) examine the empirical relationship between a country’s economic growth and
worldwide average temperature shocks, as opposed to a country’s particular temperature shock. They find that, on
average, a 1 degree C global temperature increase reduces growth by about 0.9 percentage points, with effects
largest for countries located near the equator. The global time variation in temperature thus appears to produce
broadly similar results to Dell, Jones and Olken (2012).
lagged rainfall growth, while not controlling for temperature.23 However, this relationship
appears weaker after 2000 (Miguel and Satyanath 2011). Bruckner and Ciccone (2011), in their
study of democratization, also find that negative rainfall shocks lower income in sub-Saharan
Africa. Finally, Burke and Leigh (2010) use precipitation and temperature as instruments for per-
capita income growth to explain democratization, studying a large sample with 121 countries
over the 1963-2001 period. In their analyses, temperature is a strong predictor of income while
precipitation is weak.

Studies of extreme weather events
In addition to studies of average annual precipitation, a number of studies examine extreme
weather events, such as storms and severe droughts.

Several studies examine windstorms by constructing meteorological databases that track storm
paths. For example, Hsiang and Narita (2012) use a detailed global windstorm dataset and
investigate the effect of windstorms across 233 countries from 1950-2008. They find that higher
wind speeds present substantially higher economic losses. Hsiang’s (2010) study of 28
Caribbean nations shows no average effect on income from cyclones, though there are significant
negative impacts in some sectors (such as agriculture, tourism, retail, and mining) but positive
impacts in construction (presumably due to its role in reconstruction).

Hsiang and Jina (2013) also find evidence for growth effects from windstorms, rather than level
effects. Using annual fluctuations in windstorms, they find that the effects of cyclones reduce
growth rates, with effects that cumulate over time. On net, they estimate that the annual growth
rate of world GDP declined by 1.3 percentage points due to cyclones during the period 1970-
2008.

Looking within countries, Deryugina (2011) examines U.S. counties and finds no effect on
county earnings ten years after a hurricane, a result supported by large government transfers into
the affected counties after these events (suggesting that there may be a substantial loss in locally
produced income, with consumption effects dampened by the transfer). Anttila-Hughes and
Hsiang (2011) study a panel of provinces in the Philippines, and show that local exposure to a
typhoon reduces household incomes in the province on average by 6.7%.

Additional studies examine “economic losses” as the dependent variable, rather than looking at
the income path itself. To measure such losses in cross-country studies, authors use the
Emergency Events database (EM-DAT), which includes fatalities and direct economic loss
estimates that countries self-report.Yang (2008) finds that stronger storms, as measured from
meteorological data from 1970-2002, lead to higher economic losses (damage from the EM-DAT
database as a fraction of GDP) and greater deaths and injuries, as well as larger international aid


23
  Miguel and Satyanath (2011) further show in the same sample that current and lagged rainfall levels (as opposed
to growth) predict income growth.
flows in response.24 Although not panel studies in the sense of equation (3), studies focused on
the U.S. also find substantially increased economic losses with increasing storm severity
(Nordhaus 2010; Mendelsohn, Emanuel, and Chonabayashi 2011). For example, Nordhaus
(2010) estimates the relationship between wind speed and damages, finding that annual hurricane
costs in the U.S. from 1950-2008 averaged 0.07% of GDP but with high variability; Hurricane
Katrina made 2005 an outlier, with damages nearing 1% of GDP.

Integrating across the weather studies above, it appears that an unusually hot year is associated
with substantially lower income growth in poor countries. This finding is consistent with the
strong negative cross-sectional relationship between temperature and per-capita income. The
studies also show that unusually low precipitation has had negative impacts on income per-capita
in Africa, with less clear effects elsewhere. Studies find large effects of windstorms on local
income but generally smaller effects on national income, although damages from windstorms are
highly convex in wind speed.

3.2 Agriculture
Given the natural relationship between the environment and agricultural productivity –
temperature and water are direct inputs into the biological processes of plant growth --
agriculture has been the focus of much of the existing research on climate impacts. It is also the
area where many of the core methodological contributions occurred.

3.2.1 Experimental and cross‐sectional estimates
The early debate over the likely impacts of climate on agriculture was characterized by two
approaches. One approach, frequently denoted the production function approach, specifies a
relationship between climate and agricultural output, and uses this estimate to simulate the
impacts of changing climate (Adams 1989; Kaiser et al. 1993; Adams et al. 1995).25 While the
production function is often calibrated through the use of experimental data, it has been criticized
for not realistically modeling real farmer behavior in real settings. For example, many studies do
not allow farmers to adopt new crops when the temperature input into the production function
changes, nor do they allow farmers to switch their cultivated land to livestock or non-farm use.


24
   A number of studies also use the EM-DAT dataset to construct the weather events and then use this data to study
the impacts of droughts and windstorms on national income (Raddatz 2009; Loayza et al. 2012; Fomby, Ikeda, and
Loayza 2013). Given that the inclusion criteria for the events dataset is that 10 or more people were killed, 100 or
more people were affected, an official state of emergency was declared, or a call for international assistance was
made, a challenge with this approach is that it selects to some extent on events that have notable economic impact.
This approach may then create a bias in the direction of finding larger effects and thus these results may not
generalize to the average windstorm, drought, etc. For windstorms, meteorological-based methods can help deal
with this concern. A promising direction for future research on droughts would construct a drought definition based
solely on exogenous environmental variables such as precipitation, temperature, evapotranspiration, and other
exogenous measures of soil moisture balance.
25
   See Adams et al. (1995), Adams et al. (1998), Kaiser et al. (1993), and Liverman and O'Brien (1991). Rosenzweig
and Iglesias (1994) provides a compilation of various other studies, and the IPCC Second Assessment Report (Bruce,
Yi, and Haites 1996) provides a discussion.
To address these concerns, Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw (1994) developed a second
approach, which they called the Ricardian approach, that instead used cross-sectional regressions
with land values to recover the net impacts of climate on agricultural productivity. By analyzing
farm land prices as a function of climate and a host of other characteristics, they estimated that
the impacts of climate change would be much smaller than those estimated by the production
function approach and might even be positive.

While Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw (1994) remains a major methodological contribution, it
has been subject to critiques by Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher (2005) and others. Schlenker,
Hanemann, and Fisher, for example, show that it is critical in the hedonic approach to account
for irrigation. In particular, in estimating a cross-sectional relationship like equation (2) for
irrigated areas, which transport water from other locations, the localized climate is not the key
determinant of production. Instead, water supply is a more complicated function of precipitation
in the overall supply area for the irrigation system, and since this is not measured, it biases the
coefficients in (2).26 When Schlenker, Hanemann and Fisher estimate the hedonic model for
dryland counties alone, they find robustly negative estimates, similar to those from earlier
estimates.

3.2.2 Panel estimates
Deschênes and Greenstone (2007), in an important methodological contribution, argue that the
cross-sectional hedonic approach could be biased by unobserved determinants of agricultural
productivity that are correlated with climate. Instead, Deschênes and Greenstone argued that one
could exploit year-to-year within county variation in temperature and precipitation to estimate
whether agricultural profits are affected when the year is hotter or wetter than normal, as in
equation (3). They find no statistically significant relationship between weather and U.S.
agricultural profits, corn yields, or soybean yields, and further argue that if short-run fluctuations
have no impact, then in the long run when adaptation is possible, climate change will plausibly
have little impact or could even be beneficial. These findings have subsequently been questioned
by Fisher et al. (2012), who point to data errors and argue that when these are corrected the
fluctuations approach indeed finds a negative impact of climate change on U.S. agriculture,
which is further consistent with studies examining non-linear effects of extremely high
temperatures on U.S. agriculture (see below). Nevertheless, the methodological contribution
remains extremely important.27

Impacts on developing countries estimated using panel models such as (3) typically find
consistently negative impacts of bad weather shocks on agricultural output. Schlenker and Lobell
(2010) use weather fluctuations to estimate a model of yield response in Sub-Saharan Africa,
finding that higher temperatures tend to reduce yields. Similarly, Guiteras (2009) estimates that

26
   In areas that depend on snowmelt, the extent of snow and timing of snowmelt may create further complexities
when attempting to link local water availability to local climate.
27
   Deschênes and Greenstone (2012), in their reply to Fisher et al. (2012), summarize the implied estimates once the
errors are corrected.
higher temperatures in a given year reduce agricultural output in India, and Feng, Krueger and
Oppenheimer (2010) document that high temperatures reduce agricultural output at the state
level in Mexico. Using a panel dataset that provides detailed data on rice farms in a variety of
Asian countries, Welch et al. (2010) estimate that higher minimum temperature reduces yields,
whereas higher maximum temperature increases yields. On net, their estimates suggest that
Asian rice yields will decline under a moderate warming scenario. Levine and Yang (2006)
show using a panel of Indonesian districts that more rainfall leads to more rice production.

A number of additional studies have established negative effects of low rainfall on agricultural
output or rural income in developing countries as a precursor to testing other hypotheses.
Examples include Paxson (1992), which uses negative rainfall shocks to test for the Permanent
Income Hypothesis and shows impacts of rainfall on rural incomes; Jayachandran (2006), which
focuses on the determinants of labor supply elasticities and shows that more rainfall in Indian
districts leads to higher crop yields and higher agricultural wages; Yang and Choi (2007), which
uses rainfall shocks to test for international remittances as insurance and shows impacts of
rainfall on rural incomes in the Philippines; and Hidalgo et al. (2010), who in their study of land
invasions estimate that rainfall deviations in Brazil lower agricultural incomes, with a one
standard deviation change in rainfall reducing income by around 4%.

The recent literature has also highlighted several issues that are useful for evaluating potential
future impacts of global climate change, a topic we return to in much more detail in Section 4.
One issue is the importance of accounting flexibly for non-linearities. For example, Schlenker
and Roberts (2009) examine a panel model of U.S. agricultural yields using daily temperature
data. Their approach allows flexible estimation of non-linear relationships between yields and
temperature, using very fine (1 or 3 degrees C) temperature bins, polynomials, or piecewise
splines. They find a threshold in output effects starting between 29 – 32 degrees C, depending on
the crop, with temperature being moderately beneficial at temperatures lower than the threshold
and sharply harmful above the threshold. Understanding non-linearities becomes important when
considering the impact of global climate change because a right-shift in the distribution of
average temperature causes a disproportionate increase in the number of very hot days (see
Section 4.1.2 below for more discussion of this issue). Globally, Lobell, Schlenker and Costa-
Roberts (2011) use a fixed-effects model as in (3), augmented with quadratic terms to account
for nonlinearities in weather and find similar nonlinear effects of higher temperatures.

Another key issue in using estimates from short-run weather fluctuations to shed light on the
long-run impacts of climate change is assessing how much adaptation is likely to occur. (We
discuss these issues in more detail in Section 4.1.2.) On the one hand, economic historians have
pointed to the ability of agricultural producers to successfully adapt to new climates in the past.
For example, as North American settlement advanced northwards and westwards in the 19th
century, wheat started to be farmed in areas once thought too dry or cold farm, with the
innovation of new grain varieties (Olmstead and Rhode 2011). The possibility of adaptation was
a major argument for the approach of Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw (1994), since
presumably changes in land values would incorporate future adaptation effects. However, in the
context of the American Dust Bowl, Hornbeck (2012) finds limited evidence for adaptation
through changes in land use. More recently, Burke and Emerick (2013) also find limited
evidence for adaptation in U.S. agriculture: long-difference estimates of changes in output on
changes in temperature (as in equation (8) below), estimated for the period between 1980 and
2000, appear statistically similar to the impact of annual temperature fluctuations.

Fishman (2011) examines the potential of irrigation as a mitigating mechanism for climate
change in the Indian context. To do so, he runs a panel specification interacting highly detailed
weather variables with measures of access to irrigation, which change over time in his sample.
Overall, he finds that the distribution of rainfall matters as well as the total amount of rainfall –
i.e. conditional on the total amount of rain, the number of rainless days reduces yields. Irrigation
substantially mutes this effect, though it mitigates little of the impact of higher temperatures.

Agricultural producers may also respond to a negative weather shock by moving elsewhere.
Munshi (2003) documents that when rainfall is lower in a given Mexican community, it sends
more migrants to the United States over the coming years. Feng, Krueger and Oppenheimer
(2010) use temperature and precipitation variation in panel data for Mexican states as
instruments for crop yields, and then look at the implied relationship between crop yields and
emigration to the United States. They find that lower crop yields (predicted from temperature
and precipitation shocks) increase emigration, with the reduced-form effects suggesting that the
effects are predominantly driven by temperature shocks. Gray and Mueller (2012) study internal
migration in Bangladesh from 1994-2010. They show modest migration responses to flooding
but large migration due to rain-related crop failure. Examining internal migration in the U.S.,
Hornbeck (2012) finds substantial migration out of areas affected by the Dust Bowl in the 1930s.
More recently, Feng, Oppenheimer and Schlenker (2012) examine the 1970-2009 period, and
find outmigration from corn and soybean producing areas where yields have fallen due to
changes in weather patterns, particularly for young adults.28

The scientific literature has examined forestry changes, which may be particularly important to
the extent that forests play an important role in the global carbon balance and preserve
biodiversity. These studies often use longitudinal data but do not always exploit panel
regressions to estimate the effects of temperature or precipitation shocks within spatial areas.
For example, longitudinal data has established substantial increases in tree mortality throughout
the Western United States, with suggested links to warming and precipitation declines (Van
Mantgem et al. 2009). Longitudinal data has also shown that tree deaths are strongly related to
28
  While migration appears to be an important adaptation channel, it can potentially pose a complication for
interpreting panel-based estimates. In many datasets, we know where people are at the time of the survey, but not
necessarily where they were previously, so endogenous migration may have influenced the measured economic
outcomes (such as average health or GDP). To the extent that one is interested in effects allowing for such
migration, the measured response will still be appropriate. Otherwise, the use of data that incorporates place of birth,
such as census data, can be helpful since one can analyze the data at the place of birth level, which removes the
problems of endogenous migration.
low rainfall levels on the Iberian Peninsula region (Carnicer et al. 2011), although the variation
used for estimation is across both space and time. Related work has shown experimentally that
warming weakens trees’ drought resistance (Adams et al. 2009).29 Westerling et al. (2006) use
panel data for the Western U.S. to show that wildfire increases within sub-regions are closely
related to shifts in local temperature and precipitation, particularly as they relate to earlier
springs and hence longer and drier summer seasons.

In summary, panel estimates tend to predict economically and statistically significant negative
impacts of hotter temperatures on agricultural output. These impacts are pronounced when
temperatures increase beyond a crop-specific threshold. They appear in rich countries such as the
U.S. – particularly in the rain-fed eastern part of the country - and are also important in poor
countries, where agriculture is a large share of aggregate output. Evidence also suggests that
rainfall and droughts impact agricultural output, although these effects can be complicated to
disentangle and may be mitigated in the presence of large-scale irrigation systems. The negative
effects of low rainfall on agriculture in developing counties appear consistently in developing
countries, perhaps due to lower levels of irrigation. Outmigration appears to be a common
response to declines in local agricultural productivity.

3.3 Labor productivity
The idea that temperature affects labor productivity and cognitive functioning dates back at least
to the Ancient Greeks.30 Montesquieu placed labor-productivity effects of temperature at the
center of his reasoning about development in The Spirit of Laws (1748), and the geographer
Ellsworth Huntington in Civilization and Climate (1915) not only argued that climate was central
to culture, but also presented early empirical evidence showing a link between labor productivity
and temperature in micro data. Specifically, he documented daily worker productivity for a
number of types of workers (e.g., “operatives in cotton factories” in South Carolina, and “cigar
makers” in Florida), and showed that productivity was highest in spring and fall when
temperatures are moderate, and lowest in summer and winter when temperatures are more
extreme.

Modern lab experiments have investigated the impact of temperature on productivity. Subjects
are typically randomly assigned to rooms of varying temperatures and asked to perform
cognitive and physical tasks. Examples of tasks shown to respond adversely to hot temperatures
in laboratory settings include estimation of time, vigilance, and higher cognitive functions, such
as mental arithmetic and simulated flight (Grether 1973; Seppanen, Fisk, and Faulkner 2003).
Surveying multiple experimental studies, for example, Seppanen, Fisk and Faulkner (2003)
conclude that there is a productivity loss in various cognitive tasks of about 2 percent per degree
C for temperatures over 25 degrees C.

29
  Research relating forest loss to drought and warming is reviewed by Allen et al. (2010).
30
  The Greeks and subsequent societies believed that the body was composed of four elements (humors), and that
temperature was a frequent reason for an imbalance in the humors.
Observational and experimental studies also show a strong relationship between temperature and
the productivity of factory, call center, and office workers, as well as students. Niemelä et al.
(2002) examine the productivity of call center workers in different ambient temperatures, which
vary both due to external weather and due to changes in cooling technology. The authors find
that, within the range of temperatures from 22 to 29 degrees C, each additional degree C is
associated with a reduction of about 1.8 percent in labor productivity. Other studies of call center
workers also find a link between indoor climate and performance, with high temperatures (e.g.
above 24-25 degrees C) generally associated with worse performance. They also note that the
relationship is complex and find that other aspects (e.g. humidity, amount of outdoor air, carbon
dioxide levels) have complex interactions with temperature within the normal temperature zone
(see, e.g., Federspiel et al. 2004; Tham 2004). A meta-analysis of these studies concludes that
increasing temperature from 23 to 30 degrees C reduces productivity by about 9 percent
(Seppanen, Fisk, and Lei 2006). For students, Wargocki and Wyon (2007) run an experiment
with children between ten and twelve years old in classroom settings. Classroom temperatures
were randomly varied each week between warm (around 25 degrees C) and normal (around 20-
21 degrees C) using a crossover design, and the authors found improvements on a variety of
numerical tasks in the cooler temperatures. Lee, Gino and Staats (2012) show using bank
workers in Japan that productivity appears highest in days where outside weather is less
attractive for leisure activities, arguing that nice outside weather is a distraction.

For the economy at large, Graff Zivin and Neidell (forthcoming) show using a panel that weather
fluctuations lead to substantial changes in labor supply. Looking across the United States, Graff
Zivin and Neidell use a panel data specification similar to equation (3), examining the link
between shocks to temperature and labor supply as measured by time-use surveys. They find that
hot days reduce labor supply in industries exposed to outdoor temperature, such as agriculture,
forestry, mining, construction, and utilities, particularly at extremes of temperature. For example,
at temperatures over 100 degrees Fahrenheit, labor supply in outdoor industries drops by as
much as one hour per day compared to temperatures in the 76-80 F range. They find no
statistically detectable effects in other industries that are less exposed to climate (e.g. non-
manufacturing indoor activities). These findings suggest a potentially important role for air
conditioning in de-linking temperature and productivity; we discuss air conditioning further in
Section 3.6. Connolly (2008) examines the impact of rainfall on the labor/leisure choice in the
United States using time-use data. She finds that men substitute about 30 minutes per day on
average from leisure to work when it is raining.

3.4 Industrial and Services Output
Given the negative effects of high temperature on labor productivity in factories, call centers, and
outdoor industries such as mining, forestry, and utilities discussed above, a natural next question
is whether these impacts affect aggregate output in other sectors, such as industry and services.
While high temperatures per se appear to affect labor productivity, indoor air temperature is not
necessarily the same as outdoor air temperature (e.g. given heating and air conditioning), and
other aspects of industrial production (assembly lines, mechanization), may further dampen any
labor productivity effects. Effects of precipitation and storms are also not a priori obvious.

Recent work suggests that there are important effects of weather shocks on industrial and
services output. Hsiang (2010), Jones and Olken (2010), and Dell, Jones and Olken (2012) all
examine the effect of weather fluctuations on aggregate industrial output for large samples of
countries, using panel specifications as in equation (3). Hsiang (2010) measures the effects of
temperature and cyclones in 28 Caribbean countries over the 1970-2006 period, while also
controlling for precipitation. He finds that periods of unusually high heat have large negative
effects for three of six non-agricultural sectors, where nonagricultural output declines 2.4% per
1°C. Output losses are driven by heat shocks during the hottest season. Two of the three
affected sectors are service-oriented and provide the majority of output in these Caribbean
economies, while the other affected sector is industrial (mining and utilities). Hsiang does not
find a statistically significant impact of temperature on manufacturing output. Cyclones,
measured as years with unusually high cyclone energy dissipation, have negative output effects
on mining and utilities, among other sectors in the economy, while having offsetting positive
output effects for construction, leading to no net effects on economy-wide output flows.

Dell, Jones and Olken (2012) study annual industrial value-added output within a global sample
of 125 countries over the 1950-2003 period. They find that industrial losses are 2.0% per 1°C,
but only in poor countries. The magnitudes of these estimated temperature effects are similar to
Hsiang (2010). Further, like Hsiang (2010), this study controls for mean rainfall; no effect of
mean precipitation levels is found.

Jones and Olken (2010) reconsider industrial output losses in the global sample using trade data.
This data, collected in rich countries, helps avoid possible data quality issues in national accounts
while also allowing examination of narrower product classes. Using 2-digit product codes, this
analysis finds an average 2.4% decline in exports from a poor country per 1°C warming there.
No robust effect of average precipitation appears across specifications. Analyzed by sector, 20 of
the 66 2-digit export categories show statistically significant negative impacts of temperature. In
addition to agriculture exports, negative temperature effects appear for many manufactured
goods (covering 14 different product codes, such as wood, metal, and rubber manufactures;
electrical machinery; office machines; plumbing, heating, and light fixtures; and footwear).

The above studies all examine sector-level aggregates. Cachon, Gallino and Olivares (2012)
examine the effects of weather at the plant level for one particular industrial sector – automobiles
– in the United States, focusing on the 1994-2004 period. They find that hot days reduce output
significantly: a week with six or more days above 90°C reduces that week’s production by about
8 percent. The temperature effect on automobile production may be surprising because the work
is indoors and presumably occurs in the presence of air conditioning; the authors hypothesize
that air conditioning may be imperfect at extreme heat or that the temperature effects come from
operational disruptions outside the plant interior. Worker absenteeism could also play a role.
This study also finds large output losses from extreme windstorms, which occur on average 2.5
times per year per plant and are associated with weekly output declines of 26% per windstorm
day. Snow on at least 2 days of the week and rains on at least 6 days of the week are also found
to have statistically significant but more modest negative output effects.

While few in number, a notable consistency emerges among the studies of industrial output using
aggregated data. These estimates center approximately on a 2% output loss per 1°C. The
findings are also remarkably consistent with micro-level studies of labor productivity (see
Section 3.3), which estimate labor productivity losses that center around 2% per additional 1°C
when baseline temperatures exceed 25°C. The two studies that consider heavy winds both find
large effects of windstorms on industrial production. Effects of precipitation on industrial output
appear slight, although only one study looks at extremely heavy precipitation and in that case
finds modest negative effects.

3.5 Health and mortality
The epidemiology and economics literatures emphasize the detrimental effects of high
temperatures on mortality, prenatal health, and human health more generally, across contexts
ranging from 17th century England to sub-Saharan Africa and the U.S. in recent years.31
Numerous recent papers have examined the impact on mortality, both in developed and in
developing countries, using the panel approach.

In the U.S., Deschênes and Greenstone (2011) examine death records and find that each
additional day of extreme heat (exceeding 32 degrees C), relative to a moderate day (10 to 15
degrees C) raises the annual age-adjusted mortality rate by about 0.11 percent. They also find
that extreme cold increases mortality. The elderly and infants are at particularly high
risk. Barreca (2012) reports a similar analysis using bimonthly (moving average) weather data
controlling for humidity, with each additional day of extreme heat (exceeding 90 F) increasing
mortality by about 0.2 deaths per thousand, or about 0.2 percent. He also finds that extreme cold
effects appear to be driven in part by low humidity, not cold per se. Curriero et al. (2002), in a
study of 11 eastern cities in the United States using daily data, find higher mortality on very cold
days and very hot days, with the negative impacts of hot days primarily occurring in northern
cities.

Although the magnitudes estimated by these papers are substantial, they may be even larger in
developing countries. When Burgess et al. (2011) repeat the same exercise as Deschênes and
Greenstone (2011) for India, they find that an additional day with mean temperatures exceeding
36 degrees C, relative to a day in the 22-24 degree range, increases the annual mortality rate by




31
  The review in this section is highly complementary with Deschênes (2012), which is focused exclusively on the
relationship between temperature and health.
0.75 percent, about 7 times larger than in the United States.32 Interestingly, the mortality impacts
of temperature in the United States in the 1920s and 1930s were also 6 times larger than the
estimated impacts in the U.S. during more recent periods, as shown by (Barreca et al. 2013)),
who further find that the adoption of residential air-conditioning may explain this decline. These
findings suggest that, should countries like India develop and gain widespread access to
adaptation technologies (in particular, air conditioning), the impacts of temperature on mortality
may decline and more closely resemble that observed in developed countries today.

By focusing on total deaths over a period of several months or a year, many of the papers
discussed here seek to address the impact of “harvesting,” i.e., the idea that a particularly hot day
may cause the death of someone who would have died shortly thereafter even in the absence of
high temperatures. Evidence substantiates that such time-shifting may be substantial: Deschênes
and Moretti (2009), for example, use U.S. daily data on deaths matched with daily weather data
to document that for extreme heat events, much of the immediate mortality effect is offset by
fewer deaths in the subsequent weeks. The same, however, does not apply in their sample for
extremely cold periods. Similarly, Braga, Zanobetti and Schwartz (2001) finds persistent
mortality effects from cold shocks in their time series study of 12 U.S. cities but, as above,
substantial harvesting effects of heat shocks. Finally, Hajat et al. (2005) suggests that the
harvesting effect of extreme heat may vary with income (and perhaps access to climate control
technology): they find only partial harvesting offset of heat in Delhi, somewhat more offset in
Sao Paolo, and full offset in London.

The literature has identified a number of potential channels through which temperatures can have
health effects. One is direct: extreme temperatures can directly affect health, particularly for
those with pre-existing respiratory or cardiovascular diseases. In addition, temperatures can also
affect pollution levels, the rate of food spoilage - particularly in environments with low
refrigeration - and potentially vector-borne disease.33 Each of these channels could have
corresponding health effects. Temperatures can also affect incomes, e.g. through the channels
outlined above (agriculture, labor productivity), which can in turn affect health.

Several papers examine these issues in the particular context of infant health. In U.S. data,
Deschênes, Greenstone and Guryan (2009) find that birth weight declines between .003 and .009
percent for each day above 30 degrees C during pregnancy. Currie and Rossin-Slater (2013) find
that exposure to hurricanes in Texas during pregnancy increase the probability of newborns
being born with abnormal conditions or complications, though they find no impacts on birth
weight or gestational age. In the developing world, Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011) find that
typhoons in the Philippines lead to substantial increases in infant mortality. Kudamatsu, Persson

32
   While the temperature bins and empirical specifications in these two papers are somewhat different, Burgess et al.
(2011) re-estimate the U.S. results using the same empirical specification as they use for India and find qualitatively
similar magnitudes for the U.S. to those reported in Deschênes and Greenstone (2011).
33
   We do not explicitly review the literature on the impacts of pollution on health; the interested reader should
consult Graff Zivin and Neidell (forthcoming) for a review of that literature.
and Strömberg (2012) pool Demographic and Health Survey data from 28 African countries to
examine the impact of prenatal weather on subsequent outcomes. They find impacts through two
channels. First, they find that weather associated with the flourishing of malaria – sufficient
rainfall, no very cold temperatures, and generally warm temperatures – during pregnancy is
associated with higher infant mortality, particularly in areas where malaria is sometimes
prevalent but not endemic. While they do not observe malaria directly in their data, three months
higher predicted malaria exposure during pregnancy raises infant mortality risk by about 3 per
thousand. Second, they find drought, which is likely to predict poor or delayed harvests and
hence maternal malnutrition, leads to higher infant mortality, particularly in arid areas.

Looking in the long-run, Maccini and Yang (2009) examine the implications of poor rainfall in
the year of birth of Indonesian adults born between 1953 and 1974 on health outcomes in the
year 2000. They find that women who experienced higher rainfall as infant girls (and likely
therefore had better maternal and infant nutrition) are, as adults, taller, better educated, wealthier,
and have higher self-reported health. This finding suggests that weather-induced poor nutrition
as neonates and infants can have long lasting effects.

While the focus here has been on those papers that use a panel empirical specification such as
equation (3), there is also a large literature examining the impact of temperature and health
(especially mortality) using other econometric approaches, such as focusing on heat waves or
estimating distributed lag time series models within a set of cities, states, or countries. This
literature primarily focuses on developed countries such as the United States, and each study
typically considers a single or small group of cities or regions (See Basu and Samet 2002 for an
extensive review). Consistent with the results discussed here, these studies generally find
evidence for negative mortality effects of both extremely hot and extremely cold temperatures.

3.6 Energy
The literature has looked extensively at how climatic variables, in particular temperature,
influence energy consumption. This relationship, which has received renewed attention in light
of potential climate change, has long been important for the design of electricity systems, where
demand varies with climate and weather. Understanding temperature effects matters for the
energy consequences per se and for potential feedback loops, incorporated into some climatic
models (see Section 4.2 below), where energy demand influences greenhouse gas emissions
which in turn affects future energy demand.

Most literature focuses on residential energy demand, where the relationship between energy
consumption and temperature is naturally heterogeneous; namely, consumers demand heat when
temperatures are cold and air-conditioning when temperatures are hot, so that the effect of an
‘unusually warm day’ can either reduce or increase energy demand depending on the season or
location. Separately, the energy-temperature relationship may naturally depend on the stock of
heating and cooling equipment. Auffhammer and Mansur (2012) review the broad empirical
literature; we focus here on panel model approaches.
Deschênes and Greenstone (2011) study residential energy consumption across the United States.
Their panel model uses state-year observations from 1968-2002 and considers the number of
days each state spends in nine different temperature bins. The regressions further control for
precipitation and use time fixed effects for each of eight census divisions. They find a clear U-
shape relationship between energy demand and temperature, with an extra day below 10 degrees
F or above 90 degrees F raising annual energy demand by 0.3-0.4 percent. The study further
examines these relationships for different sub-regions of the United States and finds noisy
distinctions between them.

Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat (2012) examine household-level electricity consumption data
in California from 2003-2006, using a similar panel design that examines temperature effects
flexibly in different temperature bins. While the panel is limited to one state, the underlying
dataset covers over 300 million monthly household observations. This large sample allows
estimation of how the temperature-electricity demand relationship varies across different climate
zones within California. This study broadly confirms the U-shape seen in Deschênes and
Greenstone (2011), with similar magnitudes for increased energy demand from one additional
day over 90 deg F, although the shape changes across climate zones.

These panel-data papers, in using temperature bins, depart from a prior practice of using “heating
degree days” (HDD) and “cooling degree days” (CDD), which count the number of days below
and above a threshold temperature ,with each day weighted by its temperature difference from
the threshold. This degree-days approach misses the convexity found in the non-parametric
approach, where extreme temperatures provoke much stronger energy demand increases. The
convexity of the U-shape appears important both in getting the energy demand estimation correct
and in light of climate change models, which show an increasing number of very hot days.
Partly for this reason, Deschênes and Greenstone (2011) and Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat
(2012) find that the net effect of warming over the 21st century is likely to increase energy
demand substantially, ceteris paribus, with these studies estimating 11% and 3% demand
increases respectively.

Bhattacharya et al. (2003) show that there can be consequences of increased energy costs for
other aspects of household budgets. Using the consumer expenditure survey, they find that low
temperatures lead to higher fuel expenditures. For poor households, this in turn leads to a decline
in food consumption. Richer households face even larger increases in energy costs than poor
households in response to colder weather, but they do not report declines in food, presumably
since they have a less tight budget constraint. The effects are stronger outside of the southern
United States.

Similar panel studies have also been conducted outside the United States. In the U.K., Henley
and Peirson (1997) study space heating with a household panel in 1989-90 and find that, netting
out household averages, demand for space heating declines with temperature and especially over
the 10-20 degree C range. Across Europe, Eskeland and Mideksa (2010) study residential
electricity consumption in 31 countries over ten years, with approximately 250 country-year
observations. Using the “degree days” measure of temperature, they find that a one unit increase
in CDD increases electricity consumption by about 4 times as much as a one unit increase in
HDD.

Collectively, the above panel studies find some agreement in how residential energy demand
responds to temperature in relatively rich countries over the short run. Several opportunities for
further study are clear. One large opening in the literature concerns panel studies outside
relatively rich countries.34 Such studies appear important for understanding global energy
demand responses, especially given that the penetration of heating and cooling technologies in
poor countries is low.

Related, longer-run warming may lead to more installation of cooling technologies. Panel
studies that isolate air-conditioning adoption, and the heterogeneity of adoption by income, will
be important for understanding energy demand and, separately, adaptive mechanisms. To the
extent that cooling appliances attenuate other climatic effects, including effects on labor
productivity, industrial output, and health as reviewed above, the biggest question here may be
less about the costs of increased energy demand and more about the adaptive benefits such
energy appliances may provide. Integrating across the studies above one (speculative)
description of mechanisms may note that in rich countries high heat raises energy demand but
does not reduce GDP, while in poor countries GDP and sectoral losses appear large. To the
extent that cooling technologies decouple heat from productivity in many sectors, energy
demand increases may signal important adaptive responses – but ones that are largely
unavailable in much of the world. Increased energy demand may, meanwhile, further exacerbate
climate change.35 These issues appear first-order for future research in this area.

3.7 Conflict and Political Stability
The relationship between weather and conflict/political stability has generated an explosion of
research over the past decade, providing extensive panel evidence for a weather-instability link.36


34
   Two recent studies use panel data that encompasses poorer countries but analyze it using time-series techniques
rather than fixed effect models. In China, Asadoorian, Eckaus and Schlosser (2008) study a panel of Chinese
provinces from 1995-2000, looking at residential energy use and appliance adoption in addition to non-residential
energy use. Dividing their sample into urban and rural areas, the panel includes approximately 150 urban province-
year observations and approximately 60 rural province-year observations. This study works to identify price and
income effects, in addition to temperature effects, and the temperature findings prove noisy. Finally, De Cian, Lanzi
and Roson (2013) study a panel of 31 countries worldwide from 1978-2000 at the country-year level, although the
analysis uses an Error Correction Model rather than a panel model with country and time fixed effects.
35
   Wolfram, Shelef and Gertler (2012) examine the Oportunidades cash transfer scheme in Mexico and document
large increases in purchases of electric appliances (e.g. refrigerators) with income. They suggest that many
developing countries are near the point in income space where many households will soon acquire these cooling
products, which would lead to an increase in electricity consumption and presumably a much larger electricity-
temperature response gradient.
36
   Conflict can be defined in a variety of ways. For example, conflict is often defined for empirical research as
occurring when total battle deaths in a country fall above a given threshold. However, it can also be defined using
In an early panel-data contribution, Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004) examined the
relationship between changes in rainfall and civil conflict in 41 Sub-Saharan African countries
between 1981 and 1999. This study finds that lower rainfall growth led to more conflict and also
documents that economic growth is lower when rainfall growth is lower. It posits a mechanism
through which low rainfall leads to a negative economic shock, which in turn spurs conflict.
Subsequent panel work by Burke et al. (2009) finds that higher temperatures also lead to higher
conflict incidence in Africa, with 1 degree C higher temperatures increasing civil conflicts by 4.5
percentage points (49 percent of the mean).

Moreover, weather shocks also plausibly impact political stability. For example, Burke and
Leigh (2010) and Bruckner and Ciccone (2011) document that weather shocks appear to lead to
democratization. Dell, Jones and Olken (2012) show that adverse temperature shocks increase
the probability of irregular leader transitions (i.e. coups).

The relationship between weather and conflict/political stability documented in cross-country
analysis has been supported by several studies exploiting subnational variation in weather.
Hidalgo et al. (2010) document that low rainfall shocks in Brazilian municipalities between 1988
and 2004 led the rural poor to invade and occupy large landholdings. Bohlken and Sergenti
(2011), using an approach similar to Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004), find that negative
rainfall shocks increase Muslim-Hindu riots in Indian states. Both of these studies posit reduced
incomes as a mechanism. Using a panel specification, Fjelde and von Uexkull (2012) find that
negative rainfall shocks increase communal conflict in subnational regions in Africa, particularly
in areas dominated by groups outside the political mainstream. Similarly, in Somalia between
1997 and 2009, Maystadt, Ecker and Mabiso (2013) document that droughts increased local
conflict.

Evidence for a weather-conflict nexus exists across many centuries.37 Both Kung and Ma (2012)
and Jia (2013) show using panel analysis that across four centuries suboptimal rainfall triggered
peasant rebellions in China. Nevertheless, Confucianism appears to have partially mitigated
these effects (Kung and Ma 2012), and technological innovation – in the form of the introduction
of drought-resistant sweet potatoes – weakened them further.38 Similarly, Dell (2012) finds that
municipalities in Mexico that experienced more severe drought in the early 20th century were
more likely to have insurgency during the Mexican Revolution than nearby municipalities with
less severe drought.



more disaggregated measures, such as the number of battles, violence against civilians, riots, and rebel recruitment
(all recorded in the ACLED conflict database), or using other measures specific to a given context.
37
   Anderson, Johnson and Koyama (2013) show using a decadal level panel from 1100-1800 that colder growing
seasons led to greater expulsion of the Jewish population from European cities during the 16th century.
38
   There also exist a number of studies of specific civilizations over centuries or millennia which suggest that
adverse shifts in weather can lead to the collapse of civilizations. Because these are not panel studies, they fall
beyond the scope of this paper, but the interested reader is referred to Hsiang, Burke and Miguel (2013) for a review.
Despite the large number of panel studies that find important weather effects on conflict and
political stability, panel results have not been fully unambiguous, particularly for precipitation.
For example, Couttenier and Soubeyran (2013) find using a standard panel specification that the
Palmer Drought Severity Index is positively related to conflict at the country level in sub-
Saharan Africa between 1957 and 2005 when they control for linear weather variables, whereas
the linear weather variables alone are not significantly correlated with conflict. Ciccone (2011)
argues that the relationship between rainfall and conflict in Sub-Saharan Africa appears weaker
when the data is extended to 2009, though Miguel and Satyanath (2011) note in reply that the
first-stage between rainfall and economic growth also does not appear to hold in the 2000-2009
period. A number of studies that are not fully identified from within-location deviations from
means have also found conflicting results.39

The reasons for differences in this literature have been difficult to isolate for several reasons:
conflict and weather shocks can be parameterized in many different ways; some studies have
omitted fixed effects and included potentially endogenous controls; inference does not always
account for spatial correlation; and weather measures in different datasets – for rainfall in
particular – may only be weakly correlated in regions with few weather stations (Auffhammer et
al. 2013).40 Beyond differences in specification and data, heterogeneity is also likely to be at
play. Weather shocks typically do not lead to civil conflicts in wealthy, stable countries, and in
the world as a whole, weather shocks are not strongly related to civil conflict (Dell, Jones, and
Olken 2012). Moreover, many of the estimates in this literature are quite noisy, making it
difficult to assess whether a statistically insignificant effect is a noisily measured zero or a
noisily measured large effect.41

To examine this issue systematically, Hsiang, Burke and Miguel (2013) conduct a re-analysis of
all empirical studies of weather and intergroup conflict whose empirical analysis can be specified
as fixed-effect panel regressions of the form in equation (3). All 21 estimates of temperature in

39
   For example, consider the following studies using variation across 1, 0.5, or 0.25 degree grid cells in Africa.
Harari and La Ferrara (2013) document that between 1997 and 2011 droughts during the growing season increase
conflict. In contrast, O’Loughlin et al. (2012) find that in East Africa droughts have no impact on conflict, wetter
precipitation deviations reduce conflict, and higher temperatures increase conflict. Using a gridded analysis for
Kenya, Theisen (2012) finds, in contrast to other papers, that low rainfall seems to reduce conflict in the following
year, with no clear impacts of temperature. Finally, Theisen, Holtermann and Buhaug (2011) find no relationship
between precipitation and conflict. None of these studies include grid cell fixed effects, allowing potentially
confounding correlates with weather across geographic areas to influence the regression findings. Moreover, three
of these four studies do not account for high spatial correlation across grid cells and they use different sources of
rainfall data (interpolated vs. reanalysis) that may be only weakly correlated. When Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel
(2013) rerun these analyses using cell fixed effects, excluding endogenous controls, and adjusting the inference for
spatial correlation, they find strong evidence that temperature affects conflict, as well as evidence for drought
impacts, whereas evidence for linear precipitation effects is weak (see their supplementary appendix for more
details).
40
   Note that the exclusion of fixed effects and inclusion of endogenous controls is often intentional in these studies
because the coefficients on the controls are themselves of interest.
41
   For example, Theisen et al (2011) do not find statistically significant weather effects, but due to large confidence
intervals large effects cannot be ruled out.
the re-analysis are positive. While not all estimates are statistically significant, they argue that
these coefficients would be very unlikely to arise by chance if the true impact of temperature on
conflict was zero or negative. Rainfall is more difficult to assess, since in some studies the focus
is on negative deviations (low rainfall), in others it is on positive deviations (high rainfall), and
yet others use absolute deviations or more complicated drought indices. Nevertheless, 16 of 18
studies reviewed predict that anomalous precipitation events increase conflict (although again
not all produce statistically significant estimates). Overall, the study calculates that on average a
one standard deviation change in weather variables generates an 14% change in the risk of group
conflict (p<.001).

The studies discussed here and the meta-analysis by Hsiang, Burke and Miguel (2013) in
particular provide compelling evidence that weather affects conflict across a variety of different
contexts. These results underline the importance of further examination of open questions in the
literature relating to mechanisms, heterogeneity, harvesting, and which types of weather shocks
matter most. Further subnational studies, which can employ detailed disaggregated data, may be
particularly useful in improving our understanding of these open questions.

First consider mechanisms: because extreme weather events lead output to decline, they
potentially lower the opportunity cost of engaging in violence or in protest against the
government. Moreover, a decline in economic output could decrease government revenues, in
turn reducing state capacity to maintain security. Increased food prices may lead to widespread
food riots that spill over into broader political instability, and weather-induced migration could
potentially lead to conflict as well. Weather shocks could also directly impact conflict, through
changing the environment – i.e. make roads more or less passable (Fearon and Laitin 2003) - or
through altering the bio-neurological regulation of aggression (see below). Related to the
mechanisms issue is heterogeneity: the broader political and economic circumstances that lead
extreme weather to trigger instability in some places but not others remain poorly understood.42
Finally, our understanding remains limited concerning the extent to which weather events create
conflicts that would not otherwise occur as opposed to impacting the timing at which latent
conflicts surface. This issue, which is akin to the questions about harvesting discussed in the
health section, is important for assessing the likely conflict impacts of climate change.43

3.8 Crime and Aggression
The idea that temperature affects the proclivity for aggression directly is an old one, also dating
back at least to the Ancient Greeks.44 During the 1960s, U.S. government officials noted that
riots were more likely to occur in warmer weather, and subsequent analysis confirmed this
relationship (U.S. Riot Commission 1968; Carlsmith and Anderson 1979). In analysis of detailed

42
   See Tutino (1989) for an excellent discussion of the reasons for heterogeneous responses of conflict to weather
shocks in Mexico historically.
43
   Hsiang, Meng and Cane (2011) find suggestive but statistically insignificant evidence that around 40% of the
conflict episodes associated with El Nino are displaced in time.
44
   See p. 25 in Andaya (1993).
data from the Dallas police department, Rotton and Cohn (2004) find that the relationship
between outdoor temperature and aggravated assault is substantially weaker in locations that are
likely to be air conditioned. Experimental evidence has linked temperature to horn honking
(Kenrick and MacFarlane 1986) and aggression by police officers (Vrij, Van der Steen, and
Koppelaar 1994). By contrast, a link between precipitation and crime has been less evident in
the criminology literature (see Encyclopedia of Criminology 2005), although this link may be
stronger in locations where precipitation exerts important impacts on income, as discussed
below.

A small number of rigorous panel studies relate weather fluctuations to crime. Using a fixed
effects panel specification, Jacob, Lefgren and Moretti (2007) find that higher temperatures in a
given week increase both violent and property crime in the U.S. during that week, whereas
higher precipitation reduces violent crime but has no impact on property crime. Using a 50-year
panel of monthly crime and weather data for nearly 3,000 U.S. counties, Ranson (2012) also
finds that increased temperatures lead to increased criminal activity. He finds roughly linear
positive effects of temperature on violent crimes. For property crimes, he finds that very cold
days (below 40 degrees F) reduce property crimes, but very hot days do not increase them.
Together, these studies and the evidence discussed above suggest that weather has an immediate
effect upon criminal activity, particularly for violent crime. Some researchers have argued for a
biological pathway through which temperature affects serotonin neurotransmission in the brain,
influencing impulsivity and aggression (see for example Tiihonen, Räsänen, and Hakko 1997),
but this hypothesis remains controversial (see, for example, Maes et al. 1993). Whether the
temperature-aggression nexus occurs via neurological or social-psychological channels remains
an important area of research in criminology, and studying potential linkages between aggression
mechanisms and broader social conflict (Section 3.7) is an interesting subject for further
research.

Weather might also impact crime and aggression through its effects on income. Miguel (2005)
documents that extreme rainfall events increase the murder of “witches” (typically elderly
women) in Tanzania, hypothesizing that negative income shocks induced by rainfall lead
households to seek to remove or kill relatively unproductive family members. Oster (2004) finds
that cold weather increased witch trials in 16th-18th century Europe. Using time series analysis,
Mehlum, Miguel and Torvik (2006) find that low rainfall in 19th century Bavaria increased crime
via increasing the grain price (hence reducing real wages for consumers). Sekhri and Storeygard
(2011) document that dowry killing – the murder of a woman for failing to bring sufficient
dowry – has been higher in India in recent years during periods of low rainfall.

3.9 Other channels
This section reviews two other channels in the climate-economy interface that are potentially
important but, to this point, have been the subject of comparatively few studies exploiting
weather shocks. We first consider international trade. We then briefly discuss effects on
innovation.45

Market integration has the potential to influence weather-shock sensitivity. Trade can, in
principle, dampen or exacerbate local effects of productivity losses. By muting the price effects
of local productivity shocks, access to foreign markets could both help local consumers (who can
still access products at low prices) but hurt local producers (who cannot raise prices). At the
same time, foreign consumers and producers may experience more diffuse but opposing effects.
Several studies discussed above shed some preliminary light on these issues. Burgess and
Donaldson (2010), using annual data for 125 Indian districts, show that, while famine intensity
historically in India is strongly associated with low rainfall, this famine-rainfall link is essentially
eliminated in Indian districts that had access to railroads. Thus, for mortality, market integration
may have substantially reduced the negative local effects of local weather shocks. Jones and
Olken (2010) show that temperature shocks in poor countries reduce their exports to rich
countries across a wide variety of agricultural and industrial goods. This finding is consistent
with local producer losses due to the weather shocks. It also indicates that losses can be exported
to consumers in other countries, although the effects for the individual foreign consumer may be
small if there are many substitute providers.

Another potentially first-order adaptation mechanism is innovation. Miao and Popp (2013) study
patenting in response to natural disasters using a panel of 30 countries over 25 years. They study
earthquakes, floods, and droughts, and count patents in relevant technologies. They find, for
example, that an additional $1 billion in economic losses from drought in the past five years
increases current patent applications regarding drought-resistant crops by approximately 20%.
Similarly large effects on patenting are found for earthquakes and floods. While the
effectiveness of these patents is not clear, this study suggests that innovative activity does
respond causatively to weather shocks, an important area for ongoing study.

3.10 Summary: weather and the economy
The previous sections have documented many ways in which weather fluctuations affect
economic activity, from agriculture to labor productivity to health and conflict. These estimates
provide rigorous econometric evidence that weather – temperature, precipitation, and events such
as windstorms and droughts – has manifold effects on economic activity. Poor economies
appear particularly vulnerable to detrimental weather effects, while certain demographic groups
– such as children and the elderly – appear especially sensitive on health-related dimensions.

The unusual identification opportunity provided by weather shocks has allowed a rigorous
analysis of weather-economy linkages, and implications for breadth, heterogeneity, and
functional forms. While much work remains in developing a detailed understanding of the

45
  Note that the subject of migration is discussed elsewhere; we discuss this topic in Section 3.2 when reviewing the
agriculture literature and return to it again in Section 4.1.2 when discussing labor reallocation as a possible
adaptation mechanism.
underlying mechanisms, especially for macroeconomic and political economy outcomes, the new
literature shows that weather variation has substantive effects in contemporary periods. This
begins to suggest policy targets, whether the goal is preventing substantial economic damages or
protecting public health and security.


4 What does all this mean for thinking about global climate change?
The recent explosion of literature concerning climate-economy relationships has largely been
sparked by a desire to inform the potential consequences of global climate change. According to
the 4th assessment report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Solomon et al.
2007), which takes a mean estimate across many climate models, global temperatures are
expected to rise from 1.8 to 3.1 degrees C over the 21st century, depending on the emissions
scenario. At the same time, the same climate models predict a wide range of potential outcomes
even for a given emissions scenario, with a substantial upper tail globally and substantial
regional uncertainties, so the range of potential outcomes is substantially higher. Some countries
will naturally experience larger changes than the global mean. Moreover, these climate changes
will not be limited to increased temperatures: climate change is expected to alter precipitation
patterns and lead to changes in the frequency and location of intense storms, as well as other
changes such as rising sea levels.

Given the substantial changes in climate that are forecast in many climate models and the intense
global policy discussion about what policies can be undertaken in response, there has been
substantial interest in understanding the economic consequences of potential climate changes. In
Section 4.1, we explore ways in which the estimates we have reviewed above – i.e. those
estimates based on short-run fluctuations in weather – can and cannot be used to inform thinking
about global climate change. In particular, we discuss methodological innovations for creating
tighter linkages between panel estimates, which are typically estimated based on short-run
weather shocks, and changes over longer periods. In Section 4.2, we then review the current
economic approaches used to forecast economic consequences of climate change – primarily
Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs). We discuss how such models could potentially be
modified to incorporate the recent advances in econometric estimation of weather impacts
reviewed here.

4.1 From the Short to the Long Run: The Econometrics of Adaptation,
    Intensification, and Other Issues

4.1.1 Conceptual issues in moving from short to long run
To begin, return to the econometric framework in Section 2.1. Suppose now that the structural
equation of interest – i.e., the analogue of equation (1), is

            ,   ,                                                                  (4)
where      represents the distribution of climate variables in country or region , and indexes
time, say from today until the year 2100. The key change from equation (1) is that we no longer
require the climate (defined as the distribution of weather outcomes) for place to be stationary;
instead, the distribution of outcomes (i.e., the climate) changes over time. We are interested in
how alternative realizations of the climate variables      will result in different economic
outcomes.

Conceptual issues with estimates based on cross‐sectional models
How does the structural equation of interest in (4) compare to various econometric equations that
we could estimate? For example, suppose we estimate the cross-sectional equation

                                                                                    (5)

Even abstracting from the identification issues discussed in Section 2 (i.e. the fact that there may
be omitted variables such that is correlated with ), the estimated from equation (5) is not
directly applicable to the climate change structural equation in 4.1.1. Why? Because even to the
extent that (5) identifies the causal impact of climate on the cross-sectional outcome, , the
cross-section may incorporate very long-run mechanisms that are unlikely to come into play over
the next 100 years.

For example, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) argue that the patterns of colonialism and
subsequent economic development were influenced by the mortality rates experienced by
colonial settlers when they first arrived in new territories during the 16th through 19th centuries.
These mortality rates were influenced by the local disease environment, which in turn was
influenced by local climate. Therefore, some of the impact of climate that one would estimate in
the cross-sectional equation in (5) might include this settler mortality channel. Yet, if climate
changes over the next 100 years, that particular channel will not be part of the impact – the era of
colonialism is over, and a country’s colonial origins are fixed, and so institutions will not be
affected by climate today in the same way they were in the era when settlers arrived. The same
is likely true for a variety of other “deep historical” mechanisms that determine the cross-
sectional relationship between climate and income, such as the date of adoption of agriculture.
Thus, even in the absence of omitted variables that are correlated with climate purely by chance,
cross-sectional estimates from (5) are unlikely to provide an adequate estimate of how climate
change over the next 35, 75, or even 150 years will affect economic outcomes. Within-country
cross-sectional analysis (such as Dell, Jones, and Olken 2009) suffers from the same critique,
where the historical equilibrium they represent may depend on mechanisms that no longer act in
the same way.

Conceptual issues with estimates based on panel models
By contrast, panel models, as in equation (3), precisely estimate the impact of a weather shock
on economic outcomes. Moreover, panel models typically estimate the impact of a weather
shock in contemporary data. The panel approach thus emphasizes weather’s current - as opposed
to long run – impacts, in addition to its broader identification advantages.

However, short-run changes over annual or other relatively brief periods are not necessarily
analogous to the long-run changes in average weather patterns that may occur with climate
change. That is, the effect of 1 degree higher temperature in a given country in a given year as
estimated by equation (3) may have different effects than raising the average temperature of that
country by 1 degree as in equation (4). Indeed, there are several reasons why the panel estimates
may not be directly applicable to estimating the economic impacts of climate change over the
medium or long run. We briefly lay out the potential issues in this section; Section 4.1.2 then
considers how these issues can be addressed within the context of panel-type estimates discussed
in this paper.

Adaptation. A key issue is adaptation. If the climate changes, agents may ultimately adapt
economic production processes to the new environment. Given enough time, adaptation may
occur not only by adjusting among a set of existing technological opportunities, but also through
technological change. Government institutions and policy, including policies around public
goods, innovation, and market integration, may also play important roles in the degree and nature
of adaptive responses. Examples abound: snowfalls that occasionally paralyze southern U.S.
states are minimally disruptive in New England where such events are experienced regularly and
where (costly) investments in snow removal processes have been made. In that sense, the
estimated coefficient on a snowfall shock may not estimate the long-run effect of a shift in
climate to more snowfall. As another example, regarding innovation, the Canadian Experimental
Farms, under Canadian government auspices, successfully developed wheat varieties in the late
19th Century that were more suitable to Canadian farming conditions (Ward 1994). See also
Miao and Popp (2013) regarding innovation around natural disasters. Adaptation suggests that
the short-run panel estimate of a weather shock from equation (3) may not be the long-run
impact of a permanent change in climate of the same magnitude.

Intensification of climate effects. A second, countervailing force is intensification. Climatic
changes may cause damages that are not revealed by small or fleeting weather changes.
Consider, for example, agriculture. A drought in a single year may have little effect if there are
ample stores of water available in a reservoir. On the other hand, if the amount of rainfall
permanently decreases and the reservoir eventually runs dry, then the supply of water to
agriculture will fall substantially, with concomitant impacts on economic activity.46

General equilibrium effects. The previous two issues – adaptation and intensification – could
be relevant for an isolated production process – a single farmer, for example. A third class of
issues involves macroeconomic effects, including general equilibrium adjustments of prices and
factor reallocations. For example, labor and capital will likely move in response to long-run
46
  Desertification would be an example of potentially substantial economic damages through an intensification
process.
climate damages. If both labor and capital are mobile, then this type of macroeconomic
readjustment could reduce the long-run impacts of climate change relative to a short-run panel
estimate (although any such tempering of the impacts would depend on moving costs, the extent
to which the marginal product of capital is location specific, and potentially a host of other
factors). If, by contrast, capital is mobile but labor is not (e.g., due to restrictions on
international migration), then the effects could be reversed: in the long run, capital outflows from
areas that experience negative productivity shocks would further reduce the marginal product of
labor there.

Extrapolation beyond historical experience. A final issue is the degree to which the observable
weather variation incorporates the range of changes that may occur in the future. Average annual
temperatures in a country are almost never more than 2 degrees C from their long-run historical
mean (Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012). While temperature changes over the next 30 years will
plausibly be within this range (recall the IPCC middle estimates were between 1.8 – 3.1 degrees
C by 2100), the 95th percentile estimate is warming of 7 degrees C by 2100. If the impacts of
climatic variables are linear throughout this range, then extrapolation is not an issue per se.
However, if there are nonlinearities that are different from those operating within historical
experience, one cannot directly extrapolate from equation (3) to climate scenarios far outside this
range. This issue suggests a limited capacity for panel models to provide quantitative estimates
of damages from extreme warming. In the plausible scenario in which extreme warming
introduces additional costs (i.e. the costs are convex in warming), linear extrapolation from panel
model evidence - suitably adjusted to confront the other issues discussed above - would provide
a lower bound on future damages.

These issues highlight that, even though panel models of the form of equation (3) correctly
identify the causal effect of weather shocks on contemporaneous economic outcomes, they may
not estimate the structural equation of interest for understanding the likely effects of future
global climate change. Moreover, even leaving aside the potential of catastrophic climate
scenarios – such as rapid sea-level rise or the release of methane from melting permafrost that
could greatly increase global temperature – the panel estimates are neither obviously an upper
bound nor a lower bound for the effect of climate change. If the adaptation force dominates, then
the effects of weather shocks will tend to be larger than the effects of climate change; if the
intensification force dominates, then the effects of weather shocks will tend to be smaller than
the effects of climate change.

4.1.2 Empirical approaches for moving from short to long run
Delving more deeply into panel-based estimates, one can both make progress on a number of the
important issues outlined above. This section outlines the variety of empirical techniques through
which panel approaches can still be used to say something sensible (if not definitive) about likely
effects of climate change, and then reviews the attempts thus far to do so.
We examine several empirical approaches. First, different geographic areas have different
baseline climates. An unusual weather shock in one area is often well within normal experience
in another area, where adaptation has had the opportunity to occur. Comparing these areas by
interacting weather shocks with the existing distribution of weather events can help assess the
magnitude of adaptation. Second, one can examine long differences; i.e., instead of looking at
annual shocks, one can examine average impacts over longer time horizons, such as decades.
Third, one can focus on particular permanent shocks and trace out their impacts over many years.
Fourth, combining the previous two methods with short-run panel estimation, one can explicitly
compare the same event at different time scales to assess the degree of adaptation. Fifth, one can
extend panel models to explicitly examine spillovers of weather shocks. We examine each of
these mechanisms in turn.

Interactions with the existing distribution of weather events
One way to learn about adaptation is to examine the range of climate distributions available
today, which vary greatly. In fact, the range of experience is substantial even within a given
location. For example, consider New York City. Figure 2 plots the distribution of maximum
daily temperatures for New York’s Central Park between 2000-2010 and shows that, like many
places, New York City experiences a wide range of average daily temperatures across seasons
and years. The 1st percentile day in New York has a maximum temperature of minus 4.5 degrees
C (that is, about 35 days per decade are colder than minus 4.5 degrees C). The 99th percentile
day in New York has a maximum temperature of 35 degrees C – and New York has experienced
days up to 40 degrees C, even though such days are rare.

A first observation is that future climate change represents a shift in the stochastic distribution of
degrees that may sit largely within the support experienced historically. This distributional
overlap is expected to be particularly strong when looking at temperate climates that already
experience a range of temperatures during a year and when examining shorter horizons – i.e.
2050 instead of 2150. While some temperatures expected under global climate change would be
novel (e.g. days with max temperatures exceeding 42 degrees C, which did not occur in the
decade shown in Figure 2) much of the expected shift from moderate climate change in
temperate zones within a given year will occur at temperatures that are within the historical
range.

This observation is important because, with sufficiently fine data, econometric models can
estimate the impact within precise weather bins. Depending on the locus of impacts, one may
then make some inference about adaptation. For example, when weather-based models find
effects within existing ranges and one is interested in climate change effects within these ranges,
one could argue that the scope for adaptation may be somewhat limited. As shown in the Figure,
New York has had much opportunity to adapt to a wide range of temperatures. Therefore,
should there be weather effects within this historical range, say at 28 degrees C, which New
York experiences quite frequently already, one might expect those effects to continue.
Conversely, if one found effects in the weather bins that are rare (e.g., in the New York example,
temperatures over 39 degrees C), one may suspect that the impacts might change as such rare
events became more frequent and agents adapted.

In this stylized example, we considered a single location: New York City. Suppose we see
substantive effects in New York when temperatures exceed 39 degrees C, which is currently rare.
For a single place, one cannot know for sure if the effects of such rare events will persist when
they become more common, or whether they will attenuate substantially through adaptation.
However, with multiple locations, one can begin to make progress on understanding the
possibility of adaption to such events. For example, Figure 3 shows the temperature distribution
of New York City overlaid with that of Phoenix, Arizona.

As is evident from the figure, the extreme 39 degree day in New York (which occurs just a few
days each decade) is well within the normal range for Phoenix (where it occurs 40 days per
year). This variation allows one to test for adaptation econometrically. Specifically, one can
modify the standard panel specification in equation (3) to estimate a model of the form

                                                                                                 (6)

where the      variables are weather shocks specified in narrow ranges and the       variable
captures the average initial conditions; in the example above, the long-run historical frequency
with which a given temperature tends to occur. In taking this approach, it is important to
recognize that      is a fixed characteristic of place . To the extent that  is correlated with
other characteristics of place – which creates an interpretative issue for the cross-section as
discussed above – one may also want to control for the interactions of those other characteristics
with the climate shocks.

Several studies pursue versions of this approach. For example, Deschênes and Greenstone (2011)
estimate the impact of temperature on mortality throughout the United States. They begin by
estimating the weather panel model, as in equation (3), but broken up into temperature bins.
They find evidence of nonlinearities – each day above 90 degrees F is associated with about 1
more death per 100,000 population, but find no impacts of days in the 80-90 degrees F range
relative to cooler days. While they find heterogeneity across the 9 US census regions in the
responsiveness to hot days, this heterogeneity is not systematically related to average
temperatures in each of those 9 regions, suggesting that adaptation to higher average
temperatures does not substantially affect the mortality response.47

Dell, Jones and Olken (2012) take a similar approach when studying the impact of temperature
on economic growth. Rather than break temperature up into fine bins, the paper estimates a
coarser version of (6) in which annual temperature shocks are interacted with a country’s average
temperature level. They find no evidence that hot countries experience systematically different
47
  This paper regresses the estimated coefficient from equation (3) in each of the 9 census regions on the average
number of days above 90 degrees in that region. In principle, one could obtain more power by estimating the
regression using much finer gradations in average temperatures across the United States.
impacts of temperature shocks on economic growth, once one controls for a country’s average
income level, though they note that temperature and income are correlated in the cross-section so
this relationship is hard to tease out empirically.

A related approach is taken by Schlenker and Roberts (2009), who use fine temperature bins to
estimate nonlinear effects of temperature on crop yields in the United States. They find a sharp
nonlinearity, with negative impacts of temperature above 29 degrees C for corn, 30 degrees C for
soybeans, and 32 degrees C for cotton. If farmers can adapt to permanently higher temperatures
by growing different varieties, one would expect yields in the South to be less sensitive to
extreme heat. In general, however, they find similar results in northern and southern states. 48

Similar analyses can be used for the other types of weather-related events (e.g., precipitation and
windstorms). One example is Hsiang and Narita (2012), which examines the impact of tropical
cyclones. They estimate equation (6), where the key weather variable ( ) is the intensity of a
given tropical cyclone, the key climate variable is the average intensity of tropical cyclones
experienced by a country ( ), and the dependent variables are economic damages (normalized
by GDP) and deaths (normalized by population). In both cases, they find statistically significant
evidence of adaptation – that is, the coefficient in (6) indicates that the marginal effect of
higher windspeed in a cyclone is lower in those places that more frequently experience higher
windspeeds. However, this adaptive magnitude is small – they estimate that only 3% of the
estimated impact of increased tropical cyclones will be “adapted away” in the long run.

While there is no theorem that the effect of adaptation in one context will apply to another
context – e.g. there is no a priori reason that farmers’ inability to adapt by using different corn
seed technologies necessarily tells us anything about adaptation to prevent mortality from heat
waves or adaptation from tropical cyclones – a notable similarity among the papers reviewed in
this section is that the effects of extreme weather events do not appear to be limited to those
areas that experience them only rarely. This approach seems generally useful, and more research
is needed along these lines.

Interactions with lags of weather events
A related econometric approach can be used to shed light on the question of intensification.
Specifically, if the effects build over time, then the structure of the weather shocks can be used to
examine this possibility; for example, one can examine whether the effect of a drought in year
will be different if years     1 through       5 were also droughts than if years    1 through
    5 had normal climate. This possibility can also be estimated as an interaction, but instead of

48
   This does not imply that no adaptation is possible. Olmstead and Rhode (2011) show that North American wheat
producers have made substantial adaptations between 1839 and 2009, shifting where they grew their wheat. The
median annual precipitation in areas growing wheat in the US and Canada in 2007 was one-half that of the areas
growing wheat in the 1839 distribution, and the median annual temperature in wheat-growing areas in 2007 was 3.7
degrees C lower than in wheat-growing areas in 1839. This shift, which occurred mostly before 1929, required new
biological technologies, as well as human capital (immigrants from Eurasia) skilled in growing wheat in cold, arid
climates.
interacting the weather variables with the long-run averages (in equation (6)), the weather
variables are interacted with their own lags, i.e.

                        ∑                         ∑                                           (7)

The key coefficients for estimating intensification are the , which examine whether the impact
of a given shock depends on the pattern of previous shocks.

While we are not aware of existing panel analyses along these specific lines, this approach
provides an opportunity to let the data speak to intensification concerns. An alternative approach
is to assert a functional form for intensification; for example, drought indices that seek to capture
the soil moisture balance – such as the commonly used Palmer Drought and Palmer Hydrological
Drought indices – take cumulative events into account, so that the measured intensity of drought
during the current month depends on current weather patterns plus the cumulative patterns of
previous months.

Long differences
Another econometric approach to estimating adaptation or intensification effects is to estimate
the same basic panel specification but over a longer period. To see this, start with equation (3)
and take, for example, decade-long averages.

This yields the exact same econometric specification as (3) but expressed in decades ( ) rather
than years ( ):

                                                                                     (8)

One could also take longer or shorter averages.

Although the econometric equation in (8) is similar to equation (3), substantively they are
different; by averaging the weather variables, , one is now moving closer to identifying
medium-run impacts. To the extent that these averages represent longer-run changes (e.g. those
induced by climate change), longer differences may begin to incorporate the adaptation or
intensification effects discussed above.

For example, Dell, Jones and Olken (2012) consider a 15-year average specification in studying
the effect of temperature on economic growth. That paper estimates (8) with two time periods,
1970-1985 and 1985-2000, and exploits medium-run variation, where many countries’
temperatures increased only slightly (e.g., Laos, Kenya, and Nigeria), whereas many others
experienced increases in average temperatures of around 1 degree C (e.g., Tunisia, Zambia, and
Botswana). While the results are not as statistically precise as the results based on annual
variation, this study finds larger negative impacts of temperature increases on economic growth
in poor countries in the longer-difference specification (around 2 percentage points lower
economic growth per degree C in poor countries; compared with around 1 percentage point
lower economic growth per degree C in the baseline annual specification), suggesting that, if
anything, intensification outweighs adaptation among poor countries.49

Burke and Emerick (2013) pursue an analogous econometric approach in studying U.S.
agriculture. They estimate a version of equation (8), comparing the 1978-1982 average with the
1998-2002 average, exploiting substantial heterogeneity in temperature changes over this
period, with some counties cooling by 0.5 degrees C and others warming by 1.5 degrees C.
Comparing annual panel estimates with longer differences, they estimate the degree to which
adaptation has offset the negative effects of heat. For corn productivity, their point estimate
suggests that adaptation has offset 23 percent of the negative effect of increased temperatures.
Given the confidence intervals, at most half of the negative short-run impacts were offset, and
the authors cannot reject the null hypothesis of no adaptation.

These longer-difference estimates are perhaps the closest empirical analogue to the structural
equation of interest for climate change in (4), particularly if we are interested in climate change
impacts in the medium term (e.g., by 2050). However, two issues should be kept in mind when
interpreting these medium-run estimates. First, even though (8) estimates the impact of a change
in the average temperature variables, it is not obvious how agents perceived this change or how
their beliefs conditioned their response. To the extent that adaptation requires forward-looking
investments, adaptation choices will depend not only on the underlying damage functions and
adaptation possibilities but also on agents’ expectations. Responses will depend on whether
agents both were aware of the change in average temperature and whether they perceived it to be
a permanent change or just an accumulation of idiosyncratic shocks. Burke and Emerick (2013)
discuss this issue and note that their results are similar in places with lower baseline variance in
temperatures (where, from a Bayesian perspective, farmers should more easily recognize a
change in climate) and with higher baseline variance. Their results are also unaffected by a
county’s political affiliation, which they argue may be correlated with beliefs about global
warming. Thus, Burke and Emerick (2013) provide interesting initial analysis of the
expectations issue and suggest some methods to grapple with it. More generally, the issue of
expectation formation is a rich and important avenue for ongoing research in linking historical
responses to warming with forecasts of future effects.

A second issue is that these papers examine average effects on the order of 15-20 years, while
adaptation and intensification may takes place over longer periods. In the limit, if one took
sufficiently long averages (say 100 years), then one could plausibly begin to estimate directly the
types of effects in the structural equation in (4). Such very long-differences are an exciting
opportunity for new research, but they also amplify an interpretative challenge. The challenge is
that economies are changing and the longer the time difference taken in (8), the further back in
time the analysis goes (by necessity) and the further removed from present-day economic
49
  Among richer countries (those in the upper half of the sample by initial income per-capita), the longer differences
show no statistically significant effect of temperature on economic growth, similar to what was found in the short-
run panel estimates for these countries.
conditions the analysis becomes. To the extent that different economies presented very different
standards of living, technologies, and institutions through the 20th century, one may still make
headway by examining historical heterogeneous treatment effects along various dimensions of
economic development. On the other hand, the future presumably promises new technologies
and other features that may pull economies outside the range of historical experiences, calling for
caution in drawing sharp conclusions from increasingly historical studies.

Long‐run impacts of shocks
A third empirical approach traces out the long-run effects of a given, permanent shock. Although
finding geographically isolated, permanent climate shocks that one can follow empirically is
challenging, there are several existing studies that illuminate this empirical design. For example,
Hornbeck (2012) studies the 1930s “Dust Bowl,” during which a series of large dust storms
stripped topsoil from farmland in the American Great Plains, substantially degrading the
agricultural productivity in some areas. Hornbeck shows that by 1940, the value of farmland fell
by 30 percent in high-erosion areas relative to low erosion areas and by 1992 no more than 25
percent of the initially lost value was recovered. While farmers did adapt by growing hay instead
of wheat, these adaptation mechanisms appear to have mitigated only a small share of the lost
value of the land.

These long-run studies can be especially informative when the data can further trace people over
time, allowing one to estimate the role of migration in influencing long-run aggregate
outcomes.50 Several studies using similar empirical techniques suggest that migration may be an
important channel of adjustment to weather shocks. In the same study, Hornbeck shows that by
1992, the population of high erosion areas was 23 percent lower than low erosion areas.
Boustan, Kahn and Rhode (2012) find similar outmigration in their study of the long-run impact
of tornadoes in the United States during the 1920s and 1930s. Feng, Oppenheimer and
Schlenker (2012) document qualitatively similar patterns in a more recent period (1970-2009),
suggesting that outmigration from areas experiencing negative agricultural productivity shocks
still occurs today, particularly for young adults.

The degree of labor migration in response to these shocks may provoke capital adjustments and
may also be muted through government programs. Hornbeck and Naidu (forthcoming) find that
large floods along the Mississippi River in 1927 led many farmhands to migrate north,
permanently, which in turn led the farm owners to substantially mechanize their agriculture.
Boustan, Kahn and Rhode (2012), by contrast, find in-migration associated with floods, which
they speculate may be related to efforts by the United States government to rebuild the affected
areas and make them more flood-resistant. Examining a more recent period (1980-1996),
Deryugina (2011) finds no change in population, earnings or employment in the 10 years
following a hurricane landfall in the United States, but does find a substantial increase in
50
  Should migration select on people with certain characteristics (such as age, health, or education) care is needed in
interpreting whether long-run changes in outcomes are due to a direct effect on the permanent portion of the
population or reflect a compositional effect caused by the migration channel.
government transfer payments.51 A common theme between the last two papers is that
government assistance to disaster-prone areas may counteract the natural tendencies for out-
migration from these areas, which suggests that institutions may sharply influence adaptation.
More broadly, these long-run studies illustrate that factor reallocation may be an important
mechanism.

Comparing estimates at different time scales to model adaptation
Implicit in several of these approaches is the idea that one can compare the short-run panel
estimates from an equation like (3) with other estimates that incorporate some amount of
adaptation, such as long-differences or the cross-section, to gauge the degree of adaptation.
Burke and Emerick (2013) and Dell, Jones and Olken (2012), for example, compare annual panel
estimates from equation (3) with long differences from equation (8), and note that the similarity
of the estimates suggest relatively little adaptation in their respective contexts. Similarly, as
discussed above, Hornbeck (2012) compares the estimates from 1940 (right after the Dust Bowl)
to estimates from 1992 (more than 50 years later) to quantify the amount of adaptation over that
period.

Several papers also compare panel estimates to the cross-section. Schlenker and Roberts (2009),
in their study of nonlinear effects of temperature on agriculture, note that the cross-sectional and
time-series estimates show similar effects. Dell, Jones and Olken (2009) perform a similar
exercise in their study of temperature in economic growth but use an economic model to help
quantify adaptation effects. Employing the current world cross-section (i.e. equation (2)) to
inform the very long-run impact of temperature on per-capita income and coupling this data with
panel estimates for the short-run effect of temperature shocks on income, this paper writes down
a model with two features – neoclassical convergence, so that poor countries grow faster than
rich countries other things equal, and adaptation. Using consensus estimates on convergence
rates (e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1992; Caselli, Esquivel, and Lefort 1996), one can back out
an estimated adaptation parameter. The analysis implies that, at the global macro level,
adaptation could offset about half of the short-run negative effect of higher temperatures
estimated from panel models.

Spatial spillovers
Additional questions about climatic change concern global-level effects and cross-border effects
that extend beyond isolated spatial responses. Assessing these issues with panel data requires
adjustments to the empirical strategies. Panel models, by employing time fixed effects, eliminate
common global responses. Thus, for example, the average effect of a common commodity price
shock will not be revealed. Moreover, to the extent that the effects of climatic shocks in one
location propagate to other locations (e.g. through trade or migration) the effect on the other
region will not be captured in the typical panel set up, which narrowly examines the relationship

51
  Yang (2008), in the international context, also finds that international financial flows may substantially mitigate
the negative impact of hurricanes on economic activity.
between local shocks and local outcomes. In fact, omitting substantive spillovers in the
estimation could create bias in an equation such as (3).

Localized spillovers can be examined in panel models with the appropriate set-up (e.g., Munshi
2003) by including weather shocks to one’s neighbors, trade partners, or aid providers, for
example, as explanatory variables for local outcomes. In practice, this means extending the
vector     in (3) to contain information about other locations that are relevant to outcomes in
location i. Such empirical studies, which appear currently rare, are important because the
relationships between cross-border interactions and climatic changes are potentially first-order
but also subtle. For example, local weather shocks can affect exports to trading partners (Jones
and Olken 2010), but consequences for the importing country do not appear to have been
studied. From the perspective of the source country, market integration should soften price
variation from local shocks, helping consumers but harming local producers, who are less able to
raise prices as their output quantities fall (Burgess and Donaldson 2010).

Common Global Shocks
Finally, beyond local cross-border effects, one may also want to consider common global shocks,
the estimation of which suggests alternative approaches. To the extent that responses are
heterogeneous (e.g. a commodity price shock will have different effects on consumers and
producer countries), one may exploit this variation via interaction terms to identify differential
effects from global shocks.

To examine the average effect of global shocks, one might drop time fixed effects from the panel
altogether and attempt identification directly from the global rather than local shock. While this
approach raises the risk that the analysis is biased by time-varying omitted variables, this method
may still be compelling if the global weather shocks appear randomly and over a long enough
time series to see these events repeatedly. Hsiang, Meng and Cane (2011) exploit both strategies
to study the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), a global climatic event that is frequently
repeated. The analysis, comparing variation within countries over time, shows that ENSO
strongly predicts civil conflict. Moreover, these effects are heterogeneous; in countries where
ENSO has strong weather effects, El Nino years are associated with twice the rate of civil
conflict compared to La Nina years, yet no observable effects appear in countries where ENSO is
weakly felt.

Bansal and Ochoa (2011) pursue a related strategy. They seek to examine in which countries
economic growth is most responsive to a global temperature shock. They therefore estimate a
version of equation (3) with global temperature innovations as the key climate variable, and
without global time fixed effects. They find that a 1 degree C temperature innovation reduces
growth by about 0.9 percentage points, with stronger impacts felt in those countries closest to the
equator.
Summary
Bridging from the short-run panel estimates to the potential longer-term effects of climate
change requires methods to confront sector-specific adaptation possibilities, intensification
effects, and macroeconomic adjustment mechanisms. While long-run predictions are innately
difficult, the papers reviewed in this section present a variety of econometric approaches to
confronting these potential issues, provide an informative if still small set of pertinent facts, and
suggest that much progress may still be made in tackling these challenges.

In considering longer-run responses, it is also important to note that models of future climatic
change suggest an ongoing process, rather than a permanent shock. Adaptation will thus be an
uncertain progression of steps, with new uncertainties around each corner. Given that the world
has been warming, with noted increases in the last several decades and at a rate broadly similar
to what may occur over the remainder of the 21st century according to the median climate
models, the last 30-40 years provide an empirical environment that appears to closely model the
climate change process – a stochastic series of annual shocks along an upward trend. The
capacity to draw causal inference about short and medium run effects from this recent historical
record is a key opportunity for understanding the trajectory the world is running along. We
regard this as a critically important direction for future work.

As they stand, the panel estimates reviewed in the preceding sections already raise important
questions about current practices in assessing potential climatic impacts while also suggesting
modeling innovations. For example, panel estimates suggest a remarkable breadth of effects,
including agriculture, labor productivity, health, conflict, and more. The panel estimates also
speak to important questions about functional forms of impacts, including level versus growth
effects on national income and a host of non-linear relationships. The next section reviews
mainstream integrated assessment models, the standard tools for making climate-economy
predictions, in light of these recent developments and suggests avenues through which these
models could be adapted given the recent findings.

4.2 How the new climate‐economy literature contributes to climate change
    models and policy prescriptions
In assessing possible policy responses to global climate change, the main analytical tools are
Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs). These models are the main source of well-known
estimates for proposed carbon tax levels and other policy prescriptions. IAMs have been used,
for example, by the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (Parry et al. 2007), the Stern Report (Stern 2007), and the US Interagency Working
Group on Social Cost of Carbon (Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton forthcoming), which plays
a central role in defining current U.S. government policies around carbon emissions.

Section 4.2.1 provides a brief overview of these models. IAMs consist of multiple components,
all of which are important in determining a carbon tax rate and other policies. Our focus is on the
damage function, the component of IAMs that specifies how increased temperatures affect
economic activity, as this is the area to which the literature discussed in this review can most
contribute. We examine standard IAM damage functions in light of the evidence reviewed
above and suggest ways in which these damage functions could be modified to better match
recent econometric evidence.

4.2.1 Integrated Assessment Models
Integrated assessment models combine information about human behavior and climate systems
to make predictions about future climatic change and its consequences. IAMs used for economic
policy analysis typically include four broad components: 1) a model projecting the path for
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 2) a model mapping GHG emissions into climatic change, 3) a
damage function that calculates the economic costs of climatic change, and 4) a social welfare
function for aggregating damages over time and potentially across space. These components can
be combined to estimate the external cost of burning carbon, referred to as the social cost of
carbon (SCC).52

The IAM approach was pioneered with the development of the DICE model (Nordhaus 1991;
Nordhaus 1993). Current examples include the DICE/RICE models (Nordhaus and Yang 1996;
Nordhaus and Boyer 2000; Nordhaus 2010; Nordhaus and Sztorc 2013), the PAGE model
(Hope, Anderson, and Wenman 1993; Hope 2006), and the FUND model (Tol 1999; Tol 2013)
among others.53 All IAMs must make a wide variety of modeling choices, with large
uncertainties remaining across each component. In practice each component of an IAM can be
updated as the climate sciences and social sciences improve our understanding of the underlying
mechanisms.

Uncertainties in the first component, the future GHG emissions path, follow from uncertainty
about future economic growth and technology developments. The second, climate-science
component wrestles with several central issues that are not yet well understood by climatologists,
including the relationship between GHG emissions (flows) and resulting atmospheric GHG
concentrations (stocks), the rate of heat transfer into the deep ocean, and the feedback loops
between warming and atmospheric GHG concentrations (Allen and Frame 2007). The
possibility of positive feedback loops implies that modeled climate change predictions are right-
skewed; in other words, there are “fat tail” probabilities for massive climatic change in the next
century (Hegerl et al. 2006; Weitzman 2009; Burke et al. 2011), which are an important subject
of ongoing climate research.


52
   Note that in the climate science literature, the term IAM is often used more broadly to denote any model that
integrates existing economic and geophysical information to assess climate change. There are a number of such
models. For example, the Global Climate Assessment Model (GCAM) contains only the first two components. It can
be used to simulate the impacts of different emission scenarios and to assess whether a given carbon tax rate is likely
to meet a target to limit warming, but it lacks a damage function and thus cannot be used to solve for the optimal
carbon tax. The MIT ITSM model is another well-known example of this type of model (Prinn 2013).
53
   The DICE/RICE, PAGE, and FUND models were discussed in detail in the IPCC 4th assessment report and in the
U.S. government review of social cost of carbon estimates (Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton forthcoming).
The final two components, which together constitute the economic model, also face considerable
uncertainty. One component is the choice of the social welfare function, which is the subject of
substantial debate, especially around the discount rate.54 Because most of the impacts of climate
change will be realized in the future, IAMs must specify a social welfare function that discounts
the future path of consumption. Since climate abatement policies incur costs today in order to
prevent damages long in the future, the choice of discount rate leads to substantial variation in
the implied SCC and the optimal level of abatement chosen.55

Another important aspect of the social welfare function is the concavity of the utility function.
This property influences not only how one weighs future versus current generations, but also
how one weighs rich versus poor economies at a single point in time. In order to separate climate
policy issues from redistributive issues more broadly, most IAMs impose the Negishi (1972)
principle, which constrains IAMs so that the existing distribution of world income remains
unchanged over time.

While empirical evidence potentially provides some guidance for writing down the social
welfare function, including estimates of market discount rates and the diminishing marginal
utility of consumption, some have argued that the choice of the discount rate and welfare weights
is a normative question that policymakers and societies more generally must decide using ethical
and not positive reasoning (Stern 2007; Heal 2009). Even amongst those who agree that the
social welfare function should be calibrated using empirical evidence, there is considerable
controversy over which market discount rate to use (Litterman 2013; Weitzman 2013)
Nonetheless, choices around social welfare functions can in principle be treated transparently as
policy parameters in IAMs, with a given IAM model optimized repeatedly with different social
welfare functions and the motivations behind different parameters explained, so that policy
makers can make informed decisions given heterogeneous views of these parameters and their
political constraints.56

The second and foundational component of the economic model of IAMs is the climate “damage
function”, which specifies how temperatures or other aspects of climate affect economic activity.
It is this modeling component to which empirical research on climate-economy relationships can
most directly speak. It is therefore instructive to understand how current IAMs typically model
the economic damage from climate change, to assess whether the loss functions are, or are not,

54
   See Litterman (2013); Weitzman (2013); Heal (2009); Newbold and Daigneault (2009); Mendelsohn et al. (2008);
Nordhaus (2007); Stern (2007); Weitzman (2007) and Weitzman (1998), amongst others.
55
   For example, using the IAM specifications of the US Working Group (2010) and Johnson and Hope (2012) but
varying the discount rate, Weitzman (2013) calculates that the SCC would be $1 at a discount rate of 7%, $21 at a
discount rate of 3%, and $266 at a discount rate of 1%. Similarly, differences in the discount rate largely drive the
well-known disparity in the social cost of carbon between the Stern Report (Stern 2007), which uses a discount rate
of 1.4% and argues for an SCC of over $200, and calculations by Nordhaus (2008), who uses a discount rate of
≈5.5% and finds a SCC of around $20 or less.
56
   For example, the U.S. Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon provided some transparency
around the discount rate issue by taking a median discount rate of 3% while also examining discount rates of 2.5%
and 5%.
consistent with the findings of the recent empirical literature reviewed in this paper, and to
consider ways in which damage functions can be designed to incorporate recent findings.

While we focus below on the damage function, it is important to remember that the various
components of IAMs are all related. For example, the larger climate change is, the greater the
role that non-linear damages could play and the more caution is needed in extrapolating from one
particular part of the temperature-damage function. In general, empirical estimates are likely to
tell us more about modest temperature changes – for example, those that will likely occur by
2050 – than about massive changes, such as those that could possibly occur by 2150.

The climate damage function
Different IAMs model the climate damage function in somewhat different ways. For example,
the DICE/RICE models use a Cobb-Douglas production function with capital and labor as inputs,
multiplied by TFP which grows at a constant, exogenously specified rate. Output is then reduced
by the climate damage function. For example, in the DICE model, the damage function is

                                                                                                   (9)

where T is this period’s temperature anomaly and π’s are parameters. Output is modeled as57

                                      ,                                                           (10)

where                ,    denotes output in period t in the absence of warming (e.g., a Cobb-
Douglas aggregate of capital and labor, augmented by TFP). The parameters of the loss function
are calibrated in different ways, but to the best of our knowledge generally do not incorporate the
type of panel-based evidence reviewed here. For example, DICE calibrates the parameters to
match cross-sectional estimates of climate damages reviewed in Tol (2009) (see Nordhaus and
Sztorc 2013) and then adjusts damages up by 25% to incorporate non-monetized damages, such
as impacts on bio-diversity, and to account for potentially catastrophic scenarios, such as sea
level rise, changes in ocean circulation, and accelerated climate change. The DICE/RICE models
use this common proportional damage function for the entire world. The PAGE model similarly
specifies an aggregate, nonlinear climate damage function that multiplies GDP in the absence of
climate change, but PAGE calibrates separate loss functions by region. PAGE also separately
calculates regional-specific damages for sea level impacts and extreme climatic changes (Hope
2006).

In the FUND model, rather than specify an aggregate damage function directly, climate damages
are calculated at the region-by-sector level and aggregated up; that is, FUND posits separate
models for agriculture, forestry, energy consumption, and health (deaths from infectious,
cardiovascular, and respiratory disease), while also considering water resources, extreme storm

57
  Output in DICE/RICE models is also reduced proportionally by abatement costs, which we suppress here for ease
of exposition.
damage, sea level rise, and the value for ecosystems, with potentially separate regional
parameters for each of these models (Tol 2002; Anthoff, Hepburn, and Tol 2009).

An important challenge with the current damage functions is that for the most part they do not
incorporate the type of rigorous empirical evidence on climate damages reviewed here.58 In a
recent review of IAMs, when discussing the calibration of the          function, Pindyck (2013)
writes “the choice of values for these parameters is essentially guesswork. The usual approach is
to select values such that [     ] for T in the range of 2°C to 4°C is consistent with common
wisdom regarding the damages that are likely to occur for small to moderate increases in
temperature…. The bottom line here is that the damage functions used in most IAMs are
completely made up, with no theoretical or empirical foundation.”

Given these critiques, there is a clear opportunity for the damage functions to be improved to
better match the new wave of rigorous, panel-based evidence. The implications of the
econometric evidence discussed here can be thought of in two respects: how we model and
calibrate the climate damage function at a point in time, and how the climate damage function
evolves over time. Short-run panel evidence of the type reviewed in Section 3 can help inform
the damage function at a point in time; the evidence reviewed in Section 4.1 can help inform how
climate damages evolve over time due to adaptation, intensification, and other effects. We
examine each of these issues in turn.

4.2.2 The climate damage function at a point in time

Calibrating Magnitudes
The first and most obvious place in which the weather literature can help is in calibrating the
magnitudes of the effects. That is, for models that specify an aggregate damage function such as
       in equation (10), the estimates reviewed here can be useful to help calibrate       . While
extrapolating to the long-run is challenging (as we discuss in Section 4.1), the empirical
estimates we have reviewed in Section 3 and shown in Table 3 can be a useful input for
calibrating IAM models.59 At minimum, the weather-based estimates reviewed here provide a set
of short-run moments in the data for contemporaneous impacts that models should match.

For models that seek to construct aggregate damages by aggregating up sectoral effects, such as
the FUND model, a second, related issue is which sectors to include. The panel studies reviewed
in this paper suggest several channels that are not currently incorporated in these IAMs. Among
the potentially most important are the direct impacts of temperature on labor productivity (see
Section 3.3) and industrial output (see Section 3.4). These channels can in principle be added
into IAMs in a straightforward manner. Conflict mechanisms, which are also omitted and can

58
   Stern (2013) also notes a second issue, where damage functions do not yet incorporate many types of damages
that could occur at very large temperature increases.
59
   Currently, DICE, for example, calibrates the climate damage function by fitting equation (9) to the range of
studies shown in Table 1 of (2009), which are largely a combination of estimates from other IAMs, enumerative
approaches (starting from scientific studies of certain sectors and adding up) and cross-sectional regressions.
have first-order economic effects, may also be incorporated, although incorporating rare but
important events may suggest using a stochastic damage function approach, and quantifying the
economic impacts is more challenging than with direct economic variables.

Modeling Non‐Linear Effects
A second issue is how to handle nonlinearities. Most existing IAMs incorporate nonlinearities by
postulating quadratic or another similar nonlinear functional form of average temperature.
Several recent studies are able to much more finely disaggregate the effect of temperatures
examining the whole temperature distribution (e.g. Schlenker and Roberts (2009) on agriculture,
Deschênes and Greenstone (2011) on mortality, and Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat (2012)
on energy demand). This approach allows one to more carefully and precisely estimate
nonlinearities, and these studies generally find that it is very hot days in particular that have a
strong effect. The impact of a given, say, 2 degree C increase in mean temperatures on the
number of very hot days depends on the general climate distribution (mean and variance) of each
place. For some outcomes (such as GDP or conflict) that are inherently more aggregated, this
approach may not be possible, but incorporating this type of heterogeneity could be a useful
direction in modeling these nonlinearities more accurately.

Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
The recent panel-based literature also points to substantial heterogeneity in the impacts of
climatic variables. Most IAMs currently incorporate some degree of regional heterogeneity in
climate damage impacts. One emerging possibility, however, is that the heterogeneity in climate
damage may depend not just regionally, but rather explicitly on the level of income. For
example, Barreca et al. (2013) show that the impact of hot temperatures on mortality in the
United States in the 1920s and 1930s was 6 times larger than the impact today, which implies
that the impact of temperatures on mortality in the United States in the 1920s and 1930s is closer
to the impact in India today than in the United States today. Similarly, Dell, Jones and Olken
(2012) find that the main factor distinguishing large from small temperature impacts on
economic growth is a country’s level of income, rather than its region or whether it is hot or cold.
While violence responds to temperature in all locations, the most economically costly conflicts,
civil wars, appear to respond to higher temperatures only in poorer countries (Hsiang, Meng, and
Cane 2011), and more generally conflict effects appear stronger in poorer locations (Hsiang and
Burke 2013). Modeling heterogeneity as a function of income implies that economic growth in
poor countries may reduce climate damages. Incorporating this type of heterogeneity seems an
important future direction for IAMs.

4.2.3 The dynamics of climate damage
Given the long time horizons of IAMs, one needs to project climate damages not just in one year,
but also over a long time period, which requires modeling assumptions about dynamic effects.
Dynamic features of the damage function concern both how one characterizes the relationship
between climate and economic output (and hence how climate variables affect long-run
economic growth) and how the damage function itself evolves endogenously through adaptation.
Over the long run, choices about how to model dynamics can have very large impacts on the
results of IAMs.

The level of output or the growth rate of output
A key modeling choice for the damage function is whether climate affects the level of output or
the growth path of output (Pindyck 2011; Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012; Pindyck 2012). The main
IAMs assume that the impact of climate is on the level of output only, as in equation (10) above,
with the growth of total-factor productivity ( ) continuing exogenously. In some models, such
as DICE, a contemporaneous temperature shock can affect future output by affecting the growth
rate of the capital stock, which evolves endogenously, but effects of climate on the evolution of
“ ”, which here incorporates human capital, technology, and institutions, is not allowed.
Because growth effects, even small ones, will ultimately dominate even large level effects, ruling
out growth effects substantially limits the possible economic damages these models allow.

An alternative way of specifying the damage function is to allow climate to affect the long-run
growth rate (i.e. the growth of ) directly. That is, the evolution of productivity can be written

                                                                                        11

where Δ     is a damage function of temperature. While in any given year there is no
econometric difference between equations (10) and (11) (that is, equation (10) can be represented
by a version of equation (11) with an appropriate choice of Δ ), over many years the data
generating processes evolve quite differently.

For example, consider the impact of a permanent increase in temperature that has a
contemporaneous effect of lowering economic output by 1 percent in a given year. If the growth
of technology is exogenous and the loss function is a level effect, as in equation (10), then
extrapolated out over 100 years, the impact of that increase in temperature would be to lower
GDP by about 1 percent.60 Alternatively, if the impact was modeled through equation (11), so
that the growth rate of technology was 1 percentage point lower per year, then after 100 years
GDP would be lower by about 63 percent.

This simple example suggests that understanding the functional form through which climate
affects economic output is critical. Using distributed lag models, the weather-based evidence
from Dell, Jones and Olken (2012) suggests that, for poor countries, temperature shocks appear
to have long-lasting effects; i.e., the damage function is consistent with (11). Hsiang and Jina
(2013) find similar long-lasting effects for windstorms. Long-difference estimates, as discussed
in Section 4.1.2, show similar patterns; that is, the effects of high temperatures in poor countries
appear to reduce the rate of economic growth as in (11), rather than a one-time output level effect
as in (10). Many of the channels discussed in this review, such as civil conflict or labor
productivity, could plausibly affect productivity growth. While it is hard to know definitively the

60
     This is approximate, since capital accumulation will also respond.
correct functional form for the loss function, even small impacts on productivity growth could,
over time, swamp effects on the level of output (Pindyck 2013).61

Adaptation
Different IAMs currently treat adaptation differently. The loss function in equation (9) does not
model the adaptation process specifically. Other models incorporate adaptation explicitly and in
different ways. For example, the PAGE model allows the economy to buy units of adaptation
separately for sea-level rise, economic, and non-economic costs (that is, one can pay a given
economic cost to purchase an adaptation policy that reduces the climate impact up to a certain
number of degrees). FUND includes adaptation in its sector-specific contexts. For example,
FUND posits that the agricultural damage function depends on the rate of change in temperature
(more rapid changes cause larger damage) and that adaptation causes climate damages to decay
by a constant factor each year, with the adaptation parameters chosen by the modeler. The
challenge is that many of the adaptation assumptions currently used in these models are not
based on rigorous empirical evidence. For example, the FUND documentation describes the
source of these adaptation parameters as expert guesses (Anthoff and Tol 2012).

Understanding adaptation is of first-order importance for writing down a plausible damage
function. It also remains an area of substantial uncertainty. Although panel-based evidence on
adaptation is currently limited and somewhat mixed, and it is hard to forecast long into the
future, the evidence reviewed in Section 4.1.2 does not provide substantial evidence in favor of
the idea that large scale climate damages will be mostly undone by adaptation over the sorts of
horizons that have been measured thus far.

Several pieces of evidence point in this direction. First, the evidence based on medium-term
fluctuations (i.e. long differences) suggests that, whether looking at the impacts on agriculture in
the U.S. (Burke and Emerick 2013) or GDP growth in poor countries (Dell, Jones, and Olken
2012), the estimated impacts are more or less similar when looking at changes over one or two
decades or more as compared to annual temperature fluctuations.62 Second, several studies have
examined whether the marginal impacts of temperature are smaller in areas that frequently
experience that range of temperature (e.g. Schlenker and Roberts (2009) for agriculture) and not
found substantial differences. For longer periods, technological innovations, government policy
innovations, or other adaptive mechanisms may play stronger roles, creating lower damages
globally (Acemoglu et al. 2012; Miao and Popp 2013). Heat-related mortality is one dimension
where such adaptations, in this case through air-conditioning, appear to have substantially altered
the effect of heat (Barreca et al. 2013). Over the very long run, in aggregate, Dell, Jones and

61
   Recent innovations in the IAM literature, such as work in progress by Krussel and Smith (2013), have tried to
incorporate this possibility, calibrating damages to allow for both long-run growth effects (impacts on ) as well as
level effects.
62
   A notable exception is Olmstead and Rhode (2011), in their study of agriculture in the U.S. and Canada
historically, who do find evidence of adaptation in agriculture to substantially colder temperatures – i.e. wheat seeds
were developed that could grow in Canada.
Olken (2009) present a calibration exercise comparing panel and cross-sectional results,
estimating that approximately half of the large short-run GDP effects of temperature increases
are adapted away. We regard further empirical research on the extent of adaptation using the
various empirical approaches outlined in Section 4.1.2 as a key area for future work.63

Reallocation
A final long-run issue concerns factor reallocation, including migration. In general, IAMs treat
the population distribution as exogenous. Yet, as discussed above, over the longer run, migration
may be an important macroeconomic channel through which people respond, and there are
several studies that document outmigration from areas that were negatively affected by climate
shocks (see Section 3.2.2). A key issue for IAMs is the degree to which migration is allowed to
occur only within countries or cross-nationally. In a calibrated model, Desmet and Rossi-
Hansberg (2012), for example, argue that economic damages of climate change would be limited
if full international migration was available but substantial if migration was restricted so people
could not move from southern to northern areas. Migration may also create security issues
(Department of Defense 2010). Incorporating migration is an important area for future work.

4.2.4 Concluding comments
There is no doubt that building IAMs is a challenging exercise with enormous uncertainty. One
may thus be pessimistic about the opportunity to pinpoint estimates of the social cost of carbon
to guide policymaking today. Nonetheless, if global climate change poses potentially first-order
consequences for economic systems, then it demands attempts to inform the costs. We are
optimistic that the damage function can be substantially informed by the recent wave of new
empirical research, which has begun to provide key insights. As discussed in Section 4.1.2, there
are numerous opportunities to continue to make progress on functional forms, including
heterogeneous and non-linear effects, as well as to make progress on more difficult issues,
including adaptation, through panel approaches. While the estimates will never be perfect, the
damage functions in IAMs can be substantially improved, and decision making under the
remaining uncertainty is a subject which economic methods are well suited to consider.


5 Conclusions and Future Directions
This paper has considered recent panel studies that examine the effect of temperature,
precipitation, and windstorms on economic outcomes. We have provided an overview of this
rapidly growing literature’s methodologies, data sets, and findings. Core implications,
limitations, and opportunities of the weather-fluctuation approach have also been discussed.
Overall, this literature is providing many new insights about climate-economy linkages, while
important open directions remain.

63
  The importance of more research on adaptation appears throughout the climate literature. For example, while
IPCC 4th assessment report (Metz et al. 2007) acknowledges a large number of examples of adaptation, they note
that they have largely been focused on sea-level rise rather than other channels, and that considerable more work is
needed in this area.
Integrating across the many studies reviewed, several broad themes emerge. First, there is a wide
range of channels through which weather shocks affect economic outcomes. Shocks, especially
temperature, affect agricultural output, industrial output, energy demand, labor productivity,
health, conflict, political stability, and economic growth. Labor productivity effects alone may
suggest potentially economy-wide mechanisms. Moreover, the magnitudes of the effects are
often substantive. An interesting linkage appears across studies of labor productivity, industrial
output, and economic growth, where estimates converge around a 1-2% loss per 1°C in poor
countries.

Second, the panel studies provide an emerging set of key insights about functional forms. While
the specific dimensions depend on the economic outcome of interest, a general theme emerges
where effects are often not simple linear functions independent of context. Heterogeneous
treatment effects are common features. One repeated form of heterogeneity – whether for
economic growth or mortality – is that poor countries appear much more sensitive to temperature
shocks for many outcomes. Nonlinearities also appear in the weather variables themselves,
where extreme weather is often the primary source of effects. For example, studies of
agricultural output, energy demand, and outdoor labor productivity in rich countries show high
sensitivity to extreme temperatures, but little or no sensitivity to temperature changes within
moderate temperature ranges. A final functional-form insight, which suggests compounding
effects over time with large implications for the overall scope of damages, is the appearance of
potential growth effects, rather than level effects, on income per-capita in poor countries.

This emerging body of work also has ample room for additional progress, and on numerous
dimensions. We close by considering opportunities along three broad trajectories. First, despite
the broad range of outcomes already studied, there are plausibly important channels that have to
date received comparatively little study. One dimension is cross-border effects. For example,
additional analysis of cross-border labor migration would speak to both the capacity for factor
reallocations and the potential for political economy problems and conflict. International and
internal trade effects, including studies of how integrated markets both mute and transmit shocks,
and for whom, are also a rich potential area for further study.

Second, where reduced-form effects have been established, open questions often remain about
specific mechanisms. Especially in cases where there are substantial heterogeneities – i.e. where
effects in some places are effectively “turned off” – carefully understanding the specific
mechanism would help target potential interventions. The more we grow to understand
mechanisms, the more accurately responses can be devised. Narrowly identifying mechanisms is
thus an important area for future research.

Third, and perhaps most importantly, bridging from the well-identified results from short-run
shocks to longer-run outcomes is an important dimension for future work. Recent empirical
advances outlined in Section 4 have begun to show how the same types of panel techniques used
to identify short-run impacts of weather shocks can be used to credibly provide evidence about
likely impacts in the medium term as well. Since different locations in the world experience
extremely different climates, to which they have had time to adapt, the capacity to study shocks
in very different climate contexts provides important inroads. Panel methodologies can also
study medium-run and longer-run changes directly. Keeping in mind that countries have warmed
substantially on average in the last several decades, with substantial variance within and across
countries, there is ample capacity to study medium-run changes. The recent warming rate is also
very similar to that predicted by many climate models through at least the middle of the current
century. Noting that climate change is not about a permanent climate shock but rather about a
stochastic warming process along an upward trend, recent historical experience, which has
occurred on such a stochastic warming trajectory, provides a highly relevant setting to
understand warming effects. Thus, while attention and beliefs about warming may change,
causing changes in responses, and while non-linear global effects (like sea level rise) continue to
sit outside recent historical experience, recent “long differences” provide an important
opportunity to maintain the strength of identification from panel methodologies while studying
time scales that bear more directly on longer-run responses. So far, research using longer time
scales does not suggest substantial adaptation compared to shorter-run estimates over this type of
time scale, but these analyses are still relatively few and much work remains ahead.



References

Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, L. Bursztyn and D. Hemous (2012). "The Environment and Directed
       Technical Change." American Economic Review 102(1): 131-166.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J. A. Robinson (2001). "The Colonial Origins of Comparative
       Development: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review 91(5): 1369-
       1401.
Adams, H. D., M. Guardiola-Claramonte, et al. (2009). "Temperature sensitivity of drought-
       induced tree mortality portends increased regional die-off under global-change-type
       drought." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(17): 7063-7066.
Adams, R. M. (1989). "Global climate change and agriculture: an economic perspective."
       American Journal of Agricultural Economics 71(5): 1272-1279.
Adams, R. M., R. A. Fleming, C.-C. Chang, B. A. McCarl and C. Rosenzweig (1995). "A
       reassessment of the economic effects of global climate change on U.S. agriculture."
       Climatic Change 30(2): 147-167.
Adams, R. M., B. H. Hurd, S. Lenhart and N. Leary (1998). "Effects of global climate change on
       agriculture: an interpretative review." Climate Research 11(1): 19-30.
Allen, C. D., A. K. Macalady, et al. (2010). "A global overview of drought and heat-induced tree
       mortality reveals emerging climate change risks for forests." Forest Ecology and
       Management 259(4): 660-684.
Allen, M. R. and D. J. Frame (2007). "Call Off the Quest." Science 318(5850): 582-583.
Andaya, L. Y. (1993). The world of Maluku: Eastern Indonesia in the early modern period,
       University of Hawaii Press Honolulu.
Anderson, W., N. D. Johnson and M. Koyama (2013). From the persecuting to the protective
        state? Jewish expulsions and weather shocks from 1100 to 1800, George Mason
        University.
Anthoff, D., C. Hepburn and R. S. Tol (2009). "Equity weighting and the marginal damage costs
        of climate change." Ecological Economics 68(3): 836-849.
Anthoff, D. and R. S. Tol (2012). The Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation, and
        Distribution (FUND), Technical Description, Version 3.6.
Anttila-Hughes, J. K. and S. M. Hsiang (2011). Destruction, Disinvestment, and Death:
        Economic and Human Losses Following Environmental Disaster, Columbia University.
Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991). "Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
        evidence and an application to employment equations." The Review of Economic Studies
        58(2): 277-297.
Asadoorian, M. O., R. S. Eckaus and C. A. Schlosser (2008). "Modeling climate feedbacks to
        electricity demand: The case of China." Energy Economics 30(4): 1577-1602.
Auffhammer, M. and A. Aroonruengsawat (2012). "Simulating the impacts of climate change,
        prices and population on California's residential electricity consumption." Climatic
        Change 109(1): 191-210.
Auffhammer, M., S. M. Hsiang, W. Schlenker and A. Sobel (2013). "Global Climate Models: A
        User Guide for Economists." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy
        Forthcoming.
Auffhammer, M. and E. T. Mansur (2012). "Measuring Climatic Impacts on Energy
        Expenditures: A Review of the Empirical Literature".
        Dartmouth.http://www.dartmouth.edu/~mansur/papers/auffhammer_mansur_climateadap
        tenergy.htm
Bansal, R. and M. Ochoa (2011). "Temperature, Aggregate Risk, and Expected Returns".
        Working Paper 17575. National Bureau of Economic Research
Barreca, A., K. Clay, O. Deschenes, M. Greenstone and J. S. Shapiro (2013). "Adapting to
        Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the US Temperature-Mortality Relationship
        over the 20th Century". 18692. National Bureau of Economic Research
Barreca, A. I. (2012). "Climate change, humidity, and mortality in the United States." Journal of
        Environmental Economics and Management 63(1): 19-34.
Barrios, S., L. Bertinelli and E. Strobl (2010). "Trends in rainfall and economic growth in Africa:
        A neglected cause of the African growth tragedy." The Review of Economics and
        Statistics 92(2): 350-366.
Barro, R. J. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1992). "Convergence." Journal of Political Economy: 223-251.
Bhattacharya, J., T. DeLeire, S. Haider and J. Currie (2003). "Heat or eat? Cold-weather shocks
        and nutrition in poor American families." American Journal of Public Health 93(7):
        1149-1154.
Bond, S. (2013). "Dynamic Models: Part 1." August, 2013. from
        http://www.nuffield.ox.ac.uk/users/bond/dynamic1.pdf.
Bond, S. R. (2002). "Dynamic panel data models: a guide to micro data methods and practice."
        Portuguese Economic Journal 1(2): 141-162.
Boustan, L. P., M. E. Kahn and P. W. Rhode (2012). "Moving to Higher Ground: Migration
        Response to Natural Disasters in the Early Twentieth Century." American Economic
        Review 102(3): 238-244.
Braga, A. L. F., A. Zanobetti and J. Schwartz (2001). "The time course of weather-related
        deaths." Epidemiology 12(6): 662-667.
Bruce, J. P., H.-s. Yi and E. F. Haites (1996). Climate change 1995: Economic and social
        dimensions of climate change: Contribution of Working Group III to the second
        assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge
        University Press.
Bruckner, M. and A. Ciccone (2011). "Rain and the Democratic Window of Opportunity."
        Econometrica 79(3): 923-947.
Burgess, R., O. Deschênes, D. Donaldson and M. Greenstone (2011). "Weather and Death in
        India". London School of Economics
Burgess, R. and D. Donaldson (2010). "Can openness mitigate the effects of weather shocks?
        Evidence from India's famine era." The American Economic Review 100(2): 449-453.
Burke, M., J. Dykema, D. Lobell, E. Miguel and S. Satyanath (2011). "Incorporating climate
        uncertainty into estimates of climate change impacts, with applications to US and African
        agriculture". National Bureau of Economic Research
Burke, M. and K. Emerick (2013). "Adaptation to Climate Change: Evidence from US
        Agriculture". University of California,
        Berkeley.http://www.ocf.berkeley.edu/~kemerick/burke_emerick_2013.pdf
Burke, M. B., E. Miguel, S. Satyanath, J. A. Dykema and D. B. Lobell (2009). "Warming
        increases the risk of civil war in Africa." Proceedings of the National Academy of
        Sciences 106(49): 20670-20674.
Burke, P. J. and A. Leigh (2010). "Do Output Contractions Trigger Democratic Change?"
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(4): 124-157.
Cachon, G., S. Gallino and M. Olivares (2012). "Severe Weather and Automobile Assembly
        Productivity". The Wharton School, University of
        Pennsylvania.http://opim.wharton.upenn.edu/~cachon/pdf/weather_1015.pdf
Carlsmith, J. M. and C. A. Anderson (1979). "Ambient temperature and the occurrence of
        collective violence: a new analysis." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37(3):
        337.
Carnicer, J., M. Coll, et al. (2011). "Widespread crown condition decline, food web disruption,
        and amplified tree mortality with increased climate change-type drought." Proceedings of
        the National Academy of Sciences 108(4): 1474-1478.
Caselli, F., G. Esquivel and F. Lefort (1996). "Reopening the convergence debate: a new look at
        cross-country growth empirics." Journal of Economic Growth 1(3): 363-389.
Ciccone, A. (2011). "Economic shocks and civil conflict: A comment." American Economic
        Journal: Applied Economics 3(4): 215-227.
Conley, T. G. (1999). "GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence." Journal of
        econometrics 92(1): 1-45.
Connolly, M. (2008). "Here comes the rain again: Weather and the intertemporal substitution of
        leisure." Journal of Labor Economics 26(1): 73-100.
Couttenier, M. and R. Soubeyran (2013). "Drought and civil war in sub‐saharan africa." The
        Economic Journal.
Crosby, A. W. (1986). Ecological imperialism: The biological expansion of Europe, 900-1900.
        Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Currie, J. and M. Rossin-Slater (2013). "Weathering the storm: Hurricanes and birth outcomes."
        Journal of Health Economics.
Curriero, F. C., K. S. Heiner, et al. (2002). "Temperature and mortality in 11 cities of the eastern
       United States." American Journal of Epidemiology 155(1): 80-87.
Daly, C., R. P. Neilson and D. L. Phillips (1994). "A statistical-topographic model for mapping
       climatological precipitation over mountainous terrain." Journal of applied meteorology
       33(2): 140-158.
De Cian, E., E. Lanzi and R. Roson (2013). "Seasonal temperature variations and energy
       demand." Climatic Change 116(3-4): 805-825.
Dell, M. (2012). "Insurgency and Long Run Development: Lessons from the Mexican
       Revolution".
Dell, M., B. F. Jones and B. A. Olken (2009). "Temperature and Income: Reconciling New
       Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates." American Economic Review 99(2): 198-204.
Dell, M., B. F. Jones and B. A. Olken (2012). "Temperature shocks and economic growth:
       Evidence from the last half century." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
       4(3): 66-95.
Department of Defense (2010). "Quadrennial Defense Review Report".
Deryugina, T. (2011). "The Role of Transfer Payments in Mitigating Shocks: Evidence from the
       Impact of Hurricanes". University of Illinois
Deschênes, O. (2012). "Temperature, Human Health, and Adaptation: A Review of the Empirical
       Literature". Working Paper 18345. National Bureau of Economic Research
Deschênes, O. and M. Greenstone (2007). "The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence
       from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather." American Economic
       Review 97(1): 354-385.
Deschênes, O. and M. Greenstone (2011). "Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: evidence
       from annual fluctuations in weather in the US." American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics 3(4): 152-185.
Deschênes, O. and M. Greenstone (2012). "The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence
       from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather: Reply." The American
       Economic Review 102(7): 3761-3773.
Deschênes, O., M. Greenstone and J. Guryan (2009). "Climate change and birth weight."
       American Economic Review 99(2): 211-217.
Deschênes, O. and E. Moretti (2009). "Extreme weather events, mortality, and migration." The
       Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 659-681.
Desmet, K. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2012). "On the spatial economic impact of global warming".
       #18546. National Bureau of Economic Research
Diamond, J. M. (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, W.W. Norton.
Eskeland, G. S. and T. K. Mideksa (2010). "Electricity demand in a changing climate."
       Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 15(8): 877-897.
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts ECMWF Re-Analysis Data, British
       Atmospheric Data Centre.
Fearon, J. D. and D. D. Laitin (2003). "Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war." American political
       science review 97(1): 75-90.
Federspiel, C., W. Fisk, et al. (2004). "Worker performance and ventilation in a call center:
       analyses of work performance data for registered nurses." Indoor air 14(s8): 41-50.
Feng, S., A. B. Krueger and M. Oppenheimer (2010). "Linkages among climate change, crop
       yields and Mexico's cross-border migration." Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences 107(32): 14257-14262.
Feng, S., M. Oppenheimer and W. Schlenker (2012). "Climate change, Crop Yields, and Internal
        Migration in the United States". Working Paper 17734. National Bureau of Economic
        Research
Fisher, A. C., W. M. Hanemann, M. J. Roberts and W. Schlenker (2012). "The Economic
        Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random
        Fluctuations in Weather: Comment." American Economic Review 102(7): 3749-3760.
Fishman, R. M. (2011). "Climate change, rainfall variability, and adaptation through irrigation:
        Evidence from Indian agriculture". Columbia University
Fjelde, H. and N. von Uexkull (2012). "Climate triggers: Rainfall anomalies, vulnerability and
        communal conflict in sub-Saharan Africa." Political Geography.
Fomby, T., Y. Ikeda and N. V. Loayza (2013). "The Growth Aftermath of Natural Disasters."
        Journal of Applied Econometrics 28(3): 412-434.
Gallup, J. L., J. D. Sachs and A. D. Mellinger (1999). "Geography and Economic Development."
        International Regional Science Review 22(2): 179-232.
Gates, W. (1967). "The Spread of Ibn Khaldun's ideas on Climate and Culture." Journal of
        History and Ideas 28(415-422).
Goodison, B. E., P. Y. T. Louie and D. Yang (1998). WMO Solid Precipitation Measurement
        Intercomparison: Final Report, World Meteorological Organization.
Graff Zivin, J. and M. J. Neidell (forthcoming). "Temperature and the allocation of time:
        Implications for climate change." Journal of Labor Economics.
Graff Zivin, J. S. and M. Neidell (forthcoming). "Environment, Health, and Human Capital."
        Journal of Economic Literature.
Gray, C. L. and V. Mueller (2012). "Natural disasters and population mobility in Bangladesh."
        Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109(16): 6000-6005.
Greenstone, M., E. Kopits and M. Wolverton (forthcoming). "Estimating the Social Cost of
        Carbon for Use in U.S. Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and Interpretation." Review of
        Environmental Economics & Policy.
Grether, W. (1973). "Human performance at elevated environmental temperatures." Aerospace
        Medicine 44(7): 747-755.
Guiteras, R. (2009). "The impact of climate change on Indian agriculture". University of
        Maryland
Hahn, J., J. Hausman and G. Kuersteiner (2007). "Long difference instrumental variables
        estimation for dynamic panel models with fixed effects." Journal of econometrics 140(2):
        574-617.
Hajat, S., B. G. Armstrong, N. Gouveia and P. Wilkinson (2005). "Mortality displacement of
        heat-related deaths: a comparison of Delhi, Sao Paulo, and London." Epidemiology
        16(5): 613-620.
Harari, M. and E. La Ferrara (2013). "Conflict, Climate and Cells: A disaggregated analysis".
Heal, G. (2009). "Climate economics: a meta-review and some suggestions for future research."
        Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1): 4-21.
Hegerl, G. C., T. J. Crowley, W. T. Hyde and D. J. Frame (2006). "Climate sensitivity
        constrained by temperature reconstructions over the past seven centuries." Nature
        440(7087): 1029-1032.
Henley, A. and J. Peirson (1997). "Non-Linearities in Electricity Demand and Temperature:
        Parametric Versus Non‐Parametric Methods." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
        Statistics 59(1): 149-162.
Hidalgo, F. D., S. Naidu, S. Nichter and N. Richardson (2010). "Economic determinants of land
         invasions." The Review of Economics and Statistics 92(3): 505-523.
Hope, C. (2006). "The marginal impact of CO2 from PAGE2002: An integrated assessment
         model incorporating the IPCC's five reasons for concern." Integrated assessment 6(1): 19-
         56.
Hope, C., J. Anderson and P. Wenman (1993). "Policy analysis of the greenhouse effect: An
         application of the PAGE model." Energy Policy 21(3): 327-338.
Hornbeck, R. (2012). "The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short and Long-Run
         Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe." American Economic Review 102(4): 1477-
         1507.
Hornbeck, R. and S. Naidu (forthcoming). "When the Levee Breaks: Labor Mobility and
         Economic Development in the American South." American Economic Review.
Houghton, J., Y. Ding, et al. (2001). "IPCC, 2001: Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis.
         Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the
         Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change." Cambridge, United Kingdom, New York,
         USA, Cambridge University Press 881: 9.
Hsiang, S. M. (2010). "Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic production
         in the Caribbean and Central America." Proceedings of the National Academy of
         Sciences 107(35): 15367-15372.
Hsiang, S. M. and M. Burke (2013). "Climate, Conflict, and Social Stability: What Does the
         Evidence Say?" Climatic Change In Press.
Hsiang, S. M., M. Burke and E. Miguel (2013) "Quantifying the influence of climate on human
         conflict." Science.
Hsiang, S. M. and A. Jina (2013). The Causal Effects of Environmental Catastrophe on
         Economic Growth.
Hsiang, S. M., K. C. Meng and M. A. Cane (2011). "Civil conflicts are associated with the global
         climate." Nature 476(7361): 438-441.
Hsiang, S. M. and D. Narita (2012). "Adaptation to cyclone risk: Evidence from the global cross-
         section." Climate Change Economics 3(02).
Huntington, E. (1915). Civilization and climate, Yale University Press.
Jacob, B., L. Lefgren and E. Moretti (2007). "The Dynamics of Criminal Behavior Evidence
         from Weather Shocks." Journal of Human Resources 42(3): 489-527.
Jayachandran, S. (2006). "Selling labor low: Wage responses to productivity shocks in
         developing countries." Journal of Political Economy 114(3): 538-575.
Jia, R. (2013). "Weather shocks, sweet potatoes and peasant revolts in historical China." The
         Economic Journal.
Jones, B. F. and B. A. Olken (2010). "Climate Shocks and Exports." American Economic
         Review 100(2): 454-459.
Jones, E. L. (1981). The European miracle : environments, economies, and geopolitics in the
         history of Europe and Asia. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Kaiser, H. M., S. J. Riha, D. S. Wilks, D. G. Rossiter and R. Sampath (1993). "A farm-level
         analysis of economic and agronomic impacts of gradual climate warming." American
         Journal of Agricultural Economics 75(2): 387-398.
Karl, T. R., S. J. Hassol, C. D. Miller and W. L. Murray (2006). "Temperature Trends in the
         Lower Atmosphere: Steps for Understanding and Reconciling Differences". U.S. Climate
         Change Science Program
Kenrick, D. T. and S. W. MacFarlane (1986). "Ambient Temperature and Horn Honking A Field
        Study of the Heat/Aggression Relationship." Environment and Behavior 18(2): 179-191.
Kistler, R., W. Collins, et al. (2001). "The NCEP-NCAR 50-year reanalysis: Monthly means
        CD-ROM and documentation." Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 82(2):
        247-267.
Krussel, P. and A. A. Smith (2013). A Global Economy-Climate Model with High Regional
        Resolutoin, Yale University.
Kudamatsu, M., T. Persson and D. Strömberg (2012). "Weather and infant mortality in Africa".
        Centre for Economic Policy Research
Kung, J. K.-s. and C. Ma (2012). Can Cultural Norms Reduce Conflicts? Confucianism and
        Peasant Rebellions in Qing China, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Lee, J. J., F. Gino and B. R. Staats (2012). "Rainmakers: Why bad weather means good
        productivity". Harvard Business School
Levine, D. and D. Yang (2006). A note on the impact of local rainfall on rice output in
        Indonesian districts, University of Michigan.
Litterman, B. (2013). "What is the Right Price for Carbon Emissions."
Liverman, D. M. and K. L. O'Brien (1991). "Global warming and climate change in Mexico."
        Global Environmental Change 1(5): 351-364.
Loayza, N. V., E. Olaberria, J. Rigolini and L. Christiaensen (2012). "Natural disasters and
        growth: Going beyond the averages." World Development 40(7): 1317-1336.
Lobell, D. B., W. Schlenker and J. Costa-Roberts (2011). "Climate trends and global crop
        production since 1980." Science 333(6042): 616-620.
Maccini, S. and D. Yang (2009). "Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic
        Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall." American Economic Review 99(3): 1006-1026.
Maes, M., P. Cosyns, H. Y. Meltzer, F. De Meyer and D. Peeters (1993). "Seasonality in violent
        suicide but not in nonviolent suicide or homicide." American Journal of Psychiatry 150:
        1380-1380.
Masters, W. A. and M. S. McMillan (2001). "Climate and scale in economic growth." Journal of
        Economic Growth 6(3): 167-186.
Maystadt, J.-F., O. Ecker and A. Mabiso (2013). "Extreme weather and civil war in Somalia:
        Does drought fuel conflict through livestock price shocks?". IFPRI
Mehlum, H., E. Miguel and R. Torvik (2006). "Poverty and crime in 19th century Germany."
        Journal of Urban Economics 59(3): 370-388.
Mendelsohn, R., K. Emanuel and S. Chonabayashi (2011). "The impact of climate change on
        hurricane damages in the United States". World Bank
Mendelsohn, R., W. D. Nordhaus and D. Shaw (1994). "The impact of global warming on
        agriculture: a Ricardian analysis." American Economic Review: 753-771.
Mendelsohn, R., T. Sterner, U. M. Persson and J. P. Weyant (2008). "Comments on Simon Dietz
        and Nicholas Stern's Why Economic Analysis Supports Strong Action on Climate
        Change: A Response to the Stern Review's Critics." Review of Environmental Economics
        and Policy 2(2): 309-313.
Menne, M. J. and C. N. Williams (2009). "Homogenization of temperature series via pairwise
        comparisons." Journal of Climate 22(7): 1700-1717.
Metz, B., O. R. Davidson, P. R. Bosch, R. Dave and L. A. Meyer (2007). Climate Change 2007:
        Mitigation of Climate Change - Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth
       Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK,
       Cambridge University Press.
Miao, Q. and D. Popp (2013). "Necessity as the Mother of Invention: Innovative Responses to
       Natural Disasters". #19223. National Bureau of Economic Research
Miguel, E. (2005). "Poverty and Witch Killing." The Review of Economic Studies 72(4): 1153-
       1172.
Miguel, E. and S. Satyanath (2011). "Re-examining economic shocks and civil conflict."
       American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(4): 228-232.
Miguel, E., S. Satyanath and E. Sergenti (2004). "Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
       Instrumental Variables Approach." Journal of Political Economy 112(4): 725-753.
Montesquieu, B. d. (1748). The Spirit of the Laws.
Munshi, K. (2003). "Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the US Labor
       Market." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2): 549-599.
Nakicenovic, N., J. Alcamo, et al. (2000). "Special report on emissions scenarios: a special report
       of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change". IPCC
Negishi, T. (1972). General equilibrium theory and international trade, North-Holland
       Amsterdam.
Newbold, S. C. and A. Daigneault (2009). "Climate response uncertainty and the benefits of
       greenhouse gas emissions reductions." Environmental and Resource Economics 44(3):
       351-377.
Ngo-Duc, T., J. Polcher and K. Laval (2005). "A 53-year forcing data set for land surface
       models." Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres (1984-2012) 110(D6).
Nickell, S. (1981). "Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects." Econometrica 49(6): 1417-
       1426.
Niemelä, R., M. Hannula, S. Rautio, K. Reijula and J. Railio (2002). "The effect of air
       temperature on labour productivity in call centres - a case study." Energy and Buildings
       34(8): 759-764.
Nordhaus, W. and P. Sztorc (2013). "DICE 2013: Introduction and User's Manual".
Nordhaus, W. D. (1991). Economic approaches to greenhouse warming. Global Warming:
       Economic Policy Responses. R. Dornbush, and James Poterba (eds): 33-68.
Nordhaus, W. D. (1993). "Optimal Greenhouse-Gas Reductions and Tax Policy in the 'DICE'
       Model." American Economic Review 83(2): 313-317.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2006). "Geography and macroeconomics: New data and new findings."
       Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
       103(10): 3510-3517.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2007). "A Review of the" Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
       Change"." Journal of Economic Literature: 686-702.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2008). A question of balance: Weighing the options on global warming
       policies, Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2010). "Economic aspects of global warming in a post-Copenhagen
       environment." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(26): 11721-11726.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2010). "The economics of hurricanes and implications of global warming."
       Climate Change Economics 1(01): 1-20.
Nordhaus, W. D. and J. Boyer (2000). Warning the World: Economic Models of Global
       Warming, MIT Press (MA).
Nordhaus, W. D. and Z. Yang (1996). "A regional dynamic general-equilibrium model of
        alternative climate-change strategies." The American Economic Review: 741-765.
O’Loughlin, J., F. D. Witmer, et al. (2012). "Climate variability and conflict risk in East Africa,
        1990–2009." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109(45): 18344-18349.
Olmstead, A. L. and P. W. Rhode (2011). "Adapting North American wheat production to
        climatic challenges, 1839-2009." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
        108(2): 480-485.
Oster, E. (2004). "Witchcraft, weather and economic growth in renaissance Europe." The Journal
        of Economic Perspectives 18(1): 215-228.
Parry, M., O. Canziani, J. Palutikof, P. van der Linden and C. Hanson (2007). Climate Change
        2007: Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Paxson, C. H. (1992). "Using weather variability to estimate the response of savings to transitory
        income in Thailand." The American Economic Review: 15-33.
Pindyck, R. S. (2011). Modeling the Impact of Warming in Climate Change Economics. The
        Economics of Climate Change: Adaptations Past and Present. G. D. Libecap and R. H.
        Steckel, University of Chicago Press.
Pindyck, R. S. (2012). "Uncertain outcomes and climate change policy." Journal of
        Environmental Economics and Management 63(3): 289-303.
Pindyck, R. S. (2013). "Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?" Journal of
        Economic Literature 51(3): 860-872.
Prinn, R. G. (2013). "Development and application of earth system models." Proceedings of the
        National Academy of Sciences 110(Supplement 1): 3673-3680.
Raddatz, C. (2009). "The wrath of God: macroeconomic costs of natural disasters." World Bank.
Ranson, M. (2012). "Crime, Weather, and Climate Change". Harvard Kennedy School Working
        Paper. #8.
Rodrik, D., A. Subramanian and F. Trebbi (2004). "Institutions rule: the primacy of institutions
        over geography and integration in economic development." Journal of economic growth
        9(2): 131-165.
Rohde, R. a. M., Richard A. and Jaconsen, Robert and Muller, Elizabeth and Perlmutter, Saul
        and Rosenfeld, Arthur and Wurtele, Jonathan, and Groom, Donald and Wickham,
        Charlotte (2012). "A new estimate of the average earth surface land temperature spanning
        1753 to 2011." Geoinformatics & Geostatistics: An Overview 1(1).
Rosenzweig, C. and A. Iglesias (1994). Implications of climate change for international
        agriculture: Crop modeling study, US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
        Policy, Planning, and Evaluation, Climate Change Division, Adaptation Branch.
Rotton, J. and E. G. Cohn (2004). "Outdoor Temperature, Climate Control, and Criminal Assault
        The Spatial and Temporal Ecology of Violence." Environment and Behavior 36(2): 276-
        306.
Rudolf, B., H. Hauschild, W. Rüth and U. Schneider (1994). Terrestrial Precipitation Analysis:
        Operational Method and Required Density of Point Measurements. NATO ASI I/26,
        Global Precipitations and Climate Change. M. Desbois and F. Desalmand. Berlin,
        Springer Verlag: 173-186.
Rudolf, B. and U. Schneider (2005). Calculation of gridded precipitation data for the global land-
        surface using in-situ gauge observations. Proceedings of the 2nd workshop of the
        International Precipitation Working Group IPWG.
Sachs, J. (2003). "Institutions Don't Rule: A Refutation of Institutional Fundamentalism." NBER
        Working paper 9490: 263-277.
Sachs, J. D. (2001). "Tropical underdevelopment". #8119. National Bureau of Economic
        Research
Schlenker, W., W. M. Hanemann and A. C. Fisher (2005). "Will US agriculture really benefit
        from global warming? Accounting for irrigation in the hedonic approach." American
        Economic Review 95(1): 395-406.
Schlenker, W., W. M. Hanemann and A. C. Fisher (2006). "The impact of global warming on US
        agriculture: an econometric analysis of optimal growing conditions." Review of
        Economics and Statistics 88(1): 113-125.
Schlenker, W. and D. B. Lobell (2010). "Robust negative impacts of climate change on African
        agriculture." Environmental Research Letters 5(1): 014010.
Schlenker, W. and M. J. Roberts (2009). "Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe damages
        to US crop yields under climate change." Proceedings of the National Academy of
        Sciences 106(37): 15594-15598.
Sekhri, S. and A. Storeygard (2011). "The Impact of Climate Variability on Crimes against
        Women: Dowry Deaths in India". Tufts University
Seppanen, O., W. J. Fisk and D. Faulkner (2003). "Cost benefit analysis of the night-time
        ventilative cooling in office building."
Seppanen, O., W. J. Fisk and Q. Lei (2006). "Effect of temperature on task performance in office
        environment". Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley NationalLaboratory, Berkeley, CA
        (US)
Solomon, S., D. Qin, et al. (2007). Climate Change 2007-The Physical Science basis: Working
        group I contribution to the fourth assessment report of the IPCC, Cambridge University
        Press.
Stern, N. (2013). "The Structure of Economic Modeling of the Potential Impacts of Climate
        Change: Grafting Gross Underestimation of Risk onto Already Narrow Science Models "
        Journal of Economic Literature 51(3): 838-859.
Stern, N. N. H. (2007). The economics of climate change: the Stern review, Cambridge
        University Press.
Tham, K. (2004). "Effects of temperature and outdoor air supply rate on the performance of call
        center operators in the tropics." Indoor air 14(s7): 119-125.
Theisen, O. M. (2012). "Climate clashes? Weather variability, land pressure, and organized
        violence in Kenya, 1989–2004." Journal of Peace Research 49(1): 81-96.
Theisen, O. M., H. Holtermann and H. Buhaug (2011). "Climate wars? Assessing the claim that
        drought breeds conflict."
Tiihonen, J., P. Räsänen and H. Hakko (1997). "Seasonal Variation in the Occurrence of
        Homicide in Finland." American Journal of Psychiatry 154(12): 1711-1714.
Tol, R. S. (1999). "Spatial and temporal efficiency in climate policy: applications of FUND."
        Environmental and Resource Economics 14(1): 33-49.
Tol, R. S. (2002). "Estimates of the Damage Costs of Climate Change. Part 1: Benchmark
        Estimates." Environmental and Resource Economics 21(1): 47-73.
Tol, R. S. (2009). "The Economic Effects of Climate Change." The Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 23(2): 29-51.
Tol, R. S. (2013). "The economic impact of climate change in the 20th and 21st centuries."
        Climatic Change: 1-14.
Tutino, J. (1989). From Insurrection to Revolution in Mexico: Social Bases of Agrarian
        Violence, 1750-1940, Princeton University Press.
U.S. Riot Commission (1968). Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders.
        New York, Bantam Books.
Van Mantgem, P. J., N. L. Stephenson, et al. (2009). "Widespread increase of tree mortality rates
        in the western United States." Science 323(5913): 521-524.
Vrij, A., J. Van der Steen and L. Koppelaar (1994). "Aggression of police officers as a function
        of temperature: An experiment with the Fire Arms Training System." Journal of
        Community & Applied Social Psychology 4(5): 365-370.
Ward, T. (1994). "The origins of the Canadian wheat boom, 1880-1910." Canadian Journal of
        Economics: 865-883.
Wargocki, P. and D. P. Wyon (2007). "The effects of moderately raised classroom temperatures
        and classroom ventilation rate on the performance of schoolwork by children (RP-1257)."
        HVAC&R Research 13(2): 193-220.
Weitzman, M. (2013). "Tail-Hedge Discounting and the Social Cost of Carbon." Journal of
        Economic Literature 51(3): 873-882.
Weitzman, M. L. (1998). "Why the far-distant future should be discounted at its lowest possible
        rate." Journal of environmental economics and management 36(3): 201-208.
Weitzman, M. L. (2007). "A review of the Stern Review on the economics of climate change."
        Journal of Economic Literature 45(3): 703-724.
Weitzman, M. L. (2009). "On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate
        change." The Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 1-19.
Weitzman, M. L. (2013). "Tail-Hedge Discounting and the Social Cost of Carbon." Journal of
        Economic Literature 51(3): 873-882.
Welch, J. R., J. R. Vincent, et al. (2010). "Rice yields in tropical/subtropical Asia exhibit large
        but opposing sensitivities to minimum and maximum temperatures." Proceedings of the
        National Academy of Sciences 107(33): 14562-14567.
Westerling, A. L., H. G. Hidalgo, D. R. Cayan and T. W. Swetnam (2006). "Warming and earlier
        spring increase western US forest wildfire activity." Science 313(5789): 940-943.
Willmott, C. J., K. Matsuura and D. R. Legates. (2010). "Terrestrial Air Temperature: 1900-2008
        Gridded Monthly Time Series." from
        http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/html_pages/download.html.
Wolfram, C., O. Shelef and P. J. Gertler (2012). "How Will Energy Demand Develop in the
        Developing World?". #17747. National Bureau of Economic Research
World Meterological Organization (1985). Review of Requirements for Area-averaged
        Precipitation Data, Surface-based and Space-based Estimation Techniques, Space and
        Time Sampling, Accuracy and Error; Data Exchange ; Prepared by the Workshop on
        Precipitation Data Requirements Boulder, Colorado, International Council for Science.
Yang, D. (2008). "Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International Financial
        Flows, 1970-2002." The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 8(1).
Yang, D. and H. Choi (2007). "Are remittances insurance? Evidence from rainfall shocks in the
        Philippines." The World Bank Economic Review 21(2): 219-248.
Figure 1: Changes over time in the number of ground stations included in the Global
Historical Climatology Network




Notes: This figure plots the number of ground stations included each year in the Global Historical Climatology Network dataset.
Figure reproduced from http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/html_pages/Global2_Ts_2009/air_temp_stat_num.pdf
Figure 2: Max daily temperatures in New York’s Central Park
      .03    .05
             .04
   Density
             .02
             .01
             0




                   -10   0               10             20             30   40
                                 Max daily temperature (Degrees C)


Notes: Data is from 2000-2010. Authors’ calculations based on data from GHCN daily summaries.



Figure 3: Max daily temperatures in Phoenix, AZ compared to New York’s Central Park
             .06
             .04
   Density
             .02
             0




                   -20       0                  20                40        60
                                 Max daily temperature (Degrees C)

                                       Phoenix             New York


Notes: Data is from 2000-2010. Authors’ calculations based on data from GHCN daily summaries.
