                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE REDISTRIBUTIVE EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL DEREGULATION

                                           Anton Korinek
                                          Jonathan Kreamer

                                        Working Paper 19572
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19572


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We would like to acknowledge helpful comments and discussions with George Akerlof, Robert Bichsel,
Olivier Blanchard, Claudio Borio, Maya Eden, Bruce Greenwald, Gita Gopinath, Andy Haldane, Oliver
Hart, Olivier Jeanne, Bob King, Andrew Levin, Jonathan Ostry, Marco Pagano, Goetz von Peter, Jean-Charles
Rochet, Damiano Sandri, Joseph Stiglitz, Elif Ture and Razvan Vlahu, as well as participants at the
CEMLA Conference on Macroprudential Policy, the CIGI/INET Conference on False Dichotomies,
the 1st CSEF Conference on Finance and Labor, the 2013 FIRS Conference, the 2012 JME-SNB-SCG
Conference, the 2013 LASA Conference, the 2013 NBER Summer Institute and at seminars at the
BIS, the Boston Fed, the IMF and Sveriges Riksbank. Korinek thanks the BIS Research Fellowship
and INET/CIGI for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Anton Korinek and Jonathan Kreamer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Redistributive Effects of Financial Deregulation
Anton Korinek and Jonathan Kreamer
NBER Working Paper No. 19572
October 2013
JEL No. E25,E44,G28,H23

                                              ABSTRACT

Financial regulation is often framed as a question of economic efficiency. This paper, by contrast,
puts the distributive implications of financial regulation center stage. We develop a model in which
the financial sector benefits from risk-taking by earning greater expected returns. However, risk-taking
also increases the incidence of large losses that lead to credit crunches and impose negative externalities
on the real economy. Assuming incomplete risk markets between the financial sector and the real economy,
we describe a Pareto frontier along which different levels of risk-taking map into different levels of
welfare for the two parties. A regulator has to trade off efficiency in the financial sector, which is aided
by deregulation, against efficiency in the real economy, which is aided by tighter regulation and a
more stable supply of credit. We also show that financial innovation, asymmetric compensation schemes,
concentration in the banking system, and bailout expectations enable or encourage greater risk-taking
and allocate greater surplus to the financial sector at the expense of the rest of the economy.


Anton Korinek
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
440 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
akorinek@jhu.edu

Jonathan Kreamer
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
Tydings Hall 3114
College Park, MD 20742
kreamer@econ.umd.edu
1             Introduction
Financial regulation is often framed as a question of economic e¢ ciency in the
economic literature. However, the intense political debate on the topic suggests
that redistributive questions are front and center in setting …nancial regulation.
In the aftermath of the …nancial crisis of 2008/09, for example, consumer orga-
nizations, labor unions and political parties championing worker interests have
strongly advocated a tightening of …nancial regulation, whereas …nancial insti-
tutions and their representatives have issued dire warnings of the dangers and
high costs of tighter regulation.
    Financial regulation matters for the rest of the economy because the …nancial
sector plays a central role in a modern market economy (see e.g. Caballero,
2010). It provides credit to all sectors of the economy and intermediates capital
to its most productive use. As long as the …nancial sector is well capitalized,
it can ful…ll this role almost seamlessly. During such times, it seems as if the
…nancial system was just a veil and the economy can be well understood without
explicitly considering the …nancial sector.
    If the …nancial sector su¤ers large losses and …nds itself short of capital,
however, it imposes large negative externalities on the rest of the economy. It can
no longer ful…ll its role of intermediating savings to productive investment and
spending opportunities, leading to a credit crunch and a decline in output that
hurts all other factor owners in the economy: for example, workers experience
unemployment and declines in their wages even though their labor could be
employed more productively if the …nancial intermediation process were working
well.
                        Bank equity                              Spread on risky borrowing                                 Real wage bill
                                                             6                                                 8400
          6000
                                                                                                               8300
          5500                                               5
          5000                                                                                                 8200
                                                             4
                                                 Pct. Rate




          4500                                                                                                 8100
 Bil. $




                                                                                                      Bil. $




          4000                                                                                                 8000
                                                             3
          3500
                                                                                                               7900
          3000                                               2
                                                                                                               7800
          2500
                                                         1                                                     7700
            2006Q3   2008Q4    2011Q1   2013Q2         2006Q3       2008Q4     2011Q1        2013Q2             2006Q3   2008Q4    2011Q1   2013Q2




                      Figure 1: Bank equity, interest rate spread and wage bill.

    These observations are consistent with the experience of the US during the
2008/09 …nancial crisis, as illustrated in Figure 1. The …rst panel depicts the
decline in bank equity during the crisis.1 The second panel shows the concurrent
increase in the spread between interest rates for risky borrowing and safe rates.
Although some of this increase is attributable to higher default risk, a signi…cant
fraction is due to constraints in the …nancial system (see e.g. Adrian et al., 2010).
          1 For   a detailed description of data sources, see appendix C.


                                                                         2
The last panel shows the steep decline in the wage bill over the course of the
crisis. The recovery in this variable was somewhat sluggish, possibly because
the initial shock to the …nancial sector was aggravated by aggregate demand
problems and constraints on household balance sheets. Similar macroeconomic
e¤ects have been observed during …nancial crises for centuries (see e.g. Reinhart
and Rogo¤, 2009).
    The crisis occurred after decades of …nancial deregulation had removed the
restrictions on …nancial sector risk-taking that had been imposed after the Great
Depression (see e.g. Abiad et al., 2010). This process of deregulation was
accompanied by strong growth in the size of the …nancial sector to levels not
seen since the late 1920s (Philippon and Reshef, 2013a). And as the …nancial
crisis of 2008/09 demonstrated vividly, deregulation also led to a more volatile
…nancial system in which the real economy was exposed to an increased risk of
credit crunches.

    This paper develops a formal model to analyze the distributive con‡ict inher-
ent in regulating risk-taking in the …nancial sector. We capture the special role
of the …nancial sector by assuming that it is the only sector that can engage in
…nancial intermediation and channel capital into productive investments. This
assumption applies to the …nancial sector in a broad sense, including broker-
dealers, the shadow …nancial system and all other actors that engage in …nancial
intermediation. For simplicity, we will refer to all actors in the …nancial sector
broadly de…ned as “bankers.”
    We introduce two types of …nancial imperfections into our model. First,
bankers su¤ers from a commitment problem and need to have su¢ cient capi-
tal in order to engage in …nancial intermediation. This captures the standard
notion that bankers need to have “skin in the game” to ensure proper incen-
tives. Secondly, insurance markets between bankers and the rest of society are
incomplete. We capture this by making the extreme assumption that the hold-
ings of bank equity are concentrated in the hands of bankers. More generally,
a su¢ cient condition is that the holdings of bank equity are not proportionally
distributed across the …nancial elite and the rest of society.2
    Because of the “skin in the game”-constraint, a well-capitalized …nancial
sector is essential for the rest of the economy. In particular, the …nancial sector
needs to hold a certain minimum level of capital to intermediate the …rst-best
level of credit in the economy and achieve the optimal level of output. If ag-
gregate bank capital declines below this threshold, binding …nancial constraints
force bankers to cut back on credit to the rest of the economy. The resulting
credit crunch causes output to contract, wages to decline and lending spreads
to increase, capturing the typical e¤ects of …nancial crises that we illustrated
in Figure 1. At a technical level, these price movements constitute pecuniary
externalities that hurt the real economy but bene…t bankers.
   2 An alternative and complementary assumption would be that bank managers are able

to extract a signi…cant fraction of the surplus earned by …nancial institutions in the form of
agency rents. The redistributive implications would be the same as in our framework.




                                              3
    When …nancial institutions decide how much risk to take on, they trade o¤
the bene…ts of risk-taking in terms of higher expected return with the risk of
being constrained, but they do not internalize the negative externalities on the
rest of the economy. Bankers always choose a strictly positive level of risk-taking
in our model so as to earn superior returns. By contrast, workers are averse to
‡uctuations in bank capital and would like to limit the level of risk-taking in
the …nancial sector to ensure a more stable supply of credit to the real economy.
    We characterize a Pareto-frontier along which higher levels of risk-taking
correspond to higher levels of welfare for bankers and lower levels of welfare
for workers. We interpret …nancial regulation and deregulation as imposing or
relaxing regulatory constraints on risk-taking, which moves the economy along
this Pareto frontier. In a sense, …nancial regulators need to trade o¤ e¢ ciency
in the …nancial sector, which is aided by deregulation, against e¢ ciency in the
real economy, which is aided by tighter regulation and a more stable supply of
credit.
    The distributive con‡ict over risk-taking and regulation is the result of both
…nancial imperfections in our model. If bankers weren’t …nancially constrained,
then they could always intermediate the optimal amount of capital and their
risk-taking would not a¤ect the real economy. Similarly, if risk markets were
complete, then bankers and the rest of the economy would share not only the
downside but also the bene…ts of …nancial risk-taking. In both cases, the dis-
tributive con‡ict would disappear. By contrast, in our benchmark framework
in which both …nancial frictions are present, the occasionally binding …nancial
constraint on bankers imposes one-sided negative externalities on workers in the
form of credit crunches.
    Our …ndings are consistent with the experience of a large number of countries
in recent decades: deregulation allowed for record pro…ts in the …nancial sec-
tor, which bene…tted largely the …nancial elite (see e.g. Philippon and Reshef,
2013a). Simultaneously, most countries also experienced a decline in their labor
share (Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013). When crisis struck, e.g. during the
…nancial crisis of 2008/09, economies experienced a sharp decline in …nancial
intermediation and real capital investment, with substantial negative externali-
ties on workers and the rest of the economy. Such occasionally binding …nancial
constraints are also generally viewed as the main driving force behind …nancial
crises in the quantitative macro literature (see e.g. Mendoza, 2010).
    Drawing an analogy to more traditional forms of externalities, we can com-
pare …nancial deregulation to the relaxation of safety rules on nuclear power
plants: such a relaxation will reduce costs, which increases the pro…ts of the
nuclear industry in most states of nature and may bene…t the rest of society
via reduced electricity rates. However, it comes at a heightened risk of nuclear
meltdowns that impose massive negative externalities on the rest of society. In
expectation, relaxing safety rules increases the pro…ts of the nuclear sector at
the expense of the rest of society.

    We analyze a number of extensions to study how risk-taking in the …nancial
sector interacts with the distribution of resources in our model economy. We in-


                                        4
vestigate the e¤ects of …nancial innovation that enables bankers to take on more
risk by providing them with access to a wider menu of investment options and
…nd that it always bene…ts bankers, but it may result in higher volatility and
impose greater externalities on workers. We provide an example in which work-
ers are unambiguously worse o¤ from …nancial innovation. Similarly, if bank
managers have asymmetric compensation packages, they will have incentives
to take on higher risks and expose the rest of the economy to larger negative
externalities.
    If bankers have market power, we …nd that their precautionary incentives are
reduced because they internalize that any losses they su¤er will lead to a decline
in aggregate bank capital and push up lending rates, which mitigates the losses.
This increases risk-taking and bene…ts bankers at the expense of workers. Our
…nding therefore highlights a new dimension of welfare losses from concentrated
banking systems, leading to increased …nancial instability.
    The redistributive e¤ects of deregulation are magni…ed when we allow for
discretionary bailouts: Ex-post, workers …nd it collectively optimal to provide
bailouts to bankers when aggregate bank capital is su¢ ciently scarce so as to
ease the credit crunch and mitigate the decline in wages. This makes it di¢ cult
to commit not to provide bailouts. Ex-ante, bailouts reduce the precaution-
ary incentives of bankers and increase risk-taking even if they are provided in
lump-sum fashion. If bailouts are contingent on the capital levels of individual
…nancial institutions, the distortive e¤ects on risk-taking are reinforced, corre-
sponding to the traditional moral hazard e¤ect.
    We therefore identify a novel channel through which bailouts lead to redistri-
butions between the …nancial sector and the real economy: they lead to greater
risk-taking which boosts expected bank pro…ts but leads to a higher incidence
of credit crunches and more severe externalities on workers in bad times. In ex-
pectation, the redistribution due to higher risk-taking is typically much larger
than the outright transfers that …nancial institutions receive during bailouts, as
we illustrate in an example. Financial deregulation exacerbates both of these
e¤ects since it allows for higher risk and increases the probability and magnitude
of bailouts.

Policy Implications Our paper highlights the distributive con‡ict inherent
in setting …nancial regulation. Given the two assumed …nancial market imper-
fections in our model, …nancial regulators have to trade o¤ greater e¢ ciency in
the …nancial sector, which relies on risk-taking, versus greater e¢ ciency in the
real economy, which requires a stable supply of credit.
    If regulators care primarily about the real economy, for example, then their
main concern is to ensure that bankers are well-capitalized so they can provide a
stable supply of credit. Interpreting our results more broadly, this is aided by (i)
separating risky activities, such proprietary trading, from traditional …nancial
intermediation, (ii) imposing higher capital requirements on risky activities, in
particular on those that do not directly contribute to lending to the real econ-
omy, (iii) limiting payouts if they endanger a su¢ cient level of capitalization



                                         5
in the …nancial sector, (iv) using structural policies that reduce incentives for
risk-taking, e.g. by limiting market power, asymmetric managerial incentive
contracts, …nancial innovations that increase risk-taking, and bailout expec-
tations and (v) forcing recapitalizations when necessary, even if they impose
private costs on bankers. Opposite conclusions apply if regulators place a larger
welfare weight on bankers: they will roll back regulations on risk-taking, reduce
capital requirements etc.
    A Pareto-improvement could only be achieved if deregulation was coupled
with measures that increase risk-sharing between bankers and the rest of the
economy so that the upside of risk-taking is shared. Even if formal risk markets
for this are absent, redistributive policies such as higher taxes on …nancial sector
pro…ts that are used to strenghten the social safety net for the rest of the
economy would constitute such a mechanism.

Literature This paper is related to a growing literature on the e¤ects of …-
nancial imperfections in macroeconomics (see e.g. Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010,
for an overview). Most of this literature describes how binding …nancial con-
straints may amplify and propagate shocks (see e.g. Bernanke and Gertler, 1989;
Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997) and lead to signi…cant macroeconomic ‡uctuations
that a¤ect output, employment and interest rates (see e.g. Gertler and Karadi,
2011). However, little emphasis is placed on the redistributive e¤ects of such
‡uctuations between …nancial intermediaries and the rest of the economy. The
main contribution of our paper is to …ll this gap and show that binding …nancial
constraints lead to signi…cant negative externalities so that risk-taking bene…ts
the …nancial sector at the expense of the real economy when risk markets are
incomplete.
    Our paper is also related to a long and growing literature on …nancial regu-
lation (see e.g. Freixas and Rochet, 2008, for a comprehensive review), but puts
the distributive implications of such …nancial policies center stage. One recent
strand of this literature argues that …nancial regulation should be designed to in-
ternalize pecuniary externalities in the presence of incomplete markets. See e.g.
Lorenzoni (2008), Jeanne and Korinek (2010ab, 2012), Bianchi and Mendoza
(2010), Korinek (2011) and Gersbach and Rochet (2012) for papers on …nancial
regulation motivated from asset price externalities, or Caballero and Lorenzoni
(2010) for a paper on currency intervention based on wage externalities in an
emerging economy. Campbell and Hercowitz (2009) study pecuniary externali-
ties on the interest rate that arise in the transition from an equilibrium with low
household debt to an equilibrium with high household debt. They show that
deregulation that relaxes collateral constraints on borrowers may reduce bor-
rower welfare by increasing the interest rate. Our paper is based on pecuniary
externalities from bank capital to wage earners and studies the redistributive
implications of …nancial deregulation and bailouts.
    A second strand of the literature on …nancial regulation argues that an im-
portant objective of regulation is to limit the risk-shifting of …nancial institutions
that are subject to government guarantees (see e.g. Hall, 2010, and Martinez-



                                          6
Miera and Suarez, 2012). Our contribution to this literature is twofold: …rst,
we provide an endogenous rationale for why it is in the interest of workers to
provide bailouts once a crisis has occurred. In our model, such transfers lead to
a Pareto improvement because they substitute for missing markets. In existing
macroeconomic models (see e.g. Bianchi, 2012; Sandri and Valencia, 2013), the
desirability of bailouts has only been shown in models in which the transfer is
made by a representative agent who also owns the recipient banks so that redis-
tributive e¤ects are by de…nition avoided. Secondly, we put the redistributive
e¤ects of bailout policies center stage. Our …ndings are also related to an emerg-
ing literature that shows that expansive monetary policy during crises works in
part by redistributing wealth (see e.g. Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2012).
    In the discussion of optimal capital standards for …nancial institutions, Ad-
mati et al. (2010) and Miles et al. (2012) have argued that society at large
would bene…t from imposing higher capital standards. They focus on the direct
social costs of risk-shifting by banks on governments. We focus instead on the
indirect social costs caused by credit crunches. Estimates suggest that in most
countries, including in the US, the social cost of credit crunches far outweighed
the direct monetary costs of bailouts related to the …nancial crisis of 2008/09
(see e.g. Haldane, 2010).
    Our paper is also related to a growing literature that focuses on the role
of the growth of the …nancial sector in increasing societal inequality over the
past decades (see e.g. Kaplan and Rauh, 2010; Philippon and Reshef, 2012) as
well as the implications for …nancial instability and crises (see e.g. Kumhof and
Ranciere, 2012). We provide a uni…ed explanation for the increase in inequality
and instability based on the notion that the centrality of the …nancial sector
in a modern market economy may allow the sector to extract large rents by
increasing its risk-taking.
    At a technical level, the exclusive role of bankers in intermediating capital
is related to a literature on “bottlenecks,” which describes how the supplier
of an essential productive input can earn rents from restricting supply to her
customers (see e.g. Rey and Tirole, 2007, for an overview). In our framework,
bankers earn similar rents when risk-taking creates an aggregate scarcity of bank
capital.
    There is also a growing empirical literature that documents the importance of
…nancial sector capital for the broader economy and that underpins our modeling
assumptions. Adrian et al. (2010) provide evidence that the capital position of
…nancial intermediaries has strong e¤ects on the real economy. Haldane (2010)
estimates that the Great Financial Crisis of 2008/09 imposed social costs on
the world economy in the order of magnitude of several trillion dollars. Furceri
et al. (2013) provide cross-country evidence on the deleterious e¤ects of capital
account liberalization on inequality.

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: The ensuing section develops an
analytical model in which bankers intermediate capital to the real economy.
Section 3 analyzes the determination of equilibrium and how changes in bank
capital di¤erentially a¤ect the two sectors. Section 4 describes the redistributive


                                        7
con‡ict over risk-taking between bankers and the real economy. In section 5,
we analyze the impact of factors such as …nancial innovation, agency problems,
market power and discretionary bailouts on this con‡ict.


2     Bank Capital and Workers
2.1    Model Setup
We assume an economy with three time periods, t = 0; 1; 2, and a unit mass
each of two types of agents: bankers and workers. Furthermore, there is a single
good that serves both as consumption good and capital.

Bankers In period 0, bankers are born with one unit of the consumption good.
They invest a fraction x 2 [0; 1] of it in a project that delivers a risky payo¤ A~
in period 1 with a continuously di¤erentiable distribution function G(A)    ~ over
the domain [0; 1), a density function g(A)   ~ and an expected value E[A]   ~ > 1.
They hold the remainder (1 x) in a storage technology with gross return 1.
    After the realization of the risky payo¤ A~ in period 1, the resulting equity
level of bankers is
                                e = xA~ + (1 x)
Consistent with the literature on banking regulation, we will frequently use the
term “bank capital” to refer to bank equity e in the following.
    In period 1, bankers raise d deposits at a gross deposit rate of r and lend
k d + e to the productive sector of the economy at a gross interest rate R. In
period 2, bankers are repaid and value total pro…ts in period 2 according to a
linear utility function
                                   = Rk rd

Workers Workers are born in period 1 with a large endowment m of con-
sumption goods. They lend an amount d of deposits to bankers at a deposit
rate of r and hold the remainder in a storage technology with gross return 1.
No arbitrage implies that the deposit rate satis…es r = 1.
    In period 2, workers inelastically supply one unit of labor ` = 1 at the pre-
vailing market wage w. (The main insights of our framework are unchanged if
labor supply is elastic.) Worker utility depends only on their total consump-
tion. For notational simplicity we normalize the expression for worker utility by
subtracting the constant m so that

                                     u = w`

Remark: In the described framework, risk markets between bankers and workers
are incomplete since workers are born in period 1 after the technology shock A~
is realized and cannot enter into risk-sharing contracts with bankers in period 0.
All the risk xA~ from investing in the risky technology therefore needs to be borne
by bankers. An alternative microfoundation for this market incompleteness


                                        8
would be that obtaining the distribution function G(A)   ~ requires that bankers
exert an unobservable private e¤ort, and insuring against ‡uctuations in A~ would
destroy their incentives to exert this e¤ort. In practice, bank capital is subject
to signi…cant ‡uctuations, as illustrated in Figure 1, and a large fraction of this
risk is not shared with the rest of society.3 We will investigate the implications
of reducing this market incompleteness below in Section 4.1.

Firms Workers collectively own …rms, which are neoclassical and competitive
and produce in period 2. Firms rent capital k from bankers at interest rate R
at the end of period 1, and hire labor ` from workers at wage w in period 2.
They seek to maximize pro…ts F (k; `) w` Rk, where F (k; `) = Ak `1
with 2 (0; 1). For simplicity, we assume that there is no uncertainty in …rms’
production. In equilibrium …rms earn zero pro…ts.
    The …rst-order conditions of the …rm problem are
                                                     1 1
                             R    = Fk = Ak            `
                             w    = F` = (1         ) Ak `

Remark 1: In the described setup, we have separated the risk-taking decision x
of bankers from the …nancial intermediation function k by assuming they occur
in separate time periods. This simpli…es our analysis, but implies that there
is no direct contemporaneous bene…t to workers if bankers invest more in the
risky payo¤ with higher expected return. We show in appendix A.2 that our
results continue to hold if the risk-taking and …nancial intermediation functions
of bankers are intertwined: we assume that the aggregate production function
of the economy in both periods 1 and 2 is [A~t xt + 1 xt ]F (kt ; `t ) so that workers
directly bene…t from risk-taking xt because they receive higher wages in period
t.4
Remark 2: Our model setup assumes for simplicity that the endowments of
labor and savings as well as the …rms are owned by the same set of agents
which we called workers. Our results would be unchanged if we assigned these
ownership claims to separate types of agents since savers earn zero net returns
and …rms earn zero pro…ts in equilibrium. For example, there could be an
additional type of agent called capital owner who own all the savings and …rms
of the economy.
   3 For example, Wall Street banks routinely pay out up to half of their revenue as employee

compensation in the form of largely performance-dependent bonuses, constituting an implicit
equity stake by insiders in their …rms. A considerable fraction of remaining explicit bank
equity is also held by insiders. Furthermore, only 17.9% of US households hold direct stock
investments, and another 33.2% hold equity investments indirectly, e.g. via retirement funds
or other mutual funds. And this equity ownership is heavily skewed towards the high end of
the income distribution (see Table A2a in Kennickel, 2013).
   4 In a similar vein, it can be argued that risky borrowers (e.g. in the subprime segment)

bene…tted from greater bank risk-taking because they obtained more and cheaper loans.




                                             9
           Period 0                      Period 1                        Period 2


   • Banks enter with initial   • Shock Ã realized            • Households supply labor
     endowment 1                                                 `=1
                                • Bank equity
   • Banks choose risky in-       e = (1 − x) + Ãx            • Firms produce F (k, `)
     vestment x ∈ [0, 1]
                                • Households enter and de-     • Banks receive return Rk,
                                  posit d at rate r in banks     households obtain w`

                                • Bankers supply capital       • Banks pay households rd
                                  k ≤ d + e to firms




                                 Figure 2: Timeline

2.2    First-Best Allocation
A planner who implements the …rst-best maximizes aggregate surplus in the
economy subject to the resource constraints of the economy,
           max E [F (k; `) + e + m        k]    s.t.   e   = xA~ + (1        x)
          x;e;k;`
                                                       k       e+m
                                                       x   2   [0; 1] ; ` 2 [0; 1]
In period 2, the optimal labor input is ` = 1, and the optimal level of cap-
                                     1
ital investment satis…es k = ( A) 1 , i.e. it equates the marginal return to
investment to the return on the storage technology,
                                R = Fk (k ; 1) = 1
We call the resulting output level F (k ; 1) the …rst-best level of output, or
potential output. As we discussed earlier, we assume that m is large so that
the resource constraint k     e + m is lax, i.e. there are always su¢ cient funds
available in the economy to invest k in the absence of market frictions. The
marginal product of labor at the …rst-best level of capital is w = F` (k ; 1).
    In period 0, the …rst-best planner chooses the portfolio allocation that max-
imizes expected bank equity E [e]. Since E[A]    ~ > 1, she will pick the corner
solution x = 1.
    Since a fraction F (k ; 1) of production is spent on investment, the net
social surplus generated in the …rst-best is
                            S = (1                       ~
                                         ) F (k ; 1) + E[A]

2.3    Financial Constraint
We assume that bankers are subject to a commitment problem to capture the
notion that bank capital matters. Speci…cally, bankers have access to a technol-
ogy that allows them to divert a fraction (1     ) of their gross revenue, where


                                           10
  2 [0; 1]. By implication depositors can receive repayments on their deposits
that constitute at most a fraction of the gross revenue of bankers. Antici-
pating this commitment problem, depositors restrict their supply of deposits to
satisfy the constraint
                                   rd    Rk                                 (1)
    An alternative interpretation of this …nancial constraint follows the spirit of
Holmstrom and Tirole (1998): Suppose that bankers in period 1 can shirk in
their monitoring e¤ort, which yields a private bene…t of B per unit of period 2
revenue but creates the risk of a bank failure that may occur with probability
   and that results in a complete loss. Bankers will refrain from shirking as long
as the bene…ts are less than the costs, or BRk           [Rk rd]. If depositors
impose the constraint above for = 1 B , they can ensure that bankers avoid
shirking and the associated risk of bankruptcy.5
    Furthermore, our model assumes that all credit is used for production so
that binding constraints directly reduce supply in the economy. An alterna-
tive and complementary assumption would be that credit is required to …nance
(durable) consumption so that binding constraints reduce demand. In both
setups, binding …nancial constrainst hurt the real economy, with similar redis-
tributive implications.6


3          Laissez-Faire Equilibrium
We de…ne the laissez-faire equilibrium of the economy as a set of prices fr; R; wg
                                                                           ~ such
and an allocation fx; e; d; kg, with all variables except x contingent on A,
that the investment decisions of bankers and workers and the production deci-
sions of …rms are optimal given their constraints, and the markets for capital,
labor and deposits clear.

   We solve for the laissez-faire equilibrium in the economy with the …nancial
constraint using backward induction, i.e. we …rst solve for the optimal period 1
equilibrum of bankers, …rms and workers as a function of a given level of bank
capital e. Then we analyze the optimal portfolio choice of bankers in period 0,
which determines e.

3.1         Period 1 Equilibrium
We analyze equilibrium in the economy in period 1 for a given level of bank
capital e. Employment is always at its optimum level ` = 1 since we assumed
    5 If                                                                     1
           the equilibrium interest rate is su¢ ciently large that R >   1       +B
                                                                                      , banks would prefer
                                     1
to o¤er depositors a rate r = 1      and shirk in their monitoring, incurring the default risk
  . We will discuss in section 5.4 below that such high interest rates are unlikely to be an
equilibrium outcome as they would give rise to bailouts.
   6 We should also note that our benchmark model does account for the procyclicality of

…nancial leverage, which is documented e.g. in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009). However,
this could easily be corrected by making the parameter vary with the state of nature so that
   A~ is an increasing function.



                                                  11
wages are ‡exible. The …nancial constraint is loose if bank equity is su¢ ciently
high so that bankers can intermediate the …rst-best amount of capital, e e =
(1    )k . In this case, the deposit and lending rates satisfy r = R = 1 and
bankers earn zero returns on their lending activity. The wage level is w =
(1    ) F (k ; 1). We interpret this situation as “normal times.”
   If bank equity is below the threshold e < e then the …nancial constraint
binds and the …nancial sector cannot intermediate the …rst-best level of capital.
We interpret this situation as a “credit crunch” or “…nancial crisis” since the
binding …nancial constraints reduce output below its …rst-best level. Workers
provide deposits up to the constraint d = Rk=r, the deposit rate is r = 1,
and the lending rate is R = Fk (k; 1). Equilibrium capital investment in the
constrained region, denoted by k^ (e), is implicitly de…ned by the equation
                                     k = e + kFk (k; 1)                                   (2)
which has a unique positive solution for any e 0. Overall, capital investment
is given by the expression
                                        n         o
                           k (e) = min k^ (e) ; k

Equilibrium k(e) is strictly positive, strictly increasing in e over the domain
e 2 [0; e ) and constant at k for e e . The equilibrium lending rate and the
wage level satisfy, respectively,
                             R (e)     =        F (k(e); 1) =k(e)
                             w (e)     =      (1     ) F (k(e); 1)
Let us distinguish aggregate bank equity e, and the equity ei of an individual
banker indexed by i. Then we can describe the level of capital intermediated
by banker i and the resulting pro…ts by7
                                                            ei
                        k ei ; e     =     min k ;
                                                       1     R (e)
                             i                i
                           e ;e      =     e + [R(e)       1] k ei ; e
In equilibrium, ei = e will hold, and we denote the equilibrium pro…ts of the
banking sector as a whole as well as the utility of workers by
                            (e)    = e + F (k (e) ; 1)            k (e)
                          w (e)    =     (1       ) F (k(e); 1)
Total utilitarian surplus in the economy is
                    s (e) = w (e) + (e) = e + F (k (e) ; 1)               k (e)
    Panel 1 of Figure 3 depicts the payo¤s of bankers and workers as a function
of aggregate bank capital e.8 As long as e < e , capital investment falls short
   7 Technically, when …nancial intermediation is unconstrained at the aggregate level because

e > e , there is a continuum of equilibrium allocations of ki since the lending spread is zero
R (e) 1 = 0 and individual bankers are indi¤erent between intermediating more or less. In
the equation, we are reporting the symmetric level of capital intermediation k for this case.
   8 The parameter values used to plot all …gures are reported in Appendix B.




                                                  12
        s(e)                                                                i
                                                                        π1(e ,e)
        w(e)
                                                                        w’(e)
        π(e)
                                                                        π’(e)




                                             1




0                  e*               e            0            e*                   e


               Figure 3: Welfare and marginal value of bank capital e


of the …rst best level. In this region, the welfare of workers and of bankers are
strictly increasing concave functions of bank equity. Once bank capital reaches
the threshold e , the economy achieves the …rst-best level of investment. Any
bank capital beyond this point just reduces the amount of deposits that bankers
need to raise, which increases their …nal payo¤ in period 2 but does not bene…t
workers. Beyond the threshold e , worker utility therefore remains constant
and bank pro…ts increase linearly in e. This generates a non-convexity in the
function (e) at the threshold e .
    Our analytical …ndings on the value of bank capital are consistent with the
empirical regularities of …nancial crises that we depicted in Figure 1 on page 2.

3.2    Marginal Value of Bank Capital
How do changes in bank capital a¤ect output and the distribution of surplus
in the economy? If bankers are …nancially constrained in aggregate, i.e. if e <
e , then a marginal increase in bank capital e allows bankers to raise more
deposits and leads to a greater than one-for-one increase in capital investment
k. Applying the implicit function theorem to (2) in the constrained region we
…nd
                                   1
                      k 0 (e) =  1   Fk > 1 for e < e
                                 0            for e e
If bankers are unconstrained, e e , then additional bank equity e leaves capital
investment una¤ected at the …rst-best level k ; therefore k 0 (e) = 0.
    The marginal e¤ect of additional bank capital on total surplus is s0 (e) =
1+(Fk 1) k 0 (e). The …rst term captures the consumption value of an additional
unit of wealth for bankers. The second term captures that bank capital e raises
investment in real capital by k 0 (e) which earns a marginal return (Fk 1).


                                        13
   Looking at the distribution of this additional surplus between bankers and
workers we …nd

                         w0 (e)      =   (1        )Fk k 0 (e)
                           0
                               (e)   =   1 + ( Fk         1) k 0 (e)

    The e¤ects of changes in bank equity for the two sectors di¤ers dramatically
depending on whether the …nancial constraint is loose or binding. In the uncon-
strained region e e , the consumption value for bankers is the only bene…t of
bank capital since k 0 (e) = 0 and so w0 (e) = 0 and 0 (e) = 1. Bank capital is
irrelevant for workers and the bene…ts of additional bank capital accrue entirely
to bankers.
    By contrast, in the constrained region e < e , additional equity increases
capital intermediation k and output F (k; 1). A fraction (1          ) of the addi-
tional output Fk accrues to workers via increased wages, and a fraction of the
output net of the additional capital input accrues to bankers. These e¤ects are
illustrated in Panel 2 of Figure 3.
    Technically, the e¤ects of bank capital on wages w (e) and the return on
capital R (e) in the constrained region constitute pecuniary externalities. When
atomistic bankers choose their optimal equity allocations, they take all prices
as given and do not internalize that their collective actions will have general
equilibrium e¤ects that move wages and the lending rate. In particular, they do
not internalize that equity shortages will hurt workers by pushing down wages
and pushing up lending rates.
    The decline in wages when e < e occurs because labor is a production factor
that is complementary to capital in the economy’s production technology. The
increase in lending rates when e < e occurs because the …nancial constraint
drives the return to capital investment up to R (e) = Fk (k (e) ; 1) > 1 since
not all productive investments can obtain loans. The di¤erence between the
lending rate and the deposit rate r = 1 allows bankers to earn a spread R (e) 1
when the constraint is binding. Observe that this spread plays a useful social
role in allocating risk because it signals to bankers that there are extra returns
available for carrying capital into states of nature when it is scarce. However, it
redistributes from workers to bankers by enabling them to earn a scarcity rent
on their capital.

Equity Shortages and Redistribution It is instructive to observe that
small shortages of …nancial sector capital have …rst order redistributive e¤ects
but only second order e¢ ciency e¤ects. In particular, consider an economy
in which bank capital is e so that the unconstrained equilibrium can just be
implemented. Assume that we engage in a wealth-neutral reallocation of the
wealth of bankers across periods 1 and 2: we take away an in…nitesimal amount "
of bank capital from bankers in period 1 so as to tighten their …nancial constraint
and return it to them in period 2. The resulting payo¤s for bankers and workers
are (e      ") + " and w (e    ").



                                              14
Lemma 1 (Redistributive E¤ects of Equity Shortages) A marginal tight-
ening of the …nancial constraint around the threshold e has …rst-order redis-
tributive e¤ ects but only second-order e¢ ciency costs.

Proof. We take the left-sided limit of the derivative of the payo¤ functions of
bankers and workers to …nd
                                  0
                        lim           (e    ") + 1    =     (1        ) k 0 (e )
                        "!0
                              lim w0 (e         ")    =          (1     ) k 0 (e )
                              "!0

The e¤ect on total surplus consists of the sum of the two s0 =                           0
                                                                                             + w0 and is
zero at a …rst-order approximation.

    Interestingly, a marginal tightening of the constraint imposes losses on work-
ers from lower wages that precisely equal the gains to bankers from higher lend-
ing spreads, i.e. the redistribution between workers and bankers occurs at a rate
of one-to-one. Conceptually, this is because pecuniary externalities are by their
very nature redistributions driven by changes in prices. In our model, when
…nancial constraints reduce the amount of capital intermediated and push down
wages, the losses of workers equal the gains to …rms. Similarly, when the lend-
ing rate rises, the losses to …rms equal the gains to bankers. Since …rms make
zero pro…ts, we can conclude that the losses to workers have to equal the gains
to bankers. Intuitively, since bankers are the bottleneck in the economy when
the …nancial constraint binds, they extract surplus from workers in the form of
scarcity rents.

3.3    Determination of Period 0 Risk Allocation
An individual banker i takes the lending rate R as given and perceives the
constraint on deposits d      Rk as a simple leverage limit. When a banker is
constrained, she perceives the e¤ect of a marginal increase in bank capital ei
as increasing her intermediation activity by k1 ei ; e = 1 1 R , which implies an
increase in bank pro…ts by

                              1       ei ; e = 1 + [R (e)        1] k1 ei ; e                        (3)

In period 0, bankers decide what fraction x of their endowment to allocate to
the risky project. In the laissez-faire equilibrium, banker i takes the aggregate
levels of x and e as given and chooses xi to maximize

            max         i
                            xi ; x = E           ei ; e      s.t.     ei = 1              ~ i
                                                                                     xi + Ax         (4)
         xi 2[0;1];ei

At an interior optimum, the optimality condition of bankers is
                           h                  i
                         E 1 ei ; e A~ 1 = 0,                                                        (5)



                                                     15
i.e. the risk-adjusted return on the stochastic payo¤ A~ equals the return of the
safe storage technology.
     The stochastic discount factor 1 in this expression is given by equation (3)
and is strictly declining in e as long as e < e and constant at 1 otherwise.
Observe that each banker i perceives his stochastic discount factor as indepen-
dent of his choices of ei and xi . However, in a symmetric equilibrium, ei = e
as well as xi = x have to hold, and equilibrium is given by the level of x and
the resulting realizations e = Ax ~ + (1 x) such that the optimality condition
                                ~
(5) is satis…ed. As long as E[A] > 1, the optimal allocation to the risky project
satis…es x > 0. If the expected return is su¢ ciently high, equilibrium is given
by the corner solution x = 1. Otherwise it is uniquely pinned down by the
optimality condition (5).
     Denote by xLF the fraction of their initial assets that bankers allocate to the
risky project in the laissez faire equilibrium.
                                             h The resulting levelsi of welfare for
workers and entrepreneurs are       LF
                                        = E       1 xLF + Ax  ~ LF     and W LF =
   h                      i
E w 1 xLF + Ax      ~ LF .
    For a given risky portfolio allocation x, we de…ne by A (x) the threshold of
A~ above which bank capital e is su¢ ciently high to support the …rst-best level
of production. We can express this function as
                                              e       1
                                A (x) = 1 +
                                                  x

Well-Capitalized Banking System If e               1, then the safe return is su¢ -
cient to avoid the …nancial constraint and the …rst-best level of capital interme-
diation k would be reached for sure with a perfectly safe portfolio x = 0. We
can interpret this case as an economy in which the …nancial sector is su¢ ciently
capitalized to intermediate the …rst-best amount of capital without any extra
risk-taking. In that case, we can interpret the risky project A~ as a diversion
from the main intermediation business of banks, e.g. a diversi…cation from re-
tail banking into investment banking, or loans by US banks to Latin American
governments that o¤er extra returns at extra risk.
    For the case of e    1, bankers …nd it optimal to choose xLF > 1 e , i.e. they
take on su¢ cient risk so that the …nancial constraint is binding at least for low
realizations of the risky return so that A (x) > 0. This is because the expected
return on the risky project dominates the safe return, and bankers perceive
the cost of being marginally constrained as second-order. We also observe that
for e < 1, the function A (x) is strictly increasing from A (1 e ) = 0 to
A (1) = e , i.e. more risk-taking makes it more likely that the …nancial sector
becomes constrained.

Under-Capitalized Banking System If e > 1, then the economy would
be constrained if bankers invest all their endowment in the safe return. We can
interpret this as an economy where banks are systematically undercapitalized
and risk-taking helps them to mitigate these constraints. In that case, the


                                        16
function A (x) is strictly decreasing from limx!0 A (x) = 1 to A (1) = e ,
i.e. more risk-taking makes it more likely that the …nancial sector becomes
unconstrained.


4    Pareto Frontier
We describe the redistributive e¤ects of …nancial deregulation by characterizing
the Pareto frontier of the economy, which maps di¤erent levels of …nancial risk-
taking into di¤erent levels of welfare for the …nancial sector and the real econ-
omy. Financial regulation/deregulation moves the economy along this Pareto
frontier.
    We denote the period 0 allocation to the risky project that is collectively
preferred by bankers by
                                         ~ +1
                        xB = arg max E[ (Ax             x)]
                                  x2[0;1]

Similarly, we denote the choice of x collectively preferred by workers by
                                     h                          i
                                        ~ +1
                   xW = max arg max E w(Ax                    x)
                                    x2[0;1]

In a well-capitalized banking system, i.e. for e      1, workers prefer that risk-
taking in the …nancial sector is limited to the point where …nancial constraints
will be loose in all states of nature so that the …rst-best level of capital invest-
ment k can be implemented. This is guaranteed for any x 2 [0; 1 e ]. Since
workers are indi¤erent between all x within this interval but bankers bene…t
from risk-taking, the only point from this interval that is on the Pareto-frontier
is xW = 1 e . In an under-capitalized banking sytem, i.e. for e > 1, the op-
timal risk allocation for workers involves a positive level of risk-taking xW > 0
– workers bene…t from a little bit of risk because the safe return produces in-
su¢ cient bank capital to intermediate the …rst-best amount of capital k , and
risk-taking in period 0 increases the expected availability of …nance in period 1.

De…nition 2 (Pareto Frontier) The Pareto frontier of the economy consists
of all pairs of bank pro…ts and worker wages ( (x) ; W (x)) for x 2 xW ; xB .

   To ensure that the Pareto frontier is non-degenerate, we assume that the
optimal levels of risk-taking for workers and in the decentralized equilibrium
are interior and satisfy xW < 1 and xLF < 1. This is a weak assumption that
holds whenever the risk-reward trade-o¤ associated with A~ is su¢ ciently steep.

Proposition 3 (Characterization of Pareto Frontier) (i) The risk alloca-
tions that are collectively preferred by workers and bankers, respectively, satisfy

                                     xW < xB



                                            17
                        xB




               Π                               xLF




                                                                 xW




                                          W


                             Figure 4: Pareto frontier


    (ii) Over the interval xW ; xB , the expected utility of workers W (x) is
strictly decreasing in x, and the expected utility of bankers (x) is strictly in-
creasing in x.
    (iii) We …nd furthermore that xLF < xB . If e       1 then xW < xLF < xB .

Proof. See appendix A.1.

    Figure 4 depicts the Pareto frontier for a typical portfolio allocation problem.
The risk allocation that is optimal for workers xW is at the bottom right of the
…gure, and the allocation preferred by bankers is at the top left. The laissez
faire equilibrium is indicated by the marker xLF . As risk-taking x increases,
we move upwards and left along the Pareto frontier. Along the way, expected
bank pro…ts rise for two reasons: …rst, because the risky technology o¤ers higher
returns; secondly because binding …nancial constraints redistribute from workers
towards bankers, as we emphasized in lemma 1. The welfare of workers declines
because they are more and more hurt by binding …nancial constraints.

4.1    Market Incompleteness and the Distributive Con‡ict
To pinpoint why there is a distributive con‡ict over the level of risk-taking, it
is instructive to analyze the role of the two …nancial market imperfections in
our results. First, assume that we remove the …nancial constraint on bankers
in period 1. In that case, the pro…ts/losses of bankers do not a¤ect how much
capital can be intermediated to the real economy and workers are indi¤erent


                                        18
about the level of risk-taking – bank capital does not generate any pecuniary
externalities. In such an economy, …nancial risk-taking and …nancial intermedi-
ation are two orthogonal activities and we …nd that xW = xB = xF B = 1, i.e.
the distributive con‡ict disappears.
    Secondly, assume that we introduce a complete insurance market in period 0
in which bankers and workers can share the risk associated with the technology
 ~ but we keep the …nancial constraint in period 1. In that case, workers will
A,
insure bankers against any capital shortfalls so that bankers can invest in the
risky technology without imposing negative externalities on the real economy.
By implication all agents are happy to invest the …rst-best amount xW = xB =
xF B = 1 in the risky techology, and the distributive con‡ict again disappears.
    More generally, introducing a risk market in period 0 puts a formal price on
risk-taking and, if both sets of agents can participate in this market, it implies
that bankers and workers will agree on a common price of risk. Loosely speaking,
this provides workers with a channel through which they can transmit their risk
preferences to bankers.
    An interesting special case in which …nancial markets in period 0 are e¤ec-
tively complete is a ‘Marxist’two sector framework in which bankers/capitalists
own all the capital and households/workers own all the labor in the economy
(i.e. there are no desposits d = 0 and no storage). By implication, bankers
invest all their equity into real capital k = e. Given a Cobb-Douglas production
technology, the two sectors earn constant fractions of aggregate output so that
  (e) = F (e; 1) and w (e) = (1                              ~ + (1 x). As long
                                          ) F (e; 1) for e = Ax
as the two sectors have preferences with identical relative risk aversion (in our
benchmark model both have zero risk-aversion), the optimal level of risk-taking
for capitalists simultaneously maximizes total surplus and worker welfare:

          arg max E [ (e)] = arg max E [F (e; 1)] = arg max E [w (e)]
                x                   x                      x

Bank capital still imposes pecuniary externalities on wages in this ‘Marxist’
setting, but the pecuniary externalities under a Cobb-Douglas technology guar-
antee that both sets of agents obtain constant fractions of output, replicating
the allocation under perfect risk-sharing. (Analytically, the constant capital
and labor shares drop out of the optimization problem.) Again, there is no
distributive con‡ict.
    By contrast, in our benchmark framework with the two market imperfections
reintroduced, the negative pecuniary externalities only occur on the downside.
Once bank capital exceeds the threshold where …nancial constraints are loose,
it is irrelevant and has no further e¤ects on workers. The distributive con‡ict
is therefore generated by the combination of the occasionally binding …nancial
constraints and the lack of risk-sharing between bankers and workers.




                                        19
4.2     Financial Regulation
We interpret …nancial regulation in our framework as policy measures that a¤ect
risk-taking x and therefore move the economy along the Pareto frontier.9 The
unregulated equilibrium – in the absence of any other market distortions – is
represented by the laissez-faire equilibrium xLF on the frontier.
    The two simplest forms of …nancial regulation of risk-taking are:

   1. Regulators may impose a ceiling on the risk-taking of individual bankers
      such that xi x. Such a ceiling will be binding if x < xLF . This type of
      regulation closely corresponds to capital adequacy regulations as it limits
      the amount of risk-taking per dollar of bank equity.
   2. Regulators may impose a tax x on risk-taking xi so as to modify the
      optimality condition for the risk-return tradeo¤ of bankers to E[ 1 (A~
       x
           1)] = 0. Such a tax can implement any level of risk-taking x 2 [0; 1].
      For simplicity, we assume that the tax revenue is rebated to bankers in
      lump-sum fashion.

   Financial regulators can implement any risk allocation x xLF by imposing
x as a ceiling on risk-taking or by imposing an equivalent tax on risk-taking
 x
     0. The distributive implications are straightforward:

Corollary 4 (Redistributive E¤ects of Financial Regulation) Tightening
regulation by lowering x or raising x increases worker welfare and reduces
banker welfare for any x 2 xW ; xLF .

   Conversely, …nancial deregulation increases the ceiling x and redistributes
from workers to bankers.

Scope for Pareto-Improving Deregulation An interesting question is whether
there exists a mechanism for Pareto-improving deregulation if we add further
instruments to the toolkit of policymakers in addition to the regulatory mea-
sures on x that we described in Corollary 4. Such a mechanism would need
to use some of the gains from deregulation obtained by bankers to compensate
workers for the losses they su¤er during credit crunches.
    Consider …rst a planner who provides an uncontingent lump-sum transfer
from bankers to compensate workers for the losses from deregulation. The
marginal bene…t to workers is 1 E [w0 (e)] if the transfer is given in period 1
or 1     E [w0 (e)] if it is given in period 2, i.e. workers would obtain a direct
marginal bene…t of 1 in all states of nature, but in constrained states they
would be hurt by a tightening of the …nancial constraint which reduces their
wages by w0 (e) if given in period 1 or a fraction therefore if it is given in
    9 Observe that a …nancial regulator would not …nd it optimal to change the leverage para-

meter in our setup. The parameter cannot be reduced because it stems from an underlying
moral hazard problem and banks would default or deviate from their optimal behavior. Sim-
ilarly, it is not optimal to increase  because this would tighten the constraint on …nancial
intermediation without any corresponding bene…t.


                                             20
period 2, since the transfer reduces the capital or the pledgeable income of
bankers in period 2. Both types of uncontingent transfers entail e¢ ciency costs
from tightening the constraints on bankers. Compensating workers with an
uncontingent payment without imposing these e¢ ciency costs would require
that the planner has superior enforcement capabilities to extract payments in
excess of the …nancial constraint (1).
    Alternatively, consider a planner who provides compensatory transfers to
workers contingent on states of nature in which bankers are unconstrained,
i.e. in states in which they make high pro…ts from the risky technology A.        ~
This would not impose any e¢ ciency costs but would require that the planner
can engage in state-contingent transactions that are not available via private
markets in our model. (It can be argued that this type of transfer corresponds
to proportional or progressive pro…t taxation.)
    In short, the planner only has e¢ cient compensation mechanisms if she can
get around at least one of the two …nancial market imperfections in our frame-
work, i.e. if she can mitigate either the …nancial constraint (1) or the incom-
pleteness of risk markets.
    If the planner cannot improve on these market imperfections and/or if trans-
fers require distortionary taxation, then the scope for Pareto-improving dereg-
ulation is more limited as the redistributive bene…t of any transfer has to be
weighed against the cost of the distortion introduced. In general, this creates a
constrained Pareto frontier along which the trade-o¤ between the welfare of the
two agents is signi…cantly less favorable, i.e. a Pareto frontier that is enveloped
by the frontier depicted in Figure 4.


5     Risk-Taking and Redistribution
Factors that a¤ect risk-taking in the economy will also have …rst-order redistrib-
utive implications as they move the economy along its Pareto frontier. Many
academics suggest that there are a number of other important imperfections
that induce …nancial market participants to take on excessive risks (see e.g.
Freixas and Rochet, 2008; Acharya et al., 2010), for example market power,
agency problems, and safety nets. Following our analysis, these distortions can
be expected to redistribute welfare from workers to bankers by increasing the
volatility of bank capital.
    In the following, we illustrate this in more detail for the case of …nancial insti-
tutions with market power, managerial agency problems that lead to asymmet-
ric payo¤s for managers, and …nancial innovation that creates new risk-taking
opportunities. In the ensuing section we will examine how safety nets create
additional redistributions by inducing bankers to take on more risk.

5.1    Financial Innovation
An important manifestation of …nancial innovation is to allow …nancial market
players to access new investment opportunities, frequently projects that are


                                          21
characterized by both higher risk and higher expected returns. For example,
…nancial innovation may enable bankers to invest in new activities, as made
possible e.g. by the 1999 repeal of the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act, or to lend in
new areas, to new sectors or to new borrowers, as e.g. during the subprime
boom of the 2000s.
    Formally we capture this type of …nancial innovation by expanding the set
of risky assets to which bankers have access in period 0. For a simple exam-
ple, assume an economy in which bankers can only access the safe investment
projects in period 0 before …nancial innovation takes place, and that …nancial
innovation expands the set of investable projects to include the risky project
with stochastic return A.~ Furthermore, assume that e < 1, i.e. the safe return
in period 0 generates su¢ cient period 1 equity for bankers to intermediate the
…rst-best level of capital. The pre-innovation equilibrium corresponds to x = 0
in our benchmark setup and this maximizes worker welfare.

Example 1 (Distributive E¤ects of Financial Innovation) In the described
economy, expanding the set of investment projects to include A~ increases banker
welfare but reduces worker welfare.

    After …nancial innovation introduces the risky project, bankers allocate a
strictly positive fraction of their endowment xLF > 1 e to the risky project
and incur the risk of being …nancially constrained in low states of nature. This is
their optimal choice because the expected return E[A]  ~ > 1 delivers a …rst-order
bene…t over the safe return, but bankers perceive the cost of being marginally
constrained as second-order since 1 ei ; e is continuous at e . Worker welfare,
on the other hand, unambiguously declines as a result of the increased risk-
taking. Workers have nothing to gain from bank capital that exceeds e but
they experience …rst-order losses if bank capital declines below e , constraining
capital investment and reducing wages.
    This illustrates that …nancial innovation that increases the set of investable
projects so as to include more high-risk-high-return options may redistribute
from workers to bankers, akin to …nancial deregulation, even though total sur-
plus may be increased. The problem in the described economy is that workers
would be happy for bankers to increase risk-taking if they could participate in
both the upside and the downside via complete insurance markets.
    Restrictions on the risk-taking activities of banks, e.g. via regulations such
as the Volcker rule, may bene…t workers by acting as a second-best device to
complete …nancial markets. In the example described above this would be the
case.

5.2    Asymmetric Compensation Schemes
It is frequently argued that managers of …nancial institutions may have incen-
tives to increase risk-taking because of asymmetric compensation schemes that
reward them them for higher risk and that this may have played an important
role in the build-up of risk before the …nancial crisis of 2008/09. We illustrate


                                        22
this mechanism using a stylized model of an incentive problem between bank
owners and bank managers and analyze the distributive implications.
    Let us extend our benchmark model by assuming that bank owners have to
hire a new set of agents called bank managers to conduct their business. Bank
managers choose an unobservable level of risk-taking x in period 0. Bank owners
are able to observe the realization of bank capital e in period 1 and to instruct
managers to allocate any bank capital up to e in …nancial intermediation, and
managers carry any excess max f0; e e g in a storage technology. We can
view …nancial intermediation versus storage as representative of lending to real
projects versus …nancial investments, or commercial banking versus investment
banking.
    Suppose that bank managers do not have the ability to commit to exert e¤ort
in period 1 and can threaten to withdraw their monitoring e¤ort for both bank
loans and storage in period 1. If they do not monitor, the returns on intermedi-
ation and storage (real projects and …nancial investments) are diminished by a
fraction " and " respectively, where > 1. In other words, the returns to …nan-
cial investments are more sensitive to managerial e¤ort than real investments.
An alternative interpretation would be along the lines of Jensen (1986) that free
cash provides managers with greater scope to abuse the resources under their
control.
    Assuming that managers have all the bargaining power and that we are in
a symmetric equilibrium, the threat to withdraw their e¤ort allows them to
negotiate an incentive payment from bank owners of

          p ei ; e = " min     ei ; e ; (e ; e ) + " max 0; ei    e

The marginal bene…t of bank equity for an individual manager is p1 (e; e) =
" 1 (e; e) for e < e and p1 (e; e) = " 1 (e; e) = " for e     e . Since …nan-
cial investments require a greater incentive payment, the payo¤ of managers is
relatively more convex than the payo¤ of banks (e; e) and managers bene…t
disproportionately from high realizations of bank capital. Comparing this ex-
tension to our benchmark setup, we can view (x) as the joint surplus of bank
owners and managers, and the two functions (x) and W (x) remain unchanged
compared to our earlier framework –the only thing that changes is the level of
x that will be chosen by bank managers.
    Managers internalize the asymmetric payo¤ pro…le when they choose the
                                                                        ~ i+
level of risk-taking in period 0. They maximize E[p ei ; e ] where ei = Ax
      i
1 x and their optimality condition is
                               h               i
                             E A~ 1 p1 (e; e) = 0

It is then straightforward to obtain the following result:

Proposition 5 (Agency Problems and Risk-Taking) (i) The optimal choice
of risk-taking of bank managers exceeds the optimal choice xLF in our benchmark
model if the payo¤ function of managers is asymmetric > 1.
    (ii) The expected welfare of workers is a declining function of .


                                       23
Proof. For (i), observe that we can write

                     p(ei ; e) =    (ei ; e) + (           1) ei      e I ei   e

where Iei e is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 when ei          e and 0
                                                             A
otherwise.
  h        The  preferred
                  i       choice of x by managers, call it x   , satis…es P1 (x) =
     ~        i
E (A 1)p1 (e ; e)      0. We can write this as
                                                           h                       i
                     P1 (x) =      1 (x)    + (        1) E (A~       1)Iei    e

                  h               i
where 1 (x) = E (A~ 1) 1 (ei ; e) is the owner’s …rst-order condition. Now
we argue that the second term is strictly positive. Note that we can write this
term as               h             i Z 1
                        ~
                    E (A 1)Iei e =           (A~ 1)dG(A) ~
                                                       A

Since we have E[A~ 1] > 0 by assumption, and since (A~ 1) is an increasing
             ~ it follows that the integral over the upper half of the range must
function of A,
also be strictly positive. Therefore for all x, we have P1 (x) > 1 (x), and in
particular 1 (xLF > 0, and so xA > xLF .
    To prove (ii), we begin by showing that xA   h is strictly increasing
                                                                 i        in . Dif-
                                                    ~
ferentiating P1 (x) with respect to yields E (A 1)Iei e , which is strictly
positive. At the old preferred level of x, we now have P1 (x) > 0, and so xA
will increase. Now we observe that increasing x for x > xW will always make
workers worse o¤. Given that xW < xLF < xA , this implies that increasing
will make workers worse o¤.

5.3     Financial Institutions with Market Power
Assume that there is a …nite number n of identical bankers in the economy
who each have mass n1 . Banker i internalizes that his risk-taking decision xi in
period 0 a¤ects aggregate bank capital e = n1 ei + nn 1 e i , where e i captures
the capital of the other bankers. For a given e, we assume that bankers charge
the competitive market interest rate R (e) in period 1.10
    First consider the optimal level of capital supplied by bankers who partially
internalize their e¤ect on interest rates and are not subject to a leverage con-
straint. Bankers solve
                                                                   1 i     n       1
             max (Fk (k; 1)        1) k i    where k =               k +               k   i
              i
              k                                                    n           n
  1 0 By contrast, if bankers interacted in Cournot-style competition in the period 1 market for

loans, they would restrict the quantity of loans provided for a given amount of bank equity
                                                               1
                                             n (1      )   1
ei to min k ei ; k n where k n = k            n
                                                           to increase their scarcity rents. We
do not consider this e¤ect in order to focus our analysis on the period 0 risk-taking e¤ects of
market power.



                                                  24
                     1       i
whose solution is    n Fkk k        + Fk = 1. Assuming a symmetric solution, this will
be satis…ed at                                                                         1

                                    ;n                     1                       1
                                k        =        1          (1               )             k
                                                           n

which will be achieved at a level of equity e ;n = 1 1 1 (1 ) k ;n . If
                                                              n
e < e ;n , the deposit constraint binds and bankers receive the same pro…ts as
before.
   The marginal valuation of bank capital is now
                                             1    0            n 1        i
             i;n                                      (e) +                       ei ; e        for e < e   ;n
             1     ei ; e   i
                                =            n                  n         1
                                                                                                            ;n
                                          1                                                     for e e

This falls in between the marginal value of bank capital for the sector as a whole
and for a competitive banker, i.e. 0 < i;n1 < 1.
                                                 i
                     i;n
   Since we have 1 ei ; e = i1 + n1 0           i
                                                1 , we can write the optimality
condition for one of n large …rms as

                                i;n                            1      0
                                1        =       1 (x)     +     (                     1)   =0
                                                               n
We immediately see that for n = 1, this reduces to 0 = 0, which has solution
xB , and for n ! 1 this reduces to 1 = 0, which has solution xLF < xB .
    Now suppose that for a given n, we have xn 2 xLF ; xB . At xn , we di¤er-
entiate the optimality condition w.r.t. n and …nd
                                      d          i;n           1          0
                                                 1     =          (                    1)
                                     dn                        n2
Since 1 and 0 are both strictly decreasing in x, and since they are zero at
xLF and xB > xLF respectively, in the interval (xLF ; xB ) we have 1 < 0 .
                                 d  i;n            n
Therefore for higher n we have dn   1 < 0, and so x is decreasing in n. We
summarize these results as follows:

Proposition 6 The optimal risk allocation xn of bankers is a declining function
of the number n of banks in the market. In particular, we observe that x1 =
xB x1 = xLF , with strict inequality unless they are corner solutions.

    Intuitively, bankers with market power internalize that the bene…ts of addi-
tional equity when they are constrained accrue in part to the rest of the economy
by relieving the credit crunch. This reduces their scarcity rents and therefore
provides lower incentives for precautionary behavior. Our example illustrates
that socially excessive risk-taking is an important dimension of non-competitive
behavior by banks.

5.4    Bailouts
Bailouts have perhaps raised more redistributive concerns than any other form of
public …nancial intervention, presumably because they involve redistributions in


                                                            25
the form of explicit transfers that are much more transparent than other implicit
forms of redistributions.
    However, the redistributive e¤ects of bailouts are both more subtle and po-
tentially more pernicious than this simple view suggests. Ex post, i.e. once
bankers have su¤ered large losses and the economy experiences a credit crunch,
bailouts may actually lead to a Pareto improvement and workers may be bet-
ter o¤ by providing a transfer. However, ex-ante, bailout expectations increase
risk-taking. This redistributes surplus from workers to the …nancial sector in a
less explicit and therefore more subtle way, as we have emphasized throughout
this paper.

Model of Endogenous Bailouts Since bank capital is essential for the real
economy, workers in our model …nd it optimal to coordinate to provide bailouts
to bankers during episodes of severe capital shortages in order to mitigate the
adverse e¤ects of credit crunches on the real economy. Such bailouts typically
come in two broad categories, emergency lending, frequently at a subsidized in-
terest rate, and equity injections, frequently at a subsidized (or even zero) price.
We show in Appendix A.3 that no matter how exactly a bailout is provided,
what matters in our model is the total amount of resources (subsidies) given to
bankers to relax their binding …nancial constraints. For the remainder of this
section, we focus for simplicity on bailouts in the form of direct transfers. The
appendix generalizes our results.
Lemma 7 (Optimal Bailout Policy) If aggregate bank capital in period 1 is
below a threshold 0 < e^ < e , workers …nd it collectively optimal to provide
lump-sum transfer t = e^ e to bankers. The threshold e^ is determined by the
expression w0 (^
               e) = 1 or

                         e^ = (1    ) [1    (1   ) ]1   e                       (6)
Proof. The welfare of workers who collectively provide a transfer t            0 to
bankers is given by w(e + t) t. An interior optimum satis…es w0 (e + t) = 1. We
de…ne the resulting equity level as e^ = e+t, which satis…es equation (6). Observe
that w0 (e) is strictly declining from w0 (0) = 1= > 1 to w0 (e ) = 11         <1
over the interval [0; e ] so that e^ is uniquely de…ned. If aggregate bank capital
is below this threshold e < e^, bankers …nd it collectively optimal to transfer the
shortfall. If e is above this threshold, it does not pay o¤ for workers to provide
a transfer since w0 < 1 and the optimal transfer is given by the minimum t = 0.


     The intuition stems from the pecuniary externalities of bank capital on
wages: increasing bank capital via lump-sum transfers relaxes the …nancial con-
straint of bankers and enables them to intermediate more capital, which in turn
expands output and increases wages. As long as e < e^, the cost of a transfer on
workers is less than the collective bene…t in the form of higher wages. If workers
can coordinate, they will be collectively better o¤ by providing a transfer that
lifts bank capital to e^.


                                           26
    For the remainder of our analysis of bailouts, we make the following assump-
tion:

Assumption 1 The parameters              ,    and A are such that e^ < 1.

    This guarantees that the banking sector will not require a bailout if the
period 0 endowment is invested in the safe project. It also implies that bailouts
are not desirable in states of nature in which the risky project yields higher
returns than the safe project. This is a mild assumption as we typically expect
bailouts to occur in bad states of nature.

Period 1 Equilibrium We analyze the optimal bailout transfer policy of the
worker sector in period 1 as a function of the aggregate bank capital position
e. (We continue to assume that workers’period 1 wealth m is large so that it
does not limit the size of the desired bailout.)
    For e    e^, the collective welfare of workers w (e) and bankers (e) are
unchanged from the expressions in the benchmark model since no bailouts are
given. For e < e^, the possibility of bailouts modi…es the expressions for welfare
as follows:

                  wBL (e)      =    (1        ) F (e + t (e) ; 1)      t (e)
                    BL
                         (e)   =        F (^
                                           e; 1)

    We illustrate our …ndings in Figure 5. The threshold e^ below which bankers
receive bailouts is indicated by the left dotted vertical line. Panel 1 shows
bailouts t (e) and welfare of workers and bankers as a function of bank capital.
Bailouts are positive but decrease to zero over the interval [0; e^]. Within this
interval, they stabilize the pro…ts of bankers at the level (^  e). The welfare
of workers is increasing at slope 1 since each additional dollar of bank capital
implies that the bailout is reduced by one dollar. Bailouts therefore make the
payo¤ functions of all agents less concave and, in the case of bankers, locally
convex.

Marginal Value of Bank Capital From the above expressions, we derive
the marginal value of bank capital in the bailout region, i.e. for e < e^. We note
that 1 + t0 (e) = 0 in this region and …nd that the welfare e¤ects of a marginal
increase in bank capital are

                wBL0 (e)       =   (1        ) Fk [1 + t0 (e)]      t0 (e) = 1
                  BL0
                        (e)    =    Fk [1 + t0 (e)] = 0

    Panel 2 of Figure 5 depicts the marginal welfare e¤ects of bank equity under
bailouts. The marginal bene…t for workers wBL0 (e) is 1 within the bailout
region e < e^, since each additional dollar of bank equity reduces the size of
the required bailout that they inject into bankers by a dollar. (In fact, we
can determine the level of e^ by equating the marginal bene…t of bank capital


                                              27
                               BL                                           w’(e)
                             w (e)
                              BL                                            π’(e)
                             π (e)
                                                                            e^
                             t




                                              1




0          e^     e*                 e            0     e^     e*                   e


     Figure 5: Welfare and marginal value of bank capital under bailouts.


to workers in the absence of bailouts, corresponding to the downward-sloping
dotted line wBL0 (e) = (1       ) Fk in the …gure, to the marginal cost which is
unity. This point is marked by a circle in the …gure.)
    Bailouts constitute straight transfers from workers to bankers, but in our
model, they nonetheless generate a Pareto improvement for a given e < e^ in
period 1 because they mitigate the market incompleteness that is created by
the …nancial constraint (1) and that prevents bankers from raising deposit …-
nance and intermediating capital to the productive sector. At the margin, each
additional unit of bailout generates a surplus Fk (e; 1) 1, of which w0 (e) 1
arises to workers and 0 (e) to bankers. For the last marginal unit of the bailout,
the bene…t to workers is w0 (^e) 1 = 0 –they are indi¤erent between providing
the last unit or not. However, the marginal bene…t to bankers for the last unit
is strictly positive 0 (^
                        e) = 1 . One interpretation of this is that bankers are
able to extract “bailout rents” from workers because of their bottleneck role in
…nancial intermediation.

Period 0 Risk-Taking Optimal discretionary bailouts impose a ceiling on
the market interest rate RBL (e) R (^    e) = 1 1 since they ensure that aggre-
gate capital investment is greater than the threshold k        e^ at all times. This
mitigates the precautionary incentives of bankers and increases their optimal
risk-taking, corresponding to a “wealth e¤ect” of bailouts. This e¤ect exists
even if bailouts are conditional on aggregate bank capital e and are provided in
the form of lump-sum transfers.
    In addition, the adverse incentive e¤ects of bailouts are aggravated if they are
conditional on individual bank capital ei , which provide bankers with incentives
to increase risk-taking so as to increase the expected bailout rents received,
corresponding to a “substitution e¤ect” of bailouts.


                                         28
    At a general level, we assume that the bailout received by an individual
banker i for a given level of individual and aggregate bank equity (ei ; e) is
allocated according to the function

                                        0                      if e e^
                  t ei ; e;     =
                                        e^   (1     )e   ei    if e < e^

where 2 [0; 1] captures the extent to which the bailout depends on individual
bank equity. This speci…cation nests bailouts that are entirely conditional on
aggregate bank capital (for = 0) as well as those conditional solely on indi-
vidual bank capital (for = 1). Alternatively, if banks are non-atomistic and
bailouts are conditional on aggregate bank capital e, we can interpret the para-
meter as the market share of individual banks, since each bank will internalize
that its bank equity makes up a fraction of aggregate bank equity.
    We denote the amount of their endowment that bankers allocate to the risky
project in period 0 by xBL ( ), and we …nd that bailouts have the following
e¤ects:

Proposition 8 (Risk-Taking E¤ects of Bailouts) (i) Introducing bailout trans-
fers increases period 0 risk-taking xBL ( ) > xLF for any = 0.
    (ii) Risk-taking xBL ( ) is an increasing function of .

Proof. See appendix A.1.

    Intuitively, point (i) re‡ects that bailouts reduce the tightness of constraints
and therefore the returns on capital 1 in low states of nature. This lowers the
precautionary incentives of bankers and induces them to take on more risk, even
if the bailouts are provided in a lump-sum fashion. Observe that this e¤ect is
similar to the e¤ects of any countercyclical policy or any improvement in risk-
sharing via markets. The e¤ect is also visible in Panel 1 of Figure 5, in which
the payo¤ function of bankers under bailouts is more convex than in the absence
of bailouts, inducing them to increase their risk-taking.
    For > 0, point (ii) captures that the risk-taking incentives of bankers rise
further because they internalize that one more dollar in losses will increase their
bailout by dollars. This captures the standard notion of moral hazard, i.e.
that bailouts targeted at individual losses increase risk-taking.

Redistributive E¤ects The welfare e¤ects of introducing bailouts on bankers
and workers can be decomposed into two parts, the change in expected welfare
from introducing bailouts for a given level of risk-taking xBL , corresponding to
the market completion e¤ect of bailouts, and the change in the level of risk-
taking, corresponding to the incentive e¤ects of bailouts, :
                          BL
                 =             (xBL )        (xBL ) +    (xBL )       (xLF )
            W    =     W BL (xBL ) W (xBL ) + W (xBL ) W (xLF )
                      |         {z         } |        {z       }
                              m arket com pletion             incentive e¤ect



                                              29
                            xB




                                           xBL ∆ W


                                                     ∆Π
                 Π                                   xLF




                                                                         xW




                                               W


                       Figure 6: Pareto frontier under bailouts


Corollary 9 (Distributive E¤ects of Bailouts) (i) Bankers always bene…t
from introducing bailouts and their expected pro…ts BL ( ) are an increasing
function of .
   (ii) Workers bene…t from the market completion e¤ ect of bailouts but are
hurt by the incentive e¤ ects of bailouts if e < 1. The absolute magnitude of
both e¤ ects is an increasing function of .

Proof. The …rst term is positive for both sets of agents because, for given x,
bailouts generate a Pareto improvement.11 The second term is always positive
for bankers because 0 (x) > 0 and is always negative for workers for e < 1
because W 0 (x) < 0. Higher increases risk-taking and therefore leads to more
bailouts, increasing the absolute magnitude of all four terms.

    Although the market completion e¤ect is positive for both sets of agents,
the increase in risk-taking bene…ts bankers at the expense of workers. Bailouts
increase banker welfare both directly because of the transfers received from
workers and indirectly as a result of the higher risk-taking.
    We illustrate our …ndings in Figure 6. The …gure shows how the Pareto
frontier depicted in Figure 4 is a¤ected by the introduction of bailouts under the
assumption that = 0, i.e. bailouts are distributed lump sum. The new Pareto
frontier (solid line) is shifted out compared to the old frontier (dotted line) at
  1 1 We could further disentangle the …rst term for workers into a negative term corresponding

to the transfers that they make and a larger positive term corresponding to the resulting
increase in wages for given x.



                                              30
its left end, i.e. BL (x) > (x) and W BL (x) > W (x) for all x > xW but is
unchanged at x = xW as long as e < 1 (which holds in our parameterization).
The shift in the frontier is thus biased towards bankers and the introduction
of bailouts constitutes banker-biased technological change. In our …gure, risk-
taking increases signi…cantly even though = 0. Banker welfare rises by
whereas worker welfare falls by W .


6    Conclusions
The central …nding of our paper is that …nancial regulation has important redis-
tributive implications if the …nancial sector has an exclusive role in the process
of credit intermediation and if …nancial markets are imperfect. The majority
of the literature on …nancial regulation focuses on the e¢ ciency implications
of …nancial regulation and disregards redistributive e¤ects. Welfare is typically
determined by a planner who picks the most e¢ cient allocation under the as-
sumption that the desired distribution of resources between di¤erent agents can
be implemented independently.
    However, if insurance markets are incomplete and if redistributions cannot
be undone via lump-sum transfers –two conditions which seem highly relevant in
the real world –maximizing aggregate output is an arbitrary concept. Weighting
one dollar in the hands of workers and one dollar in the hands of bankers equally
is just one arbitrary standard among many others. Depending on the welfare
weights that a planner places on workers versus bankers, she may …nd it desirable
to engage in more or less regulation of risk-taking in the …nancial sector.
    We …nd that deregulation bene…ts the …nancial sector by allowing for greater
risk-taking and higher expected pro…ts. However, the downside is that greater
risk-taking leads to a greater incidence of losses that are su¢ ciently large to
trigger a credit crunch. If the …nancial sector is constrained in its intermediation
activity, the real economy obtains less credit and invests less, lowering output
and the marginal product of labor, which imposes negative externalities on wage
earners. The degree of …nancial regulation therefore has …rst-order redistributive
implications.
    More generally, we show that many other factors that increase risk-taking
in the …nancial sector lead to a redistribution of expected welfare from workers
to bankers. These factors include …nancial innovation that enhances risk-taking
opportunities, agency problems, market power and bailouts.

    There are a number of issues that we leave for future analysis: First, since
risk-taking is pro…table, …nancial regulation generates large incentives for cir-
cumvention. If the regulatory framework of a country covers only one part of
its …nancial system, the remaining parts will expand. In the US, for example,
the shadow …nancial system grew to the point where it constituted a signi…cant
part of the …nancial sector. This made the sector a bottleneck for credit inter-
mediation and allowed it to extract signi…cant bailout rents in the aftermath of
the 2008 …nancial crisis (see e.g. Korinek, 2013).


                                        31
    Second, our paper rested on the assumption that a given set of agents,
bankers, had the exclusive ability to intermediate capital to the rest of the
economy. The rents of the …nancial sector could be reduced if alternative …nan-
cial intermediaries can emerge and make up for the lost intermediation capacity
of the …nancial sector when a crisis hits.


References
Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache and Thierry Tressel, 2010. “A New Database
of Financial Reforms,” IMF Sta¤ Papers 57(2), pp. 281-302.
Acharya, Viral V. and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2008, “Cash-in-the-Market Pricing
and Optimal Resolution of Bank Failures,” Review of Financial Studies 21(6),
pp. 2705-2742.
Acharya, Viral V., Thomas Cooley, Matthew Richardson and Ingo Walter, 2010,
“Manufacturing Tail Risk: A Perspective on the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009,”
Foundations and Trends in Finance 4(4), pp. 247-325.
Admati, Anat R., Peter M. DeMarzo, Martin F. Hellwig, Paul P‡eiderer, 2010,
“Fallacies, Irrelevant Facts, and Myths in the Discussion of Capital Regulation:
Why Bank Equity is Not Expensive,” Stanford GSB Research Paper No. 2065.
Adrian, Tobias, Emanuel Moench and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, “Macro Risk
Premium and Intermediary Balance Sheet Quantities,” IMF Economic Review
58(1), pp. 179-207.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and
Eric R. Young, 2012, “Optimal Policy for Macro-Financial Stability,” manu-
script, LSE.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1989, “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business
Fluctuations,” American Economic Review 79(1), pp. 14-31.
Bianchi, Javier, 2012, “E¢ cient Bailouts?” NBER Working Paper w18587.
Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique Mendoza, 2010, “Overborrowing, Financial Crises,
and ’Macroprudential’Taxes,” NBER Working Paper w16091.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2009, “Market liquidity
and funding liquidity,” Review of Financial Studies 22(6), pp. 2201-2238.
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Yuliy Sannikov, 2012, “Redistributive Monetary
Policy,” Jackson Hole Symposium, 1 September 2012.
Caballero, Ricardo J., 2010, “Sudden …nancial arrest,” IMF Economic Review
58, pp. 6-36.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Guido Lorenzoni, 2009, “Persistent Appreciations and
Overshooting: A Normative Analysis,” MIT, mimeo.



                                      32
Calvo, Guillermo A., Fabrizio Coricelli, Pablo Ottonello, 2012, “The Labor
Market Consequences of Financial Crises With or Without In‡ation: Jobless
and Wageless Recoveries,” NBER Working Paper 18480.
Campbell, Je¤rey R, and Zvi Hercowitz, 2009, “Welfare Implications of the
Transition to High Household Debt,” Journal of Monetary Economics 56(1),
pp. 1-16.
Del Negro, Marco, Gauti Eggertsson, Andrea Ferrero and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki,
2010, “The Great Escape? A Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed’s Non-standard
Policies,” unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Freixas, Xavier and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2008, Microeconomics of Banking,
2nd edition, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Furceri, Davide, Florence Jaumotte and Prakash Loungani, 2013, “The distrib-
utional consequences of capital account liberalization,” IMF Working Paper.
Geanakoplos, John and Heraklis Polemarchakis, 1986, “Existence, regularity,
and constrained suboptimality of competitive allocations when the asset market
is incomplete,” Cowles Foundation Paper 652.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi, 2011, “A model of unconventional monetary
policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 58, pp. 17-34.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2010, “Financial intermediation and
credit policy in business cycle analysis,” Handbook of Monetary Economics 3,
pp. 547-599.
Gersbach and Rochet, 2012, “Aggregate Investment Externalities and Macro-
prudential Regulation,” Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 12-03.
Haldane, Andrew, 2010, “The $100 Billion Question,” Bank of England.
Hall, Robert E., 2010, “Financial Stability with Government-Guaranteed Debt,”
Ch. 7 in Forward-Looking Decision Making, Princeton University Press.
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, 2010a, “Excessive Volatility in Capital
Flows: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,”American Economic Review, pp. 403–
407.
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, 2010b, “Managing Credit Booms and Busts:
A Pigouvian Taxation Approach,” NBER Working Paper 16377.
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, 2012, “Macroprudential Regulation versus
Mopping Up After the Crash,” NBER Working Paper 18675.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance,
and Takeovers,” American Economic Review 76(2), pp. 323-329.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Joshua Rauh, 2010, “Wall Street and Main Street: What
Contributes to the Rise in the Highest Incomes?” Review of Financial Studies
23(3), 2010, 1004-1050.


                                     33
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, 2013, “The Global Decline of the
Labor Share,” NBER Working Paper 19136.
Kennickell, Arthur B., 2013, “Ponds and Streams: Wealth and Income in the
U.S., 1989 to 2007”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve
Board, Washington, D.C.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John H. Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Po-
litical Economy 105(2), pp. 211-248.
Korinek, Anton, 2011, “Systemic Risk-Taking: Ampli…cation E¤ects, External-
ities, and Regulatory Responses”, ECB Working Paper 1345.
Korinek, Anton, 2013, “Financial Innovation for Rent Extraction,”manuscript.
Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, “Ine¢ cient Credit Booms,”Review of Economic Studies
75(3), 809-833.
Martinez-Miera, David and Javier Suarez, 2012, “A Macroeconomic Model of
Endogenous Systemic Risk Taking,” CEPR Discussion Paper DP9134.
Mian, Atif and Amir Su…, 2010, “Household Leverage and the Recession of
2007–09,” IMF Economic Review 58(1), pp. 74-117.
Miles, David, Jing Yang and Gilberto Marcheggiano, 2012, “Optimal Bank Cap-
ital,” Economic Journal 123(567), pp. 1-37.
Philippon, Thomas and Ariell Reshef, 2012, “Wages and Human Capital in the
U.S. Financial Industry: 1909-2006,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(4),
pp. 1551-1609.
Philippon, Thomas and Ariell Reshef, 2013, “An International Look at the
Growth of Modern Finance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(2), pp. 73-
96.
Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogo¤, 2009, This Time Is Di¤ erent: Eight
Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton University Press.
Rey, Patrick and Jean Tirole, 2007, “A Primer on Foreclosure,” in Mark Arm-
strong and Robert Porter (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization 1(3), El-
sevier.
Sandri, Damiano and Fabian Valencia, 2013, “Financial Crises and Recapital-
izations,” forthcoming, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1982, “The Ine¢ ciency of the Stock Market Equilibrium,”
Review of Economic Studies 49(2), pp. 241-261.




                                     34
A         Technical Appendix
A.1           Proofs
Proof of Proposition 3. We …rst show that the marginal functions 0 (x), 1 (xi ; x),
and W 0 (x) are strictly decreasing in x by di¤erentiating each with respect to x,
                                                          Z      1                      2    (1                  ) Fkk
                                 00
                                      (x)         =                     A~      1                                            ~ <0
                                                                                                                         dG(A)
                                                             0                               (1                    Fk )3
                                                          Z      1
                   d                                                                    2                        (1     )Fkk
                           1 (x
                                 i
                                     ; x)         =                     A~      1                                                     ~ <0
                                                                                                                                   dG(A)
                  dx                                         0                               (1                  Fk )2 (1     Fk )
                                                               (1         )
                           W 00 (x)               =                                         00
                                                                                                 (x) < 0
                                                              (1         )

Note that if it is indeed the case that xW < xB , then part (ii) of the proof follows
immediately from this fact.
    Next we show that xLF < xB at an interior solution. At the point xLF we have
  1 = 0. Then we …nd

                                                                                                     Z
      0                          0
                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                  (1           ) (1      )(A~ 1)Fk    ~
          (xLF ) =                   (xLF )               1 (x
                                                                   LF
                                                                        ; xLF ) =                                                                  dG(A)
                                                                                                         0          (1             Fk ) (1    Fk )
                                                              Fk
Observe that the term                             (1         Fk )(1          Fk )
                                                                                    is strictly increasing in Fk . Now we de…ne R
as follows. If A 1, so that the term (A~ 1) < 0 over the entire interval, we let R be
the value of Fk when A~ = A. If instead we have A > 1, then let R be the value of Fk
at A~ = 1. Then since Fk is decreasing in A,
                                          ~ we have
      Z                                                                                               Z
              A
                  (1            ) (1      )(A~ 1)Fk    ~ >
                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                     (1         ) (1      )(A~ 1)Fk    ~
                                                    dG(A)                                                                                           dG(A)
          0         (1              Fk ) (1    Fk )                                                          0             1           R (1    Fk )

Recall that at xLF we have                                     1   = 0. We can write this as
                                Z       A                                                                Z       1
                                                          (1            )Fk
                                            (A~        1)                      ~ +
                                                                            dG(A)                                    (A~            ~ =0
                                                                                                                               1)dG(A)
                                    0                      1            Fk                                   A

                    R1                                                                                           RA
Then since             A
                            (A~                  ~ > 0, we must have
                                            1)dG(A)                                                                  0
                                                                                                                         (A~    1) (11    )Fk
                                                                                                                                          Fk
                                                                                                                                                 ~
                                                                                                                                              dG(A)    < 0. Thus
we have                                                                        Z        A
                                                          (1            )                                            (1         )Fk
                            0
                                (xLF ) >                                                         A~          1                          ~ >0
                                                                                                                                     dG(A)
                                                         1              R           0                                (1         Fk )
                                LF                B
Thus we have x     < x . If e    1 then xW = 1 e because workers prefer avoiding
any constraints whereas xLF > 1 e because individual bankers would like to expose
themselves to at least some constraints; therefore xW < xLF .
   Finally, we show that xW < xB for interior solutions to prove (i). Observe that
                                                                                                 Z    1
                                                       (1          )
                                        0
                                            (x)                         W 0 (x) =                                 A~            ~ >0
                                                                                                                           1 dG(A)
                                                         1                                         A


Since at an interior solution we have W 0 (xW ) = 0, this implies                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                (xW ) > 0, and so
xB > xW .


                                                                                        35
Proof of Proposition 8. For (i) observe that the welfare maximization problem of
bankers under bailouts for a given parameter is
                                       h                              i
                     BL
             max           xi ; x;  = E BL ei + t ei ; e; ; e + t (e)
                   xi 2[0;1];ei


where ei = 1 xi + Ax   ~ i = e in equilibrium. Let us de…ne A^ as the level of A~ that
achieves the bailout threshold e^ and observe A^ < 1 by Assumption 1. The …rst partial
derivative of the function BL evaluated at xLF satis…es
                                                  h                                                  i
     BL
     1        xLF ; xLF ;               =E        A~              1           BL
                                                                              1        ei ; e;            =
                                                   Z          ^
                                                              A                                      Z    1
                    = (1               ) 1 (^
                                            e; e^)                (A~              ~ +
                                                                              1)dG(A)                         (A~   1)       1 dG(A)
                                                                                                                                       ~ >
                                                          0                                              ^
                                                                                                         A
                           Z       ^
                                   A                                           Z   1
                       >               (A~       1)   1 dG(A)
                                                                      ~ +                  (A~       1)      1 dG(A)
                                                                                                                    ~ =          1     xLF ; xLF   =0
                               0                                                   ^
                                                                                   A

The inequality holds because the second terms in the two expressions with integrals
are identical and must be positive for 1 xLF ; xLF = 0 to hold. The …rst term in
  BL
  1   xLF ; xLF ;  is either positive or satis…es
         Z    ^
              A                                                   Z       ^
                                                                          A                                              Z       ^
                                                                                                                                 A
(1   )            (A~ 1)    1 (^
                                         ~
                               e; e^) dG(A)                                   (A~ 1)           1 (^
                                                                                                            ~ >
                                                                                                  e; e^) dG(A)                       (A~ 1)             ~
                                                                                                                                              1 (e; e)dG(A)
          0                                                           0                                                      0


since (A~ 1) is strictly increasing and 1 (e; e) is strictly decreasing over the interval
    ^ Therefore individual bankers will choose to increase xBL > xLF if there is a
[0; A).
positive probability of bailouts, con…rming point (i).
     For (ii), consider the e¤ect of an increase in . Di¤erentiating the optimality
condition at xBL for a given yields

                                                 BL                                Z       ^
                                                                                           A
                                        d        1
                                                      =            1 (^
                                                                      e; e^)                   (A~        ~ >0
                                                                                                     1)dG(A)
                                             d                                         0


where the inequality holds since A^ < 1.

A.2          Period 0 Production Function
This appendix generalizes our setup to a symmetric Cobb-Douglas production function
across periods t = 1 and 2 of the form
                               h              i
                                 A~t xt + 1 xt F (kt ; `t )

This allows us to account for the notion that the higher returns from risk-taking in
the initial period are shared between workers and bankers.
    We continue to assume that bankers choose the fraction xt allocated to risky
projects and …rms choose the amount of capital invested kt before the productivity
shock A~t is realized, i.e. in period t 1.
    In period 0, bankers supply their initial equity e0 to …rms for capital investment
so that k0 = e0 . In period 1, the productivity shock A~1 is realized and …rms hire




                                                                                   36
` = 1 units of labor to produce output A~1 F (e0 ; 1). Bankers and workers share the
productive output according to their factor shares,
                               h               i
                        e1 =     A~1 x1 + 1 x F (e0 ; 1)                         (7)
                                       h             i
                        w1 = (1      ) A~1 x1 + 1 x F (e0 ; 1)                   (8)

where equation (7) represents the law-of-motion of bank equity from period 0 to period
1. Given the period 1 equity level e1 , the economy behaves as we have analyzed in
Section 3.1 in the main body of the paper, i.e. bankers and workers obtain pro…ts
and wages of (e1 ) and w(e1 ). Observe that all agents are risk-averse with respect to
period 2 consumption; therefore the optimal x2 1 and we can solve for all allocations
as if the productivity parameter in period 2 was the constant A = E[A~2 ], as in our
earlier analysis.
    We express aggregate welfare of bankers and workers as a function of period 0
risk-taking x1 as

                                  (x1 ) = E f (e1 )g
                                W (x1 ) = E fw1 + w(e1 )g

where e1 and w1 are determined by risk-taking and the output shock, as given by
equation (7).
    Observe that in addition to the e¤ects of risk-taking on period 2 wages w(e1 ) that
we investigated earlier, period 1 wages now depend positively on risk-taking x1 because
wages are a constant fraction (1      ) of output and greater risk leads to higher period
1 output since E[A~1 ] > 1. Bankers do not internalize either of the two externalities
on period 1 and period 2 wages.
    Assuming an interior solution for x1 and noting that 0 (e1 ) 1 = ( Fk 1)k0 (e1 ),
the optimal level of risk-taking for the banking sector xB1 satis…es
                       h                 i
           0
             (xB
               1 ) = E    A~1 1 0 (e1 ) =
                       h       i Z A^1
                   = E A~1 1 +             A~1 1 ( Fk 1) k0 (e1 )dG(A~1 ) = 0
                                     0


The banking sector prefers more risk than workers if W 0 (xB
                                                           1 ) < 0:

                      n                                     o
   W 0 xB      =    E (1       )F (e0 ; 1) + w0 (e) A~ 1
                    Z A^
               =         w0 (e) (1        )F (e0 ; 1) ( Fk 1) k0 (e1 )   A~   1 dG(A~1 )
                     0


where we subtracted the expression (1          )F (e0 ; 1) 0 (xB
                                                               1 ) = 0 in the second line,
which is zero by the optimality condition of bankers.
    Let us impose two weak assumptions that allow us to sign this expression. First,
assume > , i.e. leverage is above a minimum level that is typically satis…ed in all
modern …nancial systems (1.5 for the standard value of = 1=3), and secondly, that
A^ < 1, i.e. only low realizations of the productivity shock lead to credit crunches. Note
that these two assumptions are su¢ cient but not necessary conditions.
    Now observe that the …rst term under the integral, w0 (e), is always positive. To
sign the second term, notice that Fk (k; 1) Fk (k(0); 1) = 1= 8 e 0 and so the as-
sumption > implies that ( Fk 1) < 0. Furthermore, by the second assumption,


                                            37
the term (A~ 1) is negative since the integral is over the interval [0; A].
                                                                          ^ As a result,
the two conditions are su¢ cient to ensure that the expression is always negative and
that workers continue to prefer less risk-taking than the banking sector.
     Intuitively, our distributive results continue to hold when we account for production
and wage earnings in both time periods because the distributive con‡ict stems from the
asymmetric e¤ects of binding …nancial constraints on bankers and workers, which are
still present: workers are hurt from binding constraints but do not bene…t from over-
abundant bank capital; by contrast bankers bene…t from extra capital via increased
dividend payments. Therefore workers prefer less risk-taking than bankers.

A.3      Variants of Bailouts
This appendix considers bailouts that come in the form of emergency lending and
equity injections and shows that both matter only to the extent that they provide a
subsidy (outright transfer in expected value) to constrained bankers that relaxes their
…nancial constraint.

Emergency Lending A loan dBL that a policymaker provides to constrained
bankers on behalf of workers at an interest rate rBL that is frequently subsidized,
i.e. below the market interest rate rBL    1. Such lending constitutes a transfer of
  rBL 1 dBL in net present value terms.1 2 Assuming that such interventions cannot
relax the commitment problem of bankers that we described in section 2.3, they are
subject to the constraint
                                rd + rBL dBL    Rk                              (1’)

Equity Injections provide constrained bankers with additional bank equity q in
exchange for a dividend distribution D, which is frequently expressed as a fraction of
bank earnings. The equity injection constitutes a transfer of q D from workers to
bankers in net present value terms. Assuming that the dividend payment is subject
to the commitment problem of bankers that we assumed earlier, it has to obey the
constraint
                                   rd + D     Rk                                  (1”)
    Given our assumptions, both types of bailouts are isomorphic to a lump-sum trans-
fer t from workers to bankers.1 3
    In the following lemma, we will …rst focus on an optimal lump-sum transfer and
then show that the resulting allocations can be implemented either directly or via an
optimal package of emergency lending or equity injection.

Lemma 10 (Variants of Bailouts) Both workers and bankers are indi¤ erent be-
tween providing the bailout via subsidized emergency loans such that 1 rBL dBL = t
or via subsidized equity injections such that q D = t. Conversely, emergency lending
and/or equity injections that do not represent a transfer in net present value terms are
ine¤ ective in our model.

Proof. Let us …rst focus on an emergency loan package described by a pair (rBL ; dBL )
that is provided to bankers by a policymaker on behalf of workers. Since the opportu-
nity cost of lending is the storage technology, the direct cost of such a loan to workers
  1 2 In our framework, we assumed that default probabilities are zero in equilibrium. In

practice, the interest rate subsidy typically involves not charging for expected default risk.
  1 3 Since labor supply is constant, a tax on labor would be isomorphic to a lump sum transfer.




                                              38
is (1 rBL )dBL . Bankers intermediate k = e + d + dBL where we substitute d from
constraint (1’) to obtain

                       e+ 1     rBL dBL
                  k=                    =k e+ 1           rBL dBL
                         1      R (k)

Therefore the emergency loan is isomorphic to a lump sum transfer t = 1 rBL dBL
for bankers, workers and …rms. For an equity injection that is described by a pair
(q; D), an identical argument can be applied.
    These observations directly imply the second part of the lemma. More speci…cally,
constraint (1’) implies that an emergency loan of dBL at an unsubsidized interest rate
rBL = 1 reduces private deposits by an identical amount d = dBL and therefore
does not a¤ect real capital investment k. Similarly, constraint (1”) implies that an
equity injection which satis…es q = D reduces private deposits by d = D and
crowds out an identical amount of private deposits.

    This captures an equivalence result between the two categories of bailouts –what
matters for constrained bankers is that they obtain a transfer in net present value
terms, but it is irrelevant how this transfer is provided. From the perspective of
bankers who are subject to constraint (1), a one dollar repayment on emergency loans
or dividends is no di¤erent from a one dollar repayment to depositors, and all three
forms of repayment tighten the …nancial constraint of bankers in the same manner.
An emergency loan or an equity injection at preferential rates that amounts to a
one dollar transfer allows bankers to raise an additional 1 RR dollars of deposits and
expand intermediation by 1 1 R dollars in total.
    Emergency loans or equity injections that are provided at ‘fair’market rates, i.e.
that do not constitute a transfer in net present value terms, will therefore not increase
…nancial intermediation. We assumed that the commitment problem of bankers re-
quires that they obtain at least a fraction (1    ) of their gross revenue. If government
does not have a superior enforcement technology to relax this constraint, any repay-
ments on emergency lending or dividend payments on public equity injections reduce
the share obtained by bankers in precisely the same fashion as repaying bank de-
positors. Such repayment obligations therefore decrease the amount of deposits that
bankers can obtain by an equal amount and do not expand capital intermediation.
    Conversely, if government had superior enforcement capabilities to extract repay-
ments or dividends, then those special capabilities would represent an additional reason
for government intervention in the instrument(s) that relax the constraint most.


B      Model Parameterization
Figures 3 and 5 depict period 1 welfare and marginal values of bank equity. We use
the following parameterization:

                                             1=3
                                        A    10
                                             0:5

     Figures 4 and 6 depict period 0 welfare and equilibrium. We let A~ be distributed
lognormally with mean and variance 2 , with the range truncated to the interval
[0; 2]. The chosen parameters are




                                            39
                                           1=5
                                     A     8:1335
                                           0:5
                                           1:04
                                      2
                                           0:5

For illustrative purposes, we decreased     and chose A so as to leave e unchanged
compared to the previous set of …gures. The decrease in raises the bailout threshold
e^ so that the e¤ect of bailouts on period 0 risk-taking decisions is more pronounced
and better visible.


C      Data Sources
Data for Figure 1
Unless otherwise noted, data is taken from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
FRED database (Federal Reserve Economic Data).

Panel 1: Bank equity is calculated as the di¤erence between the series "Total Lia-
bilities and Equity" and "Total Liabilities" in the "Financial Business" category, from
the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds data (series FL - 79 - 41900 and 41940). The mar-
ket value of equity is used since book values do not re‡ect the losses incurred during
the …nancial crisis in real time. The resulting series is de‡ated by "Gross Domestic
Product: Implicit Price De‡ator" (FRED series GDPDEF).

Panel 2: The spread on risky borrowing in Panel 4 is the di¤erence between "Moody’s
Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield" (FRED series BAA) and "10-Year Treasury
Constant Maturity Rate" (FRED series DGS10).

Panel 3: The real wage bill is "Compensation of employees, received" (FRED series
W209RC1) de‡ated by "Gross Domestic Product: Implicit Price De‡ator" (FRED
series GDPDEF).




                                          40
