                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE OPTIMAL CURRENCY AREA IN A LIQUIDITY TRAP

                                           David Cook
                                        Michael B. Devereux

                                        Working Paper 19588
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19588


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We thank Kevin Hwang, Luca Dedola, and seminar participants at the Shanghai University of Finance
and Economics, the Bank of Chile, tthe Bank of Korea, the University of Cyprus, the University of
Wisconsin, and Sciences Po Paris, for comments. Devereux thanks SSHRC, the Bank of Canada,
and the Royal Bank of Canada for financial support. The opinions in this paper are those of the authors
alone and cannot be ascribed to the Bank of Canada or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19588.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by David Cook and Michael B. Devereux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Optimal Currency Area in a Liquidity Trap
David Cook and Michael B. Devereux
NBER Working Paper No. 19588
October 2013
JEL No. F3,F33,F4

                                               ABSTRACT

Open economy macro theory says that when a country is subject to idiosyncratic macro shocks, it should
have its own currency and a flexible exchange rate. But recently in many countries policy rates have
been pushed down close to the lower bound, limiting the ability of policy-makers to accommodate
shocks, even in open economies with flexible exchange rates. In this paper, we show that if the zero
bound constraint is binding and policy lacks an effective `forward guidance' mechanism, a flexible
exchange rate system may be inferior to a single currency area, even when there are country-specific
macro shocks. When monetary policy is constrained by the zero bound, under independent currencies
with flexible exchange rates, the exchange rate exacerbates the impact of shocks. Remarkably, this
may hold true even if only a subset of countries are constrained by the zero bound, and other countries
freely adjust their interest rates. In order for a regime of multiple currencies to dominate a single currency
area in a liquidity trap environment, it is necessary to have effective forward guidance in monetary
policy.


David Cook
Hong Kong University of Science & Technology
Department of Economics
Clear Water Bay
Kowloon, HONG KONG
davcook@ust.hk

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
1      Introduction
The theory of the optimal currency area (e.g. Mundell 1961, Kenen, 1969) says
that independent currencies and flexible exchange rates are superior in dealing with
country-specific macro shocks. If a country suffers a negative demand shock, reducing
GDP below potential, then with its own currency, the domestic interest rate can
be reduced, allowing an exchange rate depreciation which cushions income from the
worst effects of the shock. Within a single currency area, this adjustment mechanism
is absent. Much of the criticism of the Eurozone is built on that logic. When one
country in the Eurozone goes into recession, it cannot offset this through a fall in
its exchange rate. A large volume of recent commentary on the European crisis has
identified the lack of independent monetary policy as one of the biggest hindrances
to a more rapid adjustment of Southern European countries following their debt and
banking crises.
    But an important feature of the recent crisis, in both Europe and elsewhere, is
that the normal functioning of monetary policy has been severely circumscribed by
the zero bound constraint. In the eurozone, and many other countries, interest rates
have been forced down to historically low levels, and have been unable to respond
adequately to the scale of the downturns in the real economy. Arguably, the Eurozone
and many other regions have been stuck in a liquidity trap.
    The main aim of this paper is to show that in a liquidity trap, the standard
reasoning in favor of multiple currencies and flexible exchange rates is reversed.
When shocks are large enough so that monetary policy is constrained by the zero
bound on interest rates, and policy-makers lacks effective forward guidance, then
paradoxically, it may be better to have a single currency than a regime of multiple
currencies and a flexible exchange rate. Remarkably, this conclusion may still hold
even if only a subset of countries in the region are constrained by the zero bound, and
the other countries are free to follow optimal monetary policy rules. Equivalently,
our analysis says that if regions in a single currency area experience large negative
demand shocks, then they may in fact be better inside the single currency area than
if they had kept their own independent currency and had a floating exchange rate.
    To give an intuition into these results, take a simple New Keynesian open economy
model and assume there are country-specific demand shocks. Then under ‘normal’
times, when nominal interest rates are positive and monetary policy follows an in-
flation targeting rule, a regime of multiple currencies and flexible exchange rates
welfare-dominates a single currency area.
    Now, take the same setting, but assume that shocks are large enough to push one
or more countries into a liquidity trap. In this case, conventional monetary policy in


                                          2
these countries is unable adjust to the shocks. And when the policy is constrained
by the zero bound, the exchange rate does not help to offset country specific shocks.
Rather, the exchange rate moves in the ‘wrong direction’, exacerbating the effects
of the shock. Since in a liquidity trap, conventional monetary policy becomes tem-
porarily powerless, and if forward guidance is ineffective, monetary authorities have
no tools to independently affect the exchange rate so as to prevent this undesirable
response. By contrast, a single currency area eliminates the possibility of perverse ex-
change rate adjustment, and achieves a superior sharing of macro risk among regions
in a liquidity trap.
    In a sense, the elimination of independent currencies acts as a physical com-
mitment technology, removing the possibility of any adjustment of exchange rates
following country specific shocks, whether the zero bound constraint on nominal
interest rates is binding or not.
    We present the argument in three stages. First we use a stylized ‘canonical’ two
country New Keynesian model where countries may be subject to demand shocks
arising from temporary changes in the rate of time preference (savings shocks). In the
first case, monetary policy is governed by a simple Taylor rule, which applies so long
as nominal interest rates are positive. In a multiple currency, flexible exchange rate
version of the model, when the Taylor rule is operative, a country-specific savings
shock elicits a compensating nominal and real exchange rate depreciation for the
affected country. If, in the same circumstance, the region were governed by a single
currency area, a real depreciation would require a relative domestic price deflation,
which would be more costly and prolonged.
    Now however assume that the shocks are large enough so that interest rates
are pushed to the zero bound. In this case, the country experiencing the large
savings shock will experience relative price deflation, pushing up its relative real
interest rate1 , and generating a nominal and real exchange rate appreciation . This
appreciation exacerbates the effect of the original shock. By contrast, the relative real
interest rate and real exchange rate adjustment process under a single currency area is
qualitatively the same, whether or not the zero bound constraint applies. As a result,
in a zero bound environment, adjustment to country-specific shocks is more efficient
in a single currency area than under multiple currencies with flexible exchange rates.
With flexible exchange rates, the endogenous exchange rate effectively acts as a
destabilizing mechanism at the zero lower bound.
    We then extend this analysis to the case where monetary policy is chosen opti-
   1
      This response of real interest rates is very similar to those identified in the closed economy
literature on the zero bound constraint (see in particular, Christiano et al 2011, and Eggertson,
2011).


                                                 3
mally in a cooperative framework, and some countries may not be constrained by
the zero bound. Remarkably, we find that it the same argument may apply. That is,
it may be better to have a single currency area than a system of multiple currencies
with flexible exchange rates, even when only one of the two countries is in a liquid-
ity trap, and the other country follows an optimal monetary policy to maximize a
weighted sum of each country’s welfare. The logic here is in fact the same as in the
previous case. While an optimal monetary policy can alleviate the impact of perverse
movements in the exchange rate, it may still be better not to have had any exchange
rate adjustment at all, when the affected country is pushed into a liquidity trap.
    Finally, we extend the model to allow for ‘forward guidance’ in monetary policy.
Here, both countries have full commitment to determine the path of interest rates
both during the life of the shock and after the expiry of the shock. In this case, we
find that the traditional logic is restored. Optimal forward guidance can ensure that
the country affected by the shock promises highly accommodative monetary policy
in the future, after the shock ends, and if this promise is credible, it achieves an
immediate contemporaneous movement of exchange rates in the right direction. By
doing so, it can improve the adjustment process, compared with than in a single
currency area. An optimal policy, with effect forward guidance, multiple currencies,
and flexible exchange rates, is in general better than an equivalent policy under a
single currency area.
    One way to interpret the results of the paper is that absent effective forward guid-
ance, a single currency area acts as an inbuilt commitment mechanism guaranteeing
that a country pushed into a liquidity trap will experience future inflation, reducing
the impact of the shock on current inflation. By contrast, with multiple currencies,
flexible exchange rates, and no commitment, there is no such ability to guarantee
future inflation for the affected country.
    The paper is related to the recent literature on monetary and fiscal policy in a
liquidity trap. In particular, with the experience of Japan in mind Krugman (1998),
Eggertson and Woodford (2003, 2005), Jung, Teranashi, and Watanabe. (2005),
Svensson (2003), Auerbach and Obstfeld (2004) and many other writers explore how
monetary and fiscal policy could be usefully employed even when the authorities have
no further room to reduce short term nominal interest rates. Recently, a number of
authors have revived this literature in light of the very similar problems recently en-
countered by the economies of Western Europe and North America. Papers by Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2009), Devereux (2010), Eggertson (2009), Cogan et
al. (2008) have explored the possibility for using government spending expansions,
tax cuts, and monetary policy when the economy is in a liquidity trap. Bodenstein,
Erceg, and Guerrieri (2009) is an example of a fully specified two country DSGE


                                           4
model to examine the international transmission of standard business cycle shocks
when one country is in a liquidity trap. In addition, Werning (2012) explores optimal
monetary and fiscal policy in a continuous time model in face of zero lower bound
constraints. Correa et al. (2012) explore a set of alternative fiscal instruments that
can be used as a substitute for monetary policy in a zero lower bound situation.
    The counterintuitive implications of the zero lower bound outlined in this paper
parallel in part the surprising results that in a closed economy, some typically expan-
sionary policies may be contractionary. An example is given of the contractionary
effects of tax cuts in Eggertson (2010)
     Some recent papers consider international dimensions of optimal policy in a
liquidity trap. Jeanne (2009) examines whether either monetary policy or fiscal
policy can implement an efficient equilibrium in a ‘global liquidity trap’ in a model
of one-period ahead pricing similar to that of Krugman (1998). Fujiwara et al (2009)
use numerical results to describe optimal monetary policy responses to asymmetric
interest rate shocks. The present paper develops optimal natural interest rates as a
function of demand shocks and characterizes optimal policies analytically. Nakajima
(2008) and Fujiwara et al (2011) examine optimal policy responses to technology
shocks in a model without home bias. We focus on the role of home bias in creating
asymmetries in optimal policies amongst countries differentially affected by a demand
contraction in the tradition of Eggertson (2009) and Woodford (2010). Cook and
Devereux (2011) and Fujiwara and Ueda (2012) examine the fiscal policy multiplier
in an open economy at the lower bound. Finally, a more directly related paper is
Cook and Devereux (2013), which looks at optimal monetary and fiscal policy in a
flexible exchange rate version of a model similar to the one in the present paper.
    The paper is structured as follows. The next section sets out the two country
basic model. Section 3 shows some properties of the model solution. Then section
4 shows the main result of the paper in a simple setting with arbitrary monetary
rules that may be constrained by the zero bound. Section 5 extends the argument
to a situation where monetary policy is chosen optimally to maximize a weighted
sum of each country’s welfare, but again constrained by the zero lower bound, and
without commitment. Section 6 extends the analysis to allow for monetary policy
commitment. Some conclusions then follow.


2      A two country model
Take a standard two country New Keynesian model, denoting the countries as ‘home’
and ‘foreign’. Utility of a representative infinitely lived home household evaluated


                                          5
from date 0 is:                        ∞
                                       X
                           Ut = E0            β t (U (Ct , ξt ) − V (Nt ))                     (1)
                                        t=0

where U , and V represent the utility of the composite home consumption bundle Ct ,
and disutility of labour supply Nt . The variable ξt represents a shock to preferences
or a ‘demand’ shock . We assume that U12 > 0. A positive ξt shock implies that
agents become temporarily more anxious to consume today rather than the future.
A negative ξt shock implies agents wish to defer consumption to the future, and so
will increase their desired savings.
    Composite consumption is defined as
                                              v/2   1−v/2
                                   Ct = ΦCHt CF t           , v≥1
              v
             v 2         v
                              v
where Φ = 2 (1 − 2 ) 2 , CH is the consumption of the home country composite
good, and CF is consumption of the foreign composite good. If v > 1 then there
is a preference bias for domestic goods (home bias). This parameter also scales the
degree of trade integration that occurs in equilibrium, where v = 1 leads to fully
open trade between the two countries, while v = 2 results in complete autarky in
trade.
    Consumption aggregates CH and CF are composites, defined over a range of home
and foreign differentiated goods, with elasticity of substitution θ between goods.
Price indices for home and foreign consumption are:
                   1              1
                                 1−θ                         1              1
                                                                            1−θ
                   Z                                          Z
             PH =  PH (i)1−θ di     ,                 PF =  PF (i)1−θ di     ,
                     0                                           0

                                                                                 v/2   1−v/2
while the aggregate (CPI) price index for the home country is P = PHt PF t                     and
                                   ∗v/2 ∗1−v/2
for the foreign country is P ∗ = PF PH
    Demand for each differentiated good (j = H, F ) is
                                                   −θ
                                  Cj (i)     Pj (i)
                                         =
                                   Cj         Pj

The law of one price holds for each good so Pj (i) = SPj∗ (i) where St is the nominal
exchange rate (home price of foreign currency).
   The household’s implicit labor supply at nominal wage Wt is:

                                   UC (Ct , ξt )Wt = Pt V 0 (Nt ).                             (2)

                                                    6
Optimal risk sharing implies
                                                     St Pt∗                    (v−1)
                   UC (Ct , ζt ) = UC (Ct∗ , ξt∗ )          = UC (Ct∗ , ξt∗ )Tt      ,   (3)
                                                      Pt
            SP ∗
where T = PHF is the home country terms of trade.
  Nominal bonds pay interest, R. Then the home consumption Euler equation is:

                            UC (Ct , ξt )          UC (Ct+1 , ξt+1 )
                                          = βRt Et                   .                   (4)
                                Pt                      Pt+1
   Foreign household preferences and choices can be defined exactly symmetrically.
The foreign representative household has weight v/2 , (1−v/2) on the foreign (home)
composite good in preferences.

2.1    Firms
Each firm i employs labor to produce a differentiated good, so that its output is

                                          Yt (i) = Nt (i),

Profits are Πt (i) = PHt (i)Yt (i) − Wt Ht (i) θ−1
                                                θ
                                                   indicating a subsidy financed by lump-
sum taxation to eliminate steady state first order inefficiencies. Each firm re-sets its
price according to Calvo pricing with probability of adjusting prices equal to 1 − κ.
Firms that adjust their price set a new price given by PeHt (i) :
                                                               W
                                                      mt+j κj At+j
                                            P                  t+j
                                       Et       j=0                Yt+j (i)
                          PeHt (i) =           P                              .          (5)
                                          Et       j=0    mt+j κj Yt+j (i)

                                                   Pt        C       U (C
                                                               t+j t+j        ,ξ   )
where the stochastic discount factor is mt+j = UC (C t ,ξt )   Pt+j
                                                                       . In the aggregate,
the price index for the home good then follows the process given by:
                                                           1
                                             1−θ     1−θ 1−θ
                             PHt = [(1 − κ)PeHt  + κPHt−1 ] .                            (6)

The behavior of foreign firms and the foreign good price index may be described
analogously.




                                                      7
2.2     Market Clearing
Equilibrium in the market for good i is
                                                 −θ 
                                                                        v St Pt∗ ∗
                                                                                  
                                       PHt (i)           v Pt
                   YHt (i) =                                   Ct + (1 − )      C ,
                                        PHt              2 PHt          2 PHt t
Aggregate market clearing in the home good is:
                                              v Pt           v St Pt∗ ∗
                                  YHt =             Ct + (1 − )      C .                             (7)
                                              2 PHt          2 PHt t
                                   R1
           Here YHt = Vt−1                 YHt (i)di is aggregate home country output, where we
                                       0
                       R1  PHt (i) −θ
have defined Vt =                PHt
                                              di. It follows that home country employment (em-
                        0
                                                                                  R1
ployment for the representative home household) is given by Nt =                       N (i)di = YHt Vt .
                                                                                  0
     An equilibrium in the world economy with positive nominal interest rates may be
described by the equations (2), (4), (5), (6), and (7) for the home country, and the
analogous equations for the foreign economy. Together with (3), and for given values
of Vt and Vt∗ , given monetary rules (to be discussed below), these equations deter-
mine an equilibrium sequence for the variables Ct , Ct∗ , Wt , Wt∗ , St , PHt , PF∗ t , PeHt , PeF∗ t ,
Rt , Rt∗ , and Nt , Nt∗ .


3       The Effects of Savings Shocks
Define σ ≡ − UCC
              UC
                 C
                   as the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in
                            00
consumption, φ ≡ − VV H0  as the elasticity of the marginal disutility of hours worked,
                                                U
and we assume that σ > 1. Finally, εt = UCξ       C
                                                    ln(ξt ) is the measure of a positive
demand shock in the home country, with an equivalent definition for the foreign
country.
   For this section and the next section, we make a simplifying assumption about
the nature of preference shocks. We assume that the shock is unanticipated, and
reverts back to zero with probability 1 − µ in each period. This assumption implies
that under independent monetary policy and flexible exchange rates, there are no
predetermined state variables in the model. Hence, all endogenous variables in the
world economy will inherit the same persistence as the shock itself, in expectation.


                                                          8
Thus, for any endogenous variable xt , we may write Et (xt+1 ) = µxt . After the shock
expires, all variables will then revert to their zero initial equilibrium. This property
does not carry over to the single currency area, since in that case, the lagged terms
of trade becomes an independent state variable (as shown below).

3.1    The World and Relative Economy

We derive a sticky price log-linear approximation of the model in a similar manner
to Clarida et al. (2002) and Engel (2010). Let x     bt be the percentage deviation of a
given variable xt from its non-stochastic steady state level. In the analysis below,
each variable will be described in this way, except for the nominal interest rate
and inflation rates, which are defined in levels, and εt , which is already defined in
terms of deviation from the steady state value of zero. We define the term D ≡
σv(2 − v) + (1 − v)2 > 1. In addition , define ζ ≡ (v−1) D
                                                            . The parameter, 0 ≤ ζ ≤ 1,
measures the intensity of home bias. In the absence of home bias, ζ = 0; under full
home bias ζ = 1.
    We separately derive approximations to the dynamic economy in terms of world
averages and world relatives . Thus, the world average (relative) value for variable
x is given by xW = 12 (x + x∗ ) (xR = 12 (x − x∗ )).
    Using (3) and (7), as well as the equivalent condition for the foreign country,
we can derive the following partial solutions for the terms of trade and relative
consumption.
                                           σ
                                   τbt = 2 ybtR − 2ζεRt                              (8)
                                          D
                                              2v(2 − v) R
                                cR
                                b       btR +
                                 t = 2ζ y                εt                          (9)
                                                  D
Given relative income, and assuming v > 1, a negative εt shock, which implies a
ceteris paribus rise in relative home country savings, reduces relative demand for the
home good, and generates a terms of trade deterioration. A rise in relative income
also generates a terms of trade deterioration, and leads to a rise in relative home
consumption.
    Using these conditions in combination with a linear approximation of (2), (4), (5),
and (6), we can derive the following forward looking inflation equations and open
economy IS relationships, expressed in terms of world averages and world relatives.
It is convenient to write this system in ‘gap’ terms, where we define the variable
e = x − x̄ as the gap between the log of a variable and the log of its flexible price
x
analogue (x̄). The only exceptions are for inflation, which is written in logs, since


                                           9
its flexible price value is zero, and the nominal interest rate, which is expressed in
levels2 . The world average equations are:
                                πtW = k((φ + σ)e
                                               ytW ) + βEt πt+1
                                                            W
                                                                                                (10)
                                   W
                             σEt (e
                                  yt+1 − yetW ) = rtW − Et πt+1
                                                            W
                                                                − r̄tW                          (11)
The coefficient k depends on the degree of price rigidity. The term r̄tW is the world
average interest rate that would apply in a flexible price equilibrium, which we term
the ‘natural’ interest rate. In the Appendix we show that r̄tW is expressed as:
                                                  (1 − µ)φ W
                                     r̄tW = ρ +           ε .                                   (12)
                                                    σ+φ t
A negative shock to εW
                     t leads to a fall in the world natural interest rate when µ < 1.
                   σ
   Now let σD ≡ D ,where σ ≥ σD ≥ 1. Then the world ‘relative’ equations are
written as:
                          πtR = k((φ + σD )e ytR + βEt πt+1
                                                        R
                                                                                 (13)
                                     R
                             σD Et (e
                                    yt+1 − yetR ) = rtR − Et πt+1
                                                              R
                                                                  − r̄tW                        (14)
where   r̄tR   represents the natural world relative interest rate, defined in the Appendix
as:
                                                (1 − µ)ζφ W
                                       r̄tR =            ε .                                    (15)
                                                 σD + φ t
A negative εR t shock reduces the world relative natural interest rate when µ < 1 and
when there is home bias in the consumption bundle; v < 1.
    Equations (10)-(11) and (13)-(14) describe the response of the world economy to
the savings shock through the world average inflation rate and output gap move-
ments, and the world relative inflation rate and output movements. Note that the
degree of home bias does not affect aggregate average outcomes. The effect of home
bias on relative outcomes is summarized by the two parameters ζ and σD 3 .
    The specific responses determined by (10)-(11) and (13)-(14) will depend on the
nature of monetary policy, captured by the world average and relative nominal in-
terest rates, given by rtW and rtR .
   2
     Note that π W = 0.5(π + π ∗ ), where π and π ∗ are the home and foreign PPI inflation rates.
   3
     The first parameter measures the size of home bias, and represents the direct impact of relative
demand shocks on relative inflation and output. When home bias is absent, (v − 1) = ζ = 0, and
relative demand shocks have no impact on relative demand allocations. The second parameter, σD ,
the intertemporal elasticity of relative demand, governs how intensely relative demand responds to
adjustments in the relative interest rates. In the presence of home bias, σD < σ, so relative demand
responds more to interest rate changes than average demand, since relative interest rate movements
result in real exchange rate adjustments and expenditure switching across countries.

                                                  10
4         The Simplest Case: Comparing Interest Rate
         Rules with a Liquidity Trap
4.1        Separate Currencies with Independent Monetary Poli-
           cies
We first take a simple case to show the essence of the argument. To do this, assume
that outside of the zero lower bound, monetary policy is characterized by an interest
rate rule4 . Under separate currencies, each country sets its own interest rate. We
assume a simple Taylor rule described as:

                                             rt = ρ + γπt                             (16)

    Here, monetary policy targets the rate of PPI inflation. With separate currencies,
using (16) and the analogous foreign condition we have rtW = ρ+γπtW , and rtR = γπtR .
Combining these two expressions with (10)-(14), we can derive the solutions for the
four variables π W , y W , π R , and y R . Then using (8) and (9) we can obtain solutions
for the terms of trade and relative consumption. The nominal exchange rate, st , may
be then obtained from the condition

                                    st − st−1 = πtR + τt − τt−1 .                     (17)

   In this example, the solution for world averages is the same under multiple cur-
rencies or a single currency area. We therefore focus only on the characteristics
of world relative variables. Also, with multiple currencies, and under the assumed
stochastic characteristics of the εt shock, the model is entirely stationary; there are
no predetermined state variables, and all endogenous variables take on the persis-
tence characteristics of the εt shock. From (13), we can then describe a relationship
between relative PPI inflation and the relative output gap as:

                                                k(φ + σD ) R
                                        πtR =             yet                         (18)
                                                 (1 − βµ)

A rise in the relative home output gap leads to a rise in relative home country
inflation.
    Likewise, from (14), we can describe a relationship between relative inflation and
the output gap, conditional on the relative natural interest rate r̄tR . We have to be
careful here however, since (14) depends on the policy rule, and we want to take
    4
        In section 5 and 6 below, we allow for monetary policy to be set optimally.

                                                  11
account of the possibility that the policy rule may be constrained by the zero lower
bound. For now, we are assuming that each country’s monetary policy follows the
above interest rate rules, this implies that we must impose the conditions:

                           rt = rtW + rtR = Max(0, ρ + γπt )                         (19)

                           rt∗ = rtW − rtR = Max(0, ρ + γπt∗ )                       (20)
    Assume first that neither condition is binding. Then we can substitute rtR = γπtR
into (14), substituting also for r¯t R and take expectations, obtaining:
                                                               
                         R       (1 − µ)          R    ζφ     R
                        πt = −              σD yet −        ε                    (21)
                                 (γ − µ)             σD + φ t

    Figure 1 illustrates the determination of relative inflation and the relative output
gap when monetary policy is not constrained by the zero bound. Equation (18) is
upward sloping in π R and yeR space, and (21) is downward sloping, since a rise in
relative output, which is temporary, leads to a fall in the real interest rate, and under
the monetary rule (16) relative inflation must fall so as to accommodate this.
    Now we see the impact of a relative savings shock, given by a negative εR      t . For
v > 1, this shifts (21) to the left, leading to a fall in both inflation and the output
gap.
    Given independent monetary policies and the monetary rule (16), the fall in rela-
tive inflation must be associated with exchange rate and terms of trade adjustment.
From the Euler equations for bond pricing (4), expressed in relative terms, combined
with the risk sharing condition (3), we obtain the following relationship between
relative inflation and the terms of trade:

                              γπtR = Et (πt+1
                                          R
                                              + τt+1 − τt )                          (22)

The right hand side of this equation is simply the expected change in the nominal
exchange rate, so that (22) is just the uncovered interest rate parity condition. Im-
posing the stationarity condition gives us the result that the terms of trade satisfies
the following relationship:
                                           γ−µ
                                    τt = −      πt                                (23)
                                           1−µ
Since γ > µ, the fall in inflation is associated with a terms of trade depreciation. In
response to the savings shock, home relative inflation falls. When γ > µ, the home
relative interest rate falls, which allows for a terms of trade depreciation. It is easy


                                           12
to see also that the nominal exchange rate depreciates, since from (17) and (23) we
have
                                             γ−1
                               st − st−1 = −      πt
                                             1−µ
    The full solution for the terms of trade can be derived as:

                                         −kφ(γ − µ)
                     τb =                                         2ζεR                           (24)
                            σD (1 − βµ)(1 − µ) + (γ − µ)k(σD + φ)
Now contrast this response to that constrained by the zero interest bound. Assume
that the shock is large enough that using the interest rate rule (16) would involve
both home and foreign nominal interest rates to fall below zero, so that both (19)
and (20) is binding5 . In this case, nominal interest rates are equal, and zero, in both
the home and foreign country. Then (14) must reflect this additional constraint.
Again, imposing stationarity, we derive the relationship:
                                                              
                                  1−µ          R     ζφ      R
                          πt = −         σD yet −          ε                        (25)
                                    µ              σD + φ t

This is a upward sloping locus in π R -e y R space. A rise in current relative inflation
raises anticipated future relative inflation, when µ > 0. This reduces the home
relative real interest rate, and raises the relative home output gap 6 . We further
make the assumption that 1−µ    µ
                                  σD > k(φ + σD )1 − βµ, so that the slope of (25)
exceeds that of (18).
    Now look at the result of a relative savings shock where the zero bound constraint
binds. Figure 2 shows that this again leads to a fall in relative home inflation and
the relative home output gap. But for a similar sized shock, both relative inflation
and the relative output gap fall by a larger amount. In contrast to the case where
(16) applies, at the zero bound, the fall in relative inflation causes a rise in home
relative real interest rates, which causes a secondary fall in home relative demand.
So long as the above stability condition holds, this process converges at a much lower
relative inflation and relative output gap.
    What does this imply for the exchange rate and the terms of trade? Note that,
although the zero bound is binding in both countries, the arbitrage conditions (3)
   5
      It is easy to confirm that there always exists a value v ≥ 1 such under the monetary rule (16),
both home and foreign nominal interest rates would be negative in face of a savings shock.
    6
      Note that it as in Eggertson and Woodford, (2003), it is critical for this argument that the
liquidity trap will expire in expectation. This ensures that the current inflation rate is pinned down
by the expectation that prices and inflation will be uniquely determined along a stable manifold in
the future.


                                                 13
and (4) still apply. This means that (22) still holds, but with the left hand side equal
to zero. Under that stationarity condition, then we have
                                                 µ
                                          τ=        πt                                         (26)
                                                1−µ
Then, the terms of trade must appreciate. The difference with the previous case is
that the fall in relative home inflation leads to a rise in the home relative real interest
rate, which leads to an appreciation in the terms of trade. From (17) and (26), there
is also a nominal exchange rate appreciation. The initial impact of the shock on the
nominal exchange rate satisfies: 7
                                                      1
                                      st − st−1 =        πt
                                                     1−µ
This is the essence of the argument over the merits of flexible exchange rates at
the zero bound. Because movement in relative inflation lead to perverse movements
in relative real interest rates at the zero bound, relative prices move in the ‘wrong
direction’. The appreciation in the terms of trade exacerbates rather than ameliorates
the impact of the initial relative savings shock.

4.2     Single Currency Area
Now shift focus away from the multiple currency environment and assume that there
is a single currency area for both countries. In order to investigate this, we can use
the results of Benigno (2004). Under a single currency area, monetary policy for the
whole region is governed by the condition rtW = ρ + γπtW , and by definition, both
countries face the same nominal interest rate, so that rtR ≡ 0. On the surface, this
looks as if the solution should be the same as the multiple currency case under the
zero lower bound. But this is incorrect, since as shown in Benigno (2004), without an
endogenous nominal exchange rate, there is an additional initial condition imposed
on the dynamics of the terms of trade in a single currency area. This is simply given
by the condition (17) but setting the left hand side to zero so that

                                         τt = τt−1 − πtR                                       (27)

    Since there is only one nominal interest rate, the relative interest rate equations
for nominal bond rates do not impose any additional constraints on the model.
   7
     Because nominal interest rates are equal, the effect of the shock is to cause a one-time appre-
ciation in the nominal exchange rate, and the subsequent anticipated movement in the exchange
rate is zero, so that uncovered interest rate parity is still satisfied.

                                                14
But we can combine (8) (rewritten in ‘gap’ terms) with (27) to obtain a separate
relationship between inflation and the output gap implied by the single currency
area. This is:
                                                                   
               R           R     ζφ     R            R       ζφ    R
             πt = −2 σD yet −         ε     + 2 σD yet−1 −       ε          (28)
                               σD + φ t                    σD + φ t−1
    This replaces (21) as an equilibrium condition under the single currency area.
Note that a), it does not contain any parameters relevant to the monetary rule, and
b) it is a dynamic equation, so the movements in relative inflation and relative output
gaps will not satisfy the same stationarity characteristics as those under the multiple
currency regime. The first point is obvious - there is only an aggregate monetary
policy in the single currency area, and relative regional inflation will not be sensitive
to this aggregate policy, under the symmetry assumptions we have made to describe
the model. The second point comes from the fact that in a single currency area,
the terms of trade can only change as a result of differentials in domestic prices
that occur only gradually in response to savings shocks. This becomes an important
distinction between the single currency area and the multiple currency regime at the
zero lower bound - the dynamic properties of a single currency area ensure that the
impact of the shock does not dissipate immediately after the shock expires. As we
will see below, this gives a ‘proxy’ commitment aspect to the single currency area
that does not exist naturally under the multiple currency regime.
    We may combine (18) and (28) as the equations determining the dynamics of
relative inflation and the relative output gap following a savings shock. But before
that, it is worth noting that while (28) gives a negative relationship between relative
inflation and the relative output gap much like (21), the slope of the relationship is
                                        1−µ
larger in the case of (28), since 2 > γ−µ   . This implies that a fall in relative inflation
in a multiple currency area has a greater stabilizing effect on the output gap than in
a single currency area, in ‘normal’ times, when the zero bound is not binding. The
intuition behind this is clear; a fall in relative inflation precipitates a fall in the home
relative interest rate, and an exchange rate depreciation for the home economy. This
cannot happen in a single currency area.
    Combining (18) and (28), we may solve for the dynamics of inflation. The solution
is given by:
                              πtR = λπt−1R
                                             − χ2(εR − εR  t−1 )                         (29)
where 0 < λ < 1, and χ = − k2 ζ ∆φD1 < 0, with ∆D1 ≡ σD (1 − βλ + β(1 − µ)) + k2 (φ + σD ).
The immediate effect of a savings shock is to reduce relative home country inflation.
With a single currency area, this causes a terms of trade depreciation. The solution


                                             15
for the terms of trade is given as:

                                              τt−1 + χ2εR
                                       τbt = λb                                                 (30)

4.3     Comparison
How does this compare with the impact on the terms of trade when there are multiple
currencies and flexible exchange rates? First focus on the case where the Taylor rule
applies and the zero bound constraint is not binding. To compare the responses
across the two regimes, we perform a simple numerical exercise in Figure 3. Here
we make the following calibration assumptions; β = 0.99, k = 0.05, σ = 2, φ = 1,
and v = 1.5. In addition, we assume that there is a home country savings shock
which persists with probability µ = 0.7. Finally, assume a monetary rule γ = 3. The
Figure illustrates the responses of π R , y R , and τ , following the shock ε = −0.58
    With flexible exchange rates, relative inflation and relative output fall following
the savings shock. The terms of trade depreciates sharply. By reducing the relative
price of the home good, this acts to cushion the fall in relative inflation and relative
output. Under the single currency area, the terms of trade also depreciates, but
this is muted and gradual. In order to achieve this depreciation, relative domestic
inflation must fall much more sharply than under flexible exchange rates. At the
same time, relative output falls by more under the single currency area.
    Figure 3 is consistent with the traditional analysis of the relative merits of mul-
tiple currencies under flexible exchange rates in comparison with a single currency
area. A country specific demand shock requires an adjustment in relative prices. It
is better to facilitate this adjustment with changes in the nominal exchange rate. A
single currency area, by definition, cannot achieve any nominal exchange rate adjust-
ment. While the single currency has no consequences for overall world aggregates,
it leads to an excessive volatility in relative output, and insufficient flexibility in
relative prices.
    Now look at the comparison when the zero bound is binding. The responses
of relative inflation and output gaps in the single currency area are independent of
the monetary rule. Thus, the solutions described in (29) and (30) apply whether or
not the zero bound constraint binds for the single currency area as a whole. The
adjustment of relative inflation and the terms of trade depend on the response of
   8
     We follow this calibration everywhere below except when stated otherwise. Figure 3 illustrates
the impact effect, and the expected response of each variable following the shock. Since the shock
continues with probability µ, then under the flexible exchange rate the ex-post response is constant,
so long as the shock continues.



                                                 16
relative marginal costs and price adjustment. But for these responses, the behaviour
of the area-wide interest rate is irrelevant.
    This then leads to a dramatic reversal in the comparison of the single currency
area and the flexible exchange rate case when the zero bound constraint is binding.
Figure 4 shows the effect of the same shock as Figure 3, but now assuming that
both countries are constrained by the zero lower bound. As we said, the single
currency area responses are the same as Figure 3. But under flexible exchange rates,
the terms of trade appreciates sharply, and there is a large fall in relative inflation,
much larger for the flexible exchange rate than under the single currency area. Thus,
relative output falls by substantially more with flexible exchange rates than the single
currency area.
    We conclude that when the zero lower bound is binding, flexible exchange rates
do not act so as to stabilize the response to country specific shocks, and in fact impart
greater relative macro instability than would exist under a single currency area. With
flexible exchange rates, the exchange rate response compounds the original shock. In
a single currency area, relative inflation rates move slowly, but move in a stabilizing
fashion.
    As we show below, a critical feature of this comparison is that monetary policy
contains no commitment to future actions. The interest rate rule (16) implies that
when the shock expires, both countries will return to a zero inflation steady state.
Then monetary policy cannot be relatively more expansionary in the home country,
either at the time of the shock, or after the expiry of the shock. Thus, there is no
policy response that can ensure the exchange rate moves in a stabilizing direction. By
contrast, paradoxically, the single currency area has an inbuilt commitment, because
relative prices can only change through domestic inflation, and even after the shock
expires, the relative price of the home good will continue to be lower, as the terms
of trade adjusts back to the steady state. This point is made clearer in Section 6
below.


5      Extension to Optimal Monetary Policy
In the previous section we compared the single currency area to a multiple currency
case where monetary policy followed an arbitrary interest rate rule, and we also
assumed that the zero lower bound constraint was binding in both countries or not
at all. We now extend the argument to allow for the possibility that one country may
not be constrained by the zero bound, and instead sets monetary policy optimally,
assuming that central banks cooperate to maximize welfare. Remarkably, we find
that even in this case, the single currency area may outperform the multiple currency

                                           17
case, when the zero bound is binding. That is, a single currency area, in which
the whole region is at the zero bound, may dominate a multiple currency flexible
exchange rate system, even when only one country is at the zero bound in the latter
case. For now, we continue to assume that there can be no policy commitments; we
characterize an optimal policy under discretion.
    Optimal policy for the multiple currency case will obviously differ from that of the
single currency area, since in the former case, there is potentially an additional policy
instrument. But the notable feature that we will show here is that the optimal setting
even for the world average interest rate may differ between the multiple currency area
and the single currency area.
    Again, we focus on a particular case where the savings shock comes exclusively
from the home country, so that εt < 0 and ε∗t = 0, which obviously implies that
εW              R
 t < 0 and εt < 0 In addition, assume that the shock from the home country is
large enough so that the world average natural interest rate is negative; i.e. r̄tW =
ρ + (1−µ)φ
      σ+φ
           εW                                                                       W
             t < 0. From (12), then, the home natural interest rate, r̄t = r̄t + r̄t ,
                                                                                         R

must be negative, but the foreign natural interest rate r̄t∗ = r̄tW − r̄tR , will depend on
the degree of home bias v. For v = 1, the natural interest rates are identical, while
for v = 2, the foreign natural interest rate is equal to ρ, and unaffected by the home
country shock. Figure 5 shows that for a negative home country shock εt < 0, there
is a critical value of v, denoted v̄, such that for v < v, (v ≥ v̄), the foreign natural
interest rate is negative (positive).
    First, we discuss the optimal policy in the multiple currency case, taking the
characteristics of the shock as just described. The Appendix shows that a second
order approximation to global welfare, in each period, for the model set out in section
2 may be written as:
                                     σD + φ               σ+φ
                              ytR )2 ·
                       Vt = −(b                  ytW )2 ·
                                              − (b                                    (31)
                                       2                   2
                                 θ W             θ
                               − (πt + πtR )2 − (πtW − πtR )2
                                4k              4k
Thus, the social welfare function faced by the policy maker depends upon average
and relative world output gaps and inflation rates.
    Under multiple currencies, the cooperative optimal monetary policy under dis-
cretion involves maximizing (31) subject to (10)-(11) and (13)-(14), taking as given
the expected future values of all variables, as well as the non-negativity constraints
on nominal interest rates. The Appendix derives the full solution. Here we give an
intuitive description of the solution for home and foreign interest rates, following
Cook and Devereux (2012). Define Ψ and Ψ∗ respectively as the multiplier on the

                                            18
non-negativity constraint for the home and foreign interest rate. Thus, the optimal
solution must have the property that Ψ ≥ 0, rt ≥ 0, and Ψ · rt = 0, and similarly
for the foreign multiplier and foreign interest rate. Then, in the Appendix, we show
that the optimal cooperative policy, under discretion and multiple currencies requires
that the following two conditions be satisfied:

                                      ΩD (rtR − r̄tR ) = Ψt − Ψ∗t                   (32)

                                       Ω(rtW − r̄tW ) = Ψt + Ψ∗t                    (33)
where ΩD and Ω are composite terms which have the following property; ΩD < Ω
for 1 < v ≤ 2, ΩD = Ω for v = 2 9 . From (32) and (33) we can show that, under the
assumptions εt < 0 ε∗t = 0 and r̄tW < 0, the solution has the following properties; a)
the home country is always constrained by the zero bound, so that rt = 0, b) there
exists a critical value v̂ < v̄, such that for 1 ≤ v ≤ v̂, rt∗ = 0, while for v̂ < v < 1,
the foreign interest rate solution is:
                                                       ΩD − Ω
                                        rt∗ = r̄t∗ +          r̄t                   (34)
                                                       ΩD + Ω
Thus, for v sufficiently greater than unity, the foreign country will choose to set its
interest rate above zero, even if the world natural interest rate is negative. Moreover,
because the second expression on the right hand side of (34) is positive, the foreign
country may set a positive interest rate, even if its own natural interest rate is below
zero.
     The intuition behind this result is that in a cooperative optimal monetary policy
outcome, under multiple currencies and the zero bound constraint applying to the
home country, it may be optimal for the foreign country to raise policy rates in order
to reduce the appreciation of the home exchange rate. This limits the deflation and
fall in output in the home country. At the same time, for v sufficiently high, the home
terms of trade appreciation may generate inflation and a positive foreign output gap,
so an increase in the foreign policy rate may also be warranted on that account.
    9
        The exact expressions are

                                     σ+φ    (1 − βµ) + kθ(σ + φ)
                              Ω=                                     ,
                                      σ σ(1 − βµ)(1 − µ) − kµ(σ + µ)

                                    σD + φ    (1 − βµ) + kθ(σD + φ)
                            ΩD =
                                      σD σD (1 − βµ)(1 − µ) − kµ(σD + µ)
.



                                                   19
    This solution may be∗ expressed in a different way. Note that the average world
                       r +r
interest rate is rtW = t 2 t , so we may characterize the behavior of the average world
interest rate under multiple currencies and flexible exchange rates as:
                                                          Ω
                              rtW,mc = max(0, r̄tW −           r̄t )                           (35)
                                                        ΩD + Ω
   Under the single currency area, the cooperative optimal monetary policy chooses
only a single world interest rate subject to (10) and (11), and the non-negativity
constraint. This policy differs from the multiple currency area case only in that it
ignores the path of relative world output and relative world inflation, focusing only
on the optimal path of world averages. It is immediate that the solution will be:

                                      rtW,sca = max(0, r̄tW )                                  (36)

    Comparing (35) and (36) we see that under optimal monetary policy, average
policy interest rates will be higher in a multiple currency area than in a single cur-
rency area. This is because under the multiple currency area it may be optimal to
raise foreign policy rates, even though the world natural rate is negative, in order to
reduce the appreciation of the home country terms of trade.
    Figure 6 illustrates the response of average and relative world output, inflation,
and the terms of trade under optimal monetary policy, in the multiple currency
case, and the single currency area. We choose the same parameter and shocks as
before, assuming that the world natural interest rate falls below zero. The home bias
parameter v is set so that v > v̂, and the optimal response of the foreign country is to
set a positive policy interest rate. Then, since average world interest rates are higher
under multiple currencies than in the single currency area (zero), average world
output and inflation falls by more in the response to the savings shock. Thus, due
to the perverse response of the exchange rate under a multiple currency regime, at
the zero lower bound, overall world output will fall by more with multiple currencies
and flexible exchange rates than under a single currency area, even when only the
home country is constrained by the zero lower bound. Figure 6 likewise shows that
relative output and inflation also falls by more in the multiple currency case than in
the single currency area. Finally, even under the optimal policy rule, the terms of
trade still appreciates under the multiple currency case, while as before, the terms
of trade in the single currency area depreciates 10 .
   10
      This is not necessarily the case. In section 6 below, we show that in an optimal discretionary
equilibrium with relatively transitory shocks, the home terms of trade under multiple currencies
may depreciate, but does so at a rate less than would take place in the single currency area.


                                                20
    These results indicate that, even when policy is set optimally and only one region
of the multiple currency area is constrained by the zero lower bound, the macroeco-
nomic response in this environment still seems to be dominated by that of a single
currency area. But how does this comparison translate into welfare terms? We
can construct a welfare comparison by computing the loss associated with a savings
shock using the welfare function (31). To do this, we take the expected loss following
a shock which follows the persistence properties described above. In particular we
assume again that the shock is large enough to drive the world natural interest rate
below zero, and the shock persists with probability µ in each period in the future.
Welfare in each regime is constructed by computing the discounted expected value of
losses starting from the period of the shock. In the multiple currency case, expected
welfare is constant in each future period, since the shock is either the same, with
probability µ, or zero, with probability 1 − µ, and if it is zero, all future gaps are
closed. In the single currency area, welfare evolves over time, as the terms of trade
gradually adjusts to the shock, and welfare doesn’t go to zero after the shock expires,
since the terms of trade continues to be away from its steady state level, and only
gradually converges back to steady state.
    Figure 7 illustrates the welfare comparison for different values of the persistence
parameter µ, and for two different values of v. The Figure illustrates the value of

                                              |V(mc)|
                                                       −1
                                              |V(sca)|
where V(mc) (VL(sca)) is the welfare function under multiple currencies (single cur-
rency area). For v = 1, there is no difference between the two measures. For v > 1,
the loss from the multiple currency area increases, relative to that under the single
currency area, as µ rises. The welfare comparison between the multiple currency
case and the single currency area involves a trade-off. On the one hand, under mul-
tiple currencies, the savings shock leads the home terms of trade to appreciate, and
relative output is destabilized during the period of the shock. But under a single
currency area, the shock causes a persistent movement in the terms of trade, rela-
tive output, and inflation rates, even after the shock ends. For low values of µ, the
welfare effect of the second factor dominates, and the multiple currency area, under
the optimal choice of monetary policy, is preferable. But for high µ, the first factor
becomes more important, and the multiple currency area is worse in welfare terms,
even if monetary policy is chosen optimally. This is clear from Figure 6 which shows
the expected values of the home and foreign interest rate11 , where the calibration for
this Figure involves v = 1.5 and µ = 0.7. Hence, for this case, the foreign country
  11
       Note that the actual value of the home policy rate is zero so long as the savings shock continues.

                                                    21
is actively adjusting its interest rate. Despite this, welfare is higher in the single
currency area.


6      The Need for Forward Guidance
A key aspect of the comparison so far has been that monetary policy is myopic; we
have allowed no possibility for policy-makers to commit to future actions. In general,
the literature on the zero lower bound in closed economy settings has stressed the
benefits of forward guidance. As shown by Krugman (1999), Eggertson and Woodford
(1983), and Jung et al. (2005), with full commitment, an optimal monetary policy
can significantly alleviate the consequences of the zero lower bound constraint. This
is done by promising to follow, in the future, after the conditions leading to the zero
bound have elapsed, a more expansionary policy than would otherwise be appropriate
for the economy’s conditions at that time. In Eggertson and Woodford (2003) and
Jung et al. (2005), this involves keeping a zero interest rate policy for a period of time
after the shock which drives the natural interest rate below zero has disappeared.
     We now extend our analysis to allow for commitment in monetary policy. Again,
we focus on cooperative optimal monetary policy, but assume that policymakers can
choose a path of interest rates for each country (in the multiple currency case) or a
world interest rate (in the single currency case) that will hold for current and future
periods, subject to the zero bound constraint. To simplify the analysis, we focus on
a special case of perfect foresight, where the preference shock is known to last a fixed
number of periods. Specifically, assume that at time t = 1, there is a shock to home
preferences ε < 0, which drives world natural interest rates below zero, and further,
it is known at time 1 that the shock will last exactly T periods. Thus, the shock leads
to a fall in the world natural interest rate below zero for T periods. Then, in both
the single currency case and the case of multiple currencies, an optimal monetary
policy at time t = 1 is characterized by a path of interest rates for all t ≥ 1.
     We focus on a case where v ≥ v̂, which implies that in the equilibrium of the op-
timal discretionary monetary policy, the foreign country would set a positive interest
rate. In this case, we find that it is also optimal for the foreign country to pursue a
positive interest rate in the optimal policy problem with commitment. Hence, again,
we are focusing on a case where only the home country is currently constrained by
the zero bound.
     In the multiple currency case, an optimal policy with commitment involves a path
of interest rates rtW and rtR for t ≥ 1 to minimize the discounted sum of losses given



                                           22
by:
                              ∞                                                     
                              X
                                        t                   σD + φ             σ+φ
                  V0 = −            β            ytR )2
                                                (b        ·           ytW )2 ·
                                                                   + (b                  (37)
                              t=0
                                                              2                 2
                               ∞                                                    
                              X
                                        t        θ W              θ
                          −         β              (πt + πtR )2 + (πtW − πtR )2
                              t=0
                                                4k               4k

subject to (10)-(11) and (13)-(14) for each period t, as well as the non-negativity
constraints on national nominal interest rates. In the single currency area case, the
optimal policy involves a choice of the path of rtW for t ≥ 1 to minimize (37) subject
to (10)-(11) and the non-negativity constraint on rtW .
    The first order conditions for the optimal policy with commitment are quite
familiar from previous literature. The conditions are described fully in the Appendix.
Here we illustrate the results and comparisons in Figures 8- 11. The Figure are based
on the assumption that at time t = 1, there is an unanticipated savings shock in the
home country equal to ε = −0.5, which is known to persist for three periods (so that
T = 3). After that ε = 0. The Figures use the calibration used in Section 5, and
assume that v = 1.5.
    For comparison, Figures 8 and 9 illustrate the case of discretionary monetary
policy, under multiple currencies and the single currency area. The qualitative fea-
tures are the same as in Section 5. Under multiple currencies, there is no persistence
beyond t = 3. In response to the savings shock, the home country policy rate is
stuck at the zero bound for 3 periods only, while as shown in the previous section
for relatively high values of v, the foreign policy rate is positive. Relative inflation is
negative for three periods. In the single currency area, the world interest rate is at
the zero bound for three periods, but does not converge immediately to the steady
state natural rate. This is because the home terms of trade ends the third period
above its steady state, and the home country must experience some relative inflation
in order to converge back to steady state. This is achieved by having a world interest
rate lower than the steady state, which, in conjunction with a home country terms
of trade above its steady state, facilitates more inflation in the home country. This
mechanism illustrates the in-built commitment dynamic of the single currency area
- producing relative home country inflation after the expiry of the shock, even in a
discretionary equilibrium.
    Figures 10 and 11 now focus on the commitment equilibrium under the multiple
currency case and the single currency area. Under commitment, the policymaker can
choose the whole future path of interest rates so as to produce the desired outcome,
announcing interest rates to hold even after the shock elapses. We see that under

                                                          23
the multiple currency area, there is a dramatic difference from the discretionary out-
come. In particular, the home country keeps its policy rate at zero for an additional
two periods, even after the shock expires. Moreover, the foreign country’s interest
rate, while still rising immediately following the shock as in the case of discretion,
converges to steady state only gradually. This conjunction of policy announcements
sharply reduces the deflation experienced in the home country, and as a result, the
home terms of trade experiences an immediate depreciation, as would occur under
the outcome outside of the zero bound. The fall in world average output and world
relative output is now much smaller than under discretion. More importantly, the
outcomes under multiple currencies with full commitment are better than those un-
der the single currency area with commitment, which is illustrated in Figure 11.
This Figure shows that, with full commitment, the single currency area policy rate
remains at zero for one period after the shock expires. The home terms of trade
depreciates, but by less than that under full commitment. The movement in the
average world interest rate means that average world output falls by about the same
amount as under multiple currency areas, but the inability to fully adjust the home
terms of trade leads to a much greater fall in relative world output. Thus, with full
commitment, the macro outcomes under the multiple currency area, even constrained
by the zero lower bound, seem to dominate those of the single currency area.
    The substance of these results indicate that in extolling the benefits of multiple
currencies in an environment constrained by the zero bound, it is critical to have
well functioning forward guidance as part of the policy toolkit. Table 1 makes this
clear in terms of welfare evaluation.

                           Table 1: Welfare Comparison

                            SCA          Float
        Discretion         -0.007        -0.017
        Commitment        -0.0039        -0.002

        Notes: Compares present value of welfare under optimal policy under
        discretionary and commitment policies under each regime


    The Table reports the discounted sum of losses under discretion and commit-
ment, using an optimal policy in each case, for the multiple currency area and the
single currency case, for the shock process and the calibration example described in
the previous paragraphs. For the discretionary case, the single currency area still
dominates, as implied by the previous section. But with full policy commitment, the


                                         24
traditional result applies - when policy can effectively employ forward guidance, the
welfare benefits of multiple currencies and flexible exchange rates re-emerge.


7     Conclusions
A growing recent literature has demonstrated that conventional responses to macroe-
conomic shocks can be substantially different when monetary policy is constrained
by the zero bound on nominal interest rates (see e.g. Eggertson 2011, 2012, Cook
and Devereux, 2013). This present paper extends that literature by showing that
the conventional reasoning on the benefits of flexible exchange rates and the costs
of a single currency area can be reversed in a situation of a global liquidity trap.
When monetary policy is ineffective, the conventional response of the exchange rate
to aggregate demand shocks may be reversed, and the exchange rate exacerbates
rather than ameliorates economic instability.
    Our paper focuses on the role of the exchange rate as an equilibrating mechanism
in a situation with country-specific shocks. Some recent literature argues that in a
single currency area, there will exist tax-subsidy policies that can substitute for the
absent exchange rate variation. Fahri et al. (2012) describe how a mix of tax and
subsidies can achieve Fiscal Devaluation in a small economy, exactly replicating the
effects of a nominal exchange rate devaluation. Therefore, if fiscal policy is sufficiently
flexible, it can completely eliminate the loss of monetary autonomy implied by a fixed
exchange rate regime. More generally, it has been established by Correa et al. (2012)
that a combination of state-contingent taxes and subsidies can undo the effects of
the zero bound and fully replicate the flexible price equilibrium in standard New
Keynesian models. In the Appendix, we see how these results extend to our setting.
We show that a combination of VAT adjustment and payroll tax changes can be used
to ensure price stability and zero output gaps, achieving the fully optimal flexible
price equilibrium in face of shocks which would drive the world interest rate in a
single currency area, or the home interest rate in a multiple currency area, to the
zero bound. But the key finding is that when monetary policy is constrained by the
zero bound, fiscal adjustment will be required even in a situation of flexible exchange
rates. The Appendix shows that a fall in average and relative VAT taxes combined
with a rise in average and relative payroll taxes achieves the first best outcome,
leaving all gaps and inflation rates equal to zero. But the main result we show is
that the tax-subsidy policy is the same for the multiple currency case and the single
currency area. Hence, the key need for the optimal fiscal response is not the inability
of exchange rates to adjust, but the zero lower bound constraint itself.
    It is important to emphasize that the paper does not argue unconditionally for

                                            25
the benefits of a single currency area. We have entirely ignored a whole set of factors
that have been identified as important in the eurozone crisis, such as sovereign debt
constraints and financial and banking fragility. In addition, we have shown that
effective forward guidance in monetary policy can restore the traditional advantages
of multiple currencies and flexible exchange rates. Hence, the key message of the
paper is that, when monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound, the
support for traditional policy conclusions is acutely dependent on the ability for
policy-makers to make credible future commitments.




                                          26
πR	

                    ISR	
                                     ASR	





                                                                        yR	

 Figure	  1:	  	  World	  Rela4ves	  under	  Normal	  Monetary	  Policy	





                                             27
πR	
                                          ISR	


                                                                 ASR	





                                                                          yR	

        Figure	  2:	  	  World	  Rela4ves	  at	  the	  zero-­‐bound	





                                              28
                 Figure 3: A Home Shock, SCA vs Flex ER, Active Monetary Policy
        x 10
            −3       Relative Inflation                                    Relative Output
   2                                                        0.02
                                              SCA
   0                                          Float           0

  −2                                                       −0.02

  −4                                                       −0.04

  −6                                                       −0.06

  −8                                                       −0.08
        0        2       4       6        8           10           0   2      4      6       8   10


                     Terms of Trade
 0.02


0.015


 0.01


0.005


   0
        0        2       4       6        8           10




                                                  29
             Figure 4: A Home Shock, SCA vs Flex ER, ZLB
                 Relative Inflation                                    Relative Output
 0.005                                                  0.02
                                          SCA
    0                                     Float           0

−0.005                                                 −0.02

 −0.01                                                 −0.04

−0.015                                                 −0.06

 −0.02                                                 −0.08

−0.025                                                  −0.1

 −0.03                                                 −0.12
         0   2       4       6        8           10           0   2      4      6       8   10


                 Terms of Trade
  0.02

  0.01

    0

 −0.01

 −0.02

 −0.03

 −0.04
         0   2       4       6        8           10




                                              30
                        Figure 5: Natural Interest Rates
 0.02




 0.01




   0




−0.01




−0.02


                                                          Home
−0.03                                                     Foreign




−0.04




−0.05




−0.06




−0.07




−0.08
        1   1.1   1.2      1.3   1.4    1.5   1.6   1.7      1.8    1.9   2
                                         v




                                   31
                                  Figure 6: Optimal Policy
                 World Output                                       World Inflation
   0                                                  0
                                      Float
                                      SCA
−0.02                                              −0.01


−0.04                                              −0.02


−0.06                                              −0.03


−0.08                                              −0.04


 −0.1                                              −0.05


−0.12                                              −0.06


−0.14                                              −0.07
        0   2      4      6       8           10           0   2       4       6        8             10




                Relative Output                                    Relative Inflation
 0.02                                               0.02

   0                                                  0

−0.02                                              −0.02

−0.04                                              −0.04

−0.06                                              −0.06

−0.08                                              −0.08

 −0.1                                               −0.1

−0.12                                              −0.12

−0.14                                              −0.14

−0.16                                              −0.16
        0   2      4      6       8           10           0   2       4       6        8             10




                Terms of Trade                                       Policy rates
  0.1                                               0.02
                                                                                            Foreign
                                                   0.018
                                                                                            Home
 0.05
                                                   0.016
   0                                               0.014

                                                   0.012
−0.05
                                                    0.01
 −0.1
                                                   0.008

−0.15                                              0.006

                                                   0.004
 −0.2
                                                   0.002

−0.25                                                 0
        0   2      4      6       8           10           0   2       4       6        8             10




                                          32
             Figure 7: Welfare comparison with optimal Policy
 0.6




 0.5




 0.4




 0.3




 0.2
                                                               v=1
                                                               v=1.6
 0.1


          SCA dominates
  0

          Floating dominates
−0.1




−0.2




−0.3
   0.54     0.56    0.58    0.6        0.62   0.64   0.66   0.68       0.7
                                        µ




                                  33
                                      Figure 8: SCA Discretion
                     Interest Rate                       x 10
                                                             −3
                                                                      Relative Inflation
 0.02                                               1

                                                    0
0.015
                                                   −1

 0.01                                              −2

                                                   −3
0.005
                                                   −4

   0                                               −5
        0        2      4     6       8   10             0        2       4       6        8   10



        x 10
            −3
                     World Output                                     Relative Output
   5                                              0.01


   0
                                                    0

  −5
                                                 −0.01
 −10

                                                 −0.02
 −15


 −20                                             −0.03
        0        2      4     6       8   10             0        2       4       6        8   10



                     Terms of Trade
 0.06

 0.05

 0.04

 0.03

 0.02

 0.01

   0
        0        2      4     6       8   10




                                          34
                                            Figure 9: Floating, Discretion
                      Home Interest Rate                            Foreign Interest Rate
  0.02                                                   0.02

                                                        0.018
 0.015
                                                        0.016

                                                        0.014
  0.01
                                                        0.012

                                                         0.01
 0.005
                                                        0.008

    0                                                   0.006
         0        2        4       6        8    10             0   2      4     6       8              10



         x 10
             −3
                       Relative Inflation                               World Output
    0                                                      0

   −1                                                  −0.005

   −2                                                   −0.01

   −3                                                  −0.015

   −4                                                   −0.02

   −5                                                  −0.025

   −6                                                   −0.03
         0        2        4       6        8    10             0   2      4     6       8              10



                       Relative Output                                  Terms of Trade
    0                                                    0.06
                                                                                             Floating
−0.005                                                   0.05                                SCA

 −0.01                                                   0.04

−0.015                                                   0.03

 −0.02                                                   0.02

−0.025                                                   0.01

 −0.03                                                     0
         0        2        4       6        8    10             0   2      4     6       8              10




                                                35
                                  Figure 10: SCA Commitment
                 Interest Rate                      x 10
                                                        −3
                                                                 Relative Inflation
 0.025                                         1

                                               0
  0.02

                                              −1
 0.015
                                              −2
  0.01
                                              −3

 0.005
                                              −4

    0                                         −5
         0   2      4     6       8   10            0        2       4       6        8   10



                 World Output                                    Relative Output
  0.01                                       0.01


 0.005
                                               0

    0
                                            −0.01
−0.005

                                            −0.02
 −0.01


−0.015                                      −0.03
         0   2      4     6       8   10            0        2       4       6        8   10



                 Terms of Trade
  0.14

  0.12

   0.1

  0.08

  0.06

  0.04

  0.02

    0
         0   2      4     6       8   10




                                      36
                                            Figure 11: Floating, Commitment
                      Home Interest Rate                           Foreign Interest Rate
 0.025                                                  0.02

                                                       0.018
  0.02
                                                       0.016
 0.015                                                 0.014

  0.01                                                 0.012

                                                        0.01
 0.005
                                                       0.008

    0                                                  0.006
         0        2        4       6        8   10             0   2      4     6       8              10



         x 10
             −3
                       Relative Inflation                              World Output
   1.5                                                  0.01


    1                                                  0.005


   0.5                                                    0


    0                                                 −0.005


  −0.5                                                 −0.01


   −1                                                 −0.015
         0        2        4       6        8   10             0   2      4     6       8              10



                       Relative Output                                 Terms of Trade
  0.01                                                  0.15
                                                                                            Floating
 0.005                                                                                      SCA
                                                         0.1

    0
                                                        0.05
−0.005

                                                          0
 −0.01


−0.015                                                 −0.05
         0        2        4       6        8   10             0   2      4     6       8              10




                                                37
References
 [1] Beetsma Roel and Henrik Jensen, (2005), “Monetary and Fiscal Policy Interac-
     tions in a Micro-Founded Model of a Monetary Union”, Journal of International
     Economics, 67, 320-352.

 [2] Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt Grohe, and Martin Uribe, (2002) “Avoiding
     Liquidity Traps”, Journal of Political Economy.

 [3] Benigno, Gianluca and Pierpaolo Benigno (2006), “Designing Targeting Rules
     for International Monetary Policy Cooperation”, Journal of Monetary Eco-
     nomics, 53, 473-506.

 [4] Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti, (2002), “An Empirical Characteriza-
     tion of the Dynamic Effects of changes in Government Spending and Taxes on
     Output”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1329-1368.

 [5] Braun R. Anton, Lena Mareen Korber, and Yuichiro Waki, (2012) “Some Un-
     pleasant Properties of Log Linearized Solutions when the Nominal Nate is Zero”
     Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

 [6] Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher J. Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2009) “The Ef-
     fect of Foreign Shocks When Interest Rates are at Zero” IFdp 983, Board of
     Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

 [7] Christiano, Larry, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, (2011) “When is the
     Government Spending Multiplier Large?”, Journal of Political Economy, 119,
     78-121.

 [8] Cook, David, and Michael B. Devereux, (2011) “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a
     World Liquidity Trap”, European Economic Review, forthcoming.

 [9] Cook, David and Michael B. Devereux (2013) “Sharing the Burden: Monetary
     and Fiscal Policy in a Global Liquidity Trap”, American Economic Journal:
     Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

[10] Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Fahri, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles (2012),
     “Unconventional Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound ”American Economic Review,
     forthcoming.

[11] Cogan, John, Tobias Cwik, John Taylor, and Volker Wieland, (2009) “New
     Keynesian Versus Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers”, mimeo

                                        38
[12] Davig, Troy and Eric M. Leeper (2009) “Monetary Fiscal Interactions and Fiscal
     Stimulus”, NBER d.p. 15133.

[13] Devereux, Michael B. (2010) “Fiscal Deficits, Debt, and Monetary Policy in a
     Liquidity Trap”, Central Bank of Chile, Working Paper 581.

[14] Engel, Charles (2010), “Currency Misalignments and Optimal Monetary Policy:
     A Reinvestigation”, mimeo

[15] Eggerston, Gauti, (2010) “What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest
     Rates?”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, forthcoming.

[16] Eggertson Gauti and Michael Woodford, (2003) “The Zero Interest Bound and
     Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

[17] Eggertsson, Gauti and Michael Woodford, (2005) “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal
     Policy in a Liquidity Trap”, ISOM Annual.

[18] Fahri Emmanuel, Gita Gopinath, and Oleg Itskhoki, (2012) “Fiscal Devaluations
     Trap”, mimeo.

[19] Faia, Ester and Tommaso Monacelli, (2008) “Optimal Monetary Policy in a
     Small Open Economy with Home Bias,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
     40, 721-750.

[20] Fujiwara, Ippei, Nao Sudo, and Yuki Teranishi, (2009) “The Zero Lower Bound
     and Monetary Policy in a Global Economy: A Simple Analytical Investigation”,
     International Journal of Central Banking.

[21] Fujiwara, Ippei, Tomoyuki Nakajimaz, Nao Sudox, and Yuki Teranishi, (2010)
     “Global Liquidity Trap”, mimeo, Bank of Japan

[22] Fujiwara, Ippei, and Kozu Ueda (2010) “The Fiscal Multiplier and Spillover in
     a Global Liquidity Trap”, IMES d.p. 2010-E-3. Bank of Japan.

[23] Jeanne, Olivier (2009) “The Global Liquidity Trap”, mimeo

[24] Krugman, Paul, (1998), “It’s baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the
     Liquidity Trap”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity”, 2, 137-87.

[25] Jung, Taehun, Yuki Terinishi, and Tsutomo Watanabe, (2005) “The Zero Bound
     on Nominal Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy”, Journal of Money
     Credit and Banking.

                                        39
[26] Monacelli, Tomasso and Roberto Perotti, (2008), “Fiscal Policy, Wealth Effects
     and Markups”, NBER d.p. 14584.

[27] Perotti, Roberto, (2007) “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal
     Policy”, NBER 13143.

[28] Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford (1998) “An Optimization Based Econometric
     Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy”, NBER Technical Working
     Paper 233.

[29] Svensson, Lars E. (2003) “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The
     Foolproof Way and Others” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17, 145-166.

[30] Werning, Ivan (2012) “The Zero Lower Bound Constraint: Monetary and Fiscal
     Policy”mimeo, MIT.

[31] Woodford, Michael (2003) Interest and Prices, MIT Press

[32] Woodford, Michael (2010) “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure
     Multiplier”, mimeo, Columbia University.



8      Appendix A
8.1    Equilibrium with Fully Flexible Prices
We first define the equilibrium of the model in a fully flexible price world equilibrium,
where κ = 0 in each country. In that case, PHt (i) = PHt , PF t (i) = PF t , and Vt =
Vt∗ = 1. In addition (given the presence of optimal subsidies) we have PHt = A−1 Wt
and PF∗ t = A−1 Wt∗ . Letting a bar denote values in a flexible price world equilibrium,
we may describe the equilibrium by the equations:
                              1−v/2                                          −(1−v/2)
          UC (C̄t , ζt )A = T̄t       V 0 (N̄t ),    UC∗ (C̄t∗ , ζt∗ )A∗ = T̄t          V 0 (N̄t∗ )   (38)

                                UC (C̄t , ζt )T̄tv−1 = UC∗ (C̄t∗ , ζt∗ ),                             (39)
                                     v 1−v/2                  v v/2
                           AN̄t = T̄t             C̄t + (1 − )T̄t C̄t∗ ,                              (40)
                                     2                        2
                                   v    −(1−v/2)                 v −v/2 ∗
                         A∗ N̄t∗ = T̄t              C̄t∗ + (1 − )T̄t      C̄t                         (41)
                                   2                             2


                                                    40
This implicitly describes the efficient world equilibrium for consumption, output (or
employment), and the terms of trade.
    We analyze equations (38)-(41) by taking a linear approximation around the
globally efficient steady state. For a given variable X, define x̄ to be the log difference
of the global efficient value from the non-stochastic steady state, except for εt (as
defined in the text), and πHt and rt , which refer respectively to the level of the
inflation rate and nominal interest rate. Since the model is symmetric, we have
T = 1 in a steady state. Then we may express the linear approximation of (38)-(41)
as:
                                                        v
                              σc̄t − εt + φȳt + (1 − )τ̄t = 0                        (42)
                                                        2
                                                        v
                              σc̄∗t − ε∗t + φȳt∗ − (1 − )τ̄t = 0                     (43)
                                                        2
                                   v             v ∗           v
                         ȳt = ( c̄t + (1 − )c̄t ) + v(1 − )τ̄t ,                     (44)
                                   2             2             2
                                    v             v             v
                         ȳt∗ = ( c̄∗t + (1 − )c̄t ) − v(1 − )τ̄t ,                   (45)
                                    2             2             2
                                          ∗         ∗
                         σc̄t − (εt − εt ) − σc̄t − (v − 1)τ̄t = 0,                   (46)
   We may solve the system (42)-(46) to obtain the first order solutions for con-
sumption, output and the terms of trade in response to savings shocks. We can
write home and foreign consumption responses to savings shocks as:
                                                    
                             1   W      1 + φv(2 − v) R
                      c̄t =     ε +                    εt
                            φ+σ t          σ + φD
                                                    
                        ∗    1   W      1 + φv(2 − v) R
                      c̄t =     ε −                     εt
                            φ+σ t          σ + φD
    A savings shock reduces the efficient flexible price world consumption level, but
the impact on individual country consumption depends on the source of the shock,
and the degree of home bias in preferences.
    The impact of savings shocks on flexible price output levels are likewise written
as:                                                  
                                1     W        (v − 1)
                        ȳt =        εt +                 εR
                                                           t
                              φ+σ              σ + φD
                                                     
                          ∗     1     W        (v − 1)
                        ȳt =        ε −                  εR
                              φ+σ t            σ + φD      t




                                            41
    A world savings shock reduces equilibrium output in both countries. When there
is home bias in preferences, so that v > 1, a relative home savings shock tends to
reduce home output and raise foreign output.
    Demand shocks also affect the flexible price efficient response of the terms of
trade. We can show that:

                                     τ̄t    φ(v − 1) R
                                         =−         ε
                                      2     σ + φD t
In response to a relative home country savings shock, relative home output falls, but
the terms of trade deteriorates, in a fully flexible price equilibrium.
    If monetary authorities could adjust nominal interest rates freely to respond to
demand shocks, then the flexible price efficient global equilibrium could be sustained.
We denote the interest rate that would sustain the flexible price efficient outcome as
the ‘natural interest rate’. Let ρ be the steady state value for the natural interest
rate. Then a log linear approximation of (4) leads to the expressions for the flexible
price equilibrium nominal interest rate in the home country as:
                                                                    v
    r̄t = ρ + σEt (c̄t+1 − c̄t ) − Et (εt+1 − εt ) + Et πHt+1 + (1 − )Et (τ̄t+1 − τ̄t )   (47)
                                                                    2
Assume that an efficient monetary policy is to keep the domestic rate of inflation
equal to zero. In addition, for now, assume that demand shocks follow an AR(1)
process so that εt+1 = µεt + ut and ε∗t+1 = µε∗t + u∗t , where ut and u∗t are mean-zero
and i.i.d., then the value of ret when the right hand side is driven by demand shocks
alone can be derived as:
                                                      
                                   φ W        φ(v − 1) R
                    r¯t = ρ +         ε +                εt (1 − µ)                (48)
                                 φ+σ t        σ + φD
In similar manner, the foreign efficient nominal interest rate is:
                                                    
                    ∗           φ W          φ(v − 1) R
                 r¯t = ρ +           ε −               εt (1 − µ)                         (49)
                              φ+σ t          σ + φD

Natural interest rates respond to both aggregate and relative savings shocks. An
aggregate savings shock raises global marginal utility and raises natural interest
rates. A relative savings shock affects natural interest rates in separate ways in
the two countries, but this depends upon the degree of home bias in preferences.
With identical preferences across countries, the natural interest rate is independent
of purely relative demand shocks, and is equalized across countries.


                                              42
    This discussion has direct bearing on the degree to which the zero bound con-
straint will bind across countries in response to time preference shocks (negative de-
mand shocks) emanating from one country. In general, these shocks will have both
aggregate and relative components. If there are full security markets and identical
preferences, we see that natural interest rates are always equated across countries.
But when v ≥ 1 a home country shock has a smaller impact on the foreign natural
interest rate, so the home country may be constrained by the zero lower bound, but
the foreign country will not be so constrained.

8.2    Optimal Policy: Discretion
Cooperative policy under discretion (and multiple currencies) may be characterized
by the solution to the following optimization problem:


                         max        Lt
                     ybtR ,e
                           ytW ,πtW ,πtR ,rtW ,rtR

                 = Vt + λ1t πtW − k(φ + σ)e   nW          W
                                                              
                                               t − βEt πt+1
                   +λ2t πtR − k(φ + σD )e  ytR − βEt πt+1
                                                      R
                                                         
                               W
                                   − ybtW ) − Et rtW − retW − πt+1 W
                                                                     
                   +ψ1t σEt (byt+1
                                                           retR
                                                                      
                                 R       R           R              R
                   +ψ2t σD Et (byt+1 − ybt ) − Et rt −           − πt+1
                                                             2
                   +γ1t rtW + rtR + γ2t rtW − rtR
                                                   


    The policy optimum involves the choice of the output gaps, government spending
gaps, inflation rates and the foreign interest rate to maximize this Lagrangian. The
first two constraints are the inflation equations in average and relative terms. The
second two constraints are the average and relative ‘IS’ equations. The final two
constraints are the non-negativity constraint on the two policy interest rates.
    The first order conditions of the maximization are:

                                   ytR = λ2t k(φ + σD ) + σD ψ2
                          −(σD + φ)b                                             (50)
                                     ytW = λ1t k(φ + σ) + σψ1t
                             −(σ + φ)b                                           (51)
                                                 kλ1t = θπtW                     (52)
                                                 kλ2t = θπtR                     (53)
                                              ψ2t = γ1t + γ2t                    (54)

                                                     43
                                                    ψ2t = γ1t − γ2t                              (55)
                      γ1t ≥ 0, (rtW + rtR ) ≥ 0, γ1t (rtW + rtR ) = 0                            (56)
                      γ2t ≥ 0, (rtW − rtR ) ≥ 0, γ2t (rtW − rtR ) = 0                            (57)
    These equations, in conjunction with (10)-(11) and (13)-(14), give the conditions
determining average and relative output gaps; ybtR , ybtW , inflation rates; πtR , πtW , fiscal
       bR
gaps; cg      bW
          t , cg t , the Lagrange multipliers; λ1t , λ2t , ψ1t , ψ2t , and the value of either
rtW + rtR , or γ1t and rtW − rtR , or γ2t , under optimal policy.
    In the single currency area, cooperative policy is described in a similar manner,
but involves only the choice of rtW subject to a non-negativity constraint.

8.3     Optimal Policy: Commitment
Cooperative policy under commitment with multiple currencies is characterized by:


                              max                   L0
                    ybtR ,e
                          ytW ,πtW ,πtR ,rtW ,rtR
                             ∞
                             X
                                    λ1t πtW − k(φ + σ)e
                                                      nW         W
                                                                    
                = V0 +                                  t − βEt πt+1
                          t=0
                        ∞
                        X
                              λ2t πtR − k(φ + σD )e
                                                  ytR − βEt πt+1
                                                             R
                                                                
                    +
                        t=0
                        ∞
                        X
                                        W
                                            − ybtW ) − Et rtW − retW − πt+1
                                                                        W
                                                                           
                    +         ψ1t σEt (b
                                       yt+1
                        t=0
                         ∞
                                                                                retR
                        X                                                                 
                                                R
                    +         ψ2t       σD Et (b
                                               yt+1      −   ybtR )         R
                                                                      − Et rt −         R
                                                                                     − πt+1
                        t=0
                                                                                  2
                        X∞                    ∞
                                            X
                              γ1t rtW + rtR +   γ2t rtW − rtR
                                                              
                    +
                        t=0                               t=0

where V0 is defined in (37) of the text.
    The policy optimum involves the choice of the output gaps, government spending
gaps, inflation rates and the foreign interest rate to maximize this Lagrangian. The
first two constraints are the inflation equations in average and relative terms. The
second two constraints are the average and relative ‘IS’ equations. The final two
constraints are the non-negativity constraint on the two policy interest rates.
    The first order conditions of the maximization are, for time t = 0:

                                                          44
                                    y0R = λ2t k(φ + σD ) + σD ψ2t
                           −(σD + φ)b                                                         (58)
                                     ytW = λ1t k(φ + σ) + σψ1t
                             −(σ + φ)b                                                        (59)
                                          kλ1t = θπtW                                         (60)
                                          kλ2t = θπtR                                         (61)
                                         ψ2t = γ1t + γ2t                                      (62)
                                         ψ2t = γ1t − γ2t                                      (63)
                       γ1t ≥ 0, (rtW + rtR ) ≥ 0, γ1t (rtW + rtR ) = 0                        (64)
                       γ2t ≥ 0, (rtW − rtR ) ≥ 0, γ2t (rtW − rtR ) = 0                        (65)
    and for time t > 0, the conditions are:

                             y0R = λ2t k(φ + σD ) + σD ψ2t − σD ψ2t−1
                    −(σD + φ)b                                                                (66)
                               ytW = λ1t k(φ + σ) + σψ1t − σψ1t−1
                       −(σ + φ)b                                                              (67)
                               k(λ1t − βλ1t−1 − ψ1t−1 ) = θπtW                                (68)
                               k(λ2t − βλ2t−1 − ψ2t−1 ) = θπtR                                (69)
                                         ψ2t = γ1t + γ2t                                      (70)
                                         ψ2t = γ1t − γ2t                                      (71)
                       γ1t ≥ 0, (rtW + rtR ) ≥ 0, γ1t (rtW + rtR ) = 0                        (72)
                       γ2t ≥ 0, (rtW − rtR ) ≥ 0, γ2t (rtW − rtR ) = 0                        (73)
    These equations, in conjunction with (10)-(11) and (13)-(14) for each period t,
give the conditions determining average and relative output gaps; ybtR , ybtW , inflation
                                bR
rates; πtR , πtW , fiscal gaps; cg     bW
                                   t , cg t , the Lagrange multipliers; λ1t , λ2t , ψ1t , ψ2t , and
the value of either rt + rt , or γ1t and rtW − rtR , or γ2t , under an optimal policy with
                         W    R

commitment.
    Again, under the single currency area, the optimal policy problem is simply a
subset of the above problem, where rtW is chosen subject to a non-negativity con-
straint.




                                                45
9       Appendix B. Adjustment with Fiscal Policy
Fahri et al. (2012) have described how a mix of tax and subsidies can achieve“Fiscal
Devaluation” in a small economy, exactly replicating the effects of a nominal exchange
rate devaluation. Therefore, if fiscal policy is sufficiently flexible, it can completely
eliminate the loss of monetary autonomy implied by a fixed exchange rate regime.
More generally, it has been established by Correa et al. (2012) that a combination
of state-contingent taxes and subsidies can undo the effects of the zero bound, and
fully replicate the flexible price equilibrium in standard New Keynesian models. A
similar set of results applies to our model. We show below that a combination of
VAT adjustment and payroll tax changes can be used to ensure price stability and
zero output gaps, achieving the fully optimal flexible price equilibrium. But when
monetary policy is constrained by the zero bound, fiscal adjustment will be required
even in a situation of flexible exchange rates. So we need to identify the set of optimal
fiscal instruments both in the single currency model as well as the model with flexible
exchange rates. The main result we show is that the tax-subsidy mix is the same
in both cases. We can express the extended model in terms of world averages and
world relatives as follows:

                πtW = k((φ + σ)b
                               ytW + tW         W          W          W
                                      V AT,t + tW AGE,t − εt ) + βEt πt+1                   (74)
       W
           − ybtW ) = Et (εW      W              W    W              W       W
                                                                                    
 σEt (b
      yt+1                 t+1 − tV AT,t+1 ) − (εt − tV AT,t ) + Et rt − Et πt+1 − ρ (75)



                πtR = k((φ + σD )b
                                 ytR − ζ(εR    R         R              R
                                          t − tV AT ) + tW AGE ) + βEt πt+1                 (76)
            R
                − ybtR ) = ζ(Et (εR      R              R    R               R    R
                                                                                        
    σD Et (b
           yt+1                   t+1 − tV AT,t+1 ) − (εt − tV AT,t )) + Et rt − πt+1       (77)
Here, tW         R
        V AT,t (tV AT,t ) represents the world average (world relative) VAT tax at time
t, assuming taxes are zero in steady state. Likewise tW            R
                                                         W AGE,t (tW AGE,t ) represent the
world average (world relative) payroll tax. An increase in world average VAT tax
raises consumer prices, shifting back labor supply and pushing up marginal costs for
firms, thus reducing world output. A payroll tax also increases marginal costs and
reduces output. At the same time, an expected rise in the VAT rate Et tW              W
                                                                           V AT,t+1 −tV AT,t
will reduce the expected real interest rate, inclusive of taxes, and reduce the rate of
growth of world consumption and output. The impact of world relative VAT and
payroll taxes on world relative output can be explained in an analogous manner. We
may rewrite these two equations systems in terms of inflation and output gaps

                   πtW = k((φ + σ)ỹtW + tW         W                W
                                          V AT,t + tW AGE,t ) + βEt πt+1                    (78)


                                              46
            W
                − ỹtW ) = −Et (tW             W              W       W      W
                                                                                   
     σEt (ỹt+1                  V AT,t+1 ) − tV AT,t ) + Et rt − Et πt+1 − RN,t           (79)

                  πtR = k((φ + σD )ỹtR + ζtR       R              R
                                            V AT − tW AGE ) + βEt πt+1                     (80)
                 R
                     − ỹtR ) = −ζ(Et tR           R              R    R      R
                                                                                       
        σD Et (ỹt+1                   V AT,t+1 − tV AT,t ) + Et rt − πt+1 − RN,t          (81)
      W                    φ
here RN,t = ρ + (1 − µ) σ+φ   εW
                               t is defined as the world average natural interest rate,
      R                φ
and RN,t  = (1 − µ)ζ σD +φ εRt is the world relative natural real interest rate.
   From these two equations, it is easy to see that the following combination of VAT
and payroll tax changes can eliminate all gaps in a liquidity trap. The policy mix
can be described by the following conditions:
                                               φ W
                                    tW
                                     V AT =      ε                                         (82)
                                              σ+φ t
                                    tW         W
                                     W AGE = −tV AT                                        (83)
                                             φ
                                   tR
                                    V AT =        εR                                       (84)
                                           σD + φ t
                                   tR          R
                                    W AGE = −ζtV AT                                        (85)
In addition, these taxes are applied with the same persistence µ as the shock itself.
This policy mix does the following. In terms of world averages, it combines a VAT
tax cut with a payroll tax increase. The VAT tax cut takes on the same expected
persistence as the negative demand shock, and so induces a fall in the expected real
interest rate that cannot be achieved by a nominal interest rate cut. The VAT tax
cut on its own however would be too expansionary, since with inflation and expected
inflation maintained at zero, it would lead to a positive output gap. This must be
offset by a payroll tax increase. In terms of world relatives, there is a relative VAT
tax cut that is greater in the worst hit economy. That effectively achieves the relative
price tilting that mimics the terms of trade depreciation that should take place in
the fully efficient economy with fully flexible prices. Again, with v > 1 however, this
would lead to a positive world relative output gap, and so must be countered by a rise
in the relative payroll tax. The key feature of the solutions (82)-(85) is that they do
not depend on the monetary rule. Thus, they are the same for the flexible exchange
rate model and the single currency area. In both cases, they achieve the adjustment
in world and relative output without any inflation adjustment, or nominal exchange
rate adjustment. To see this, we note that the terms of trade (exclusive of VAT) in
the presence of VAT changes can be written as

                             τ̂t = 2σD ŷtR − 2ζ(εR    R
                                                  t − tV AT,t )                            (86)

                                              47
It is easy to see from (80) and (86) that the adjustment of relative VAT rates obviates
any movement in the terms of trade. Hence, if VAT rates are adjusted appropriately,
neither domestic inflation or nominal exchange rate adjustment is necessary. But in
contrast to the discussion on Fiscal Devaluations in the eurozone, we see that in a
liquidity trap, the optimal fiscal policy mix is the same whether or not the region
has a system of flexible exchange rates. Thus, the key constraint is the zero bound
on interest rates, not the non-adjustability of the nominal exchange rate.




                                          48
