NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DRIVE MORE EFFECTIVE DATA-BASED INNOVATIONS:
ENHANCING THE UTILITY OF SECURE DATABASES
Yi Qian
Hui Xie
Working Paper 19586
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19586
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yi Qian and Hui Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Drive More Effective Data-Based Innovations:¸˛Enhancing the Utility of Secure Databases
Yi Qian and Hui Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 19586
October 2013
JEL No. M31
ABSTRACT
Databases play a central role in evidence-based innovations in business, economics, social, and health
sciences. In modern business and society, there are rapidly growing demands for constructing analytically
valid databases that also are secure and protect sensitive information in order to meet customer and
public expectations, to minimize financial losses, and to comply with privacy regulations and laws.
We propose new data perturbation and shuffling (DPS) procedures, named MORE, for this purpose.
As compared with existing DPS methods, MORE can substantially increase the utility of secure databases
without increasing disclosure risk. MORE is capable of preserving important nonmonotonic relationships
among attributes, such as the inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation. Maintaining
such relationships is often the key to determining optimal levels of policy and managerial interventions.
MORE does not require data to be of particular types or have particular distributional shapes. Instead,
it provides unified, flexible, and robust algorithms to mask general types of confidential variables
with arbitrary distributions, thereby making it suitable for general-purpose data masking. Since MORE
nests the commonly used generalized linear models as special cases, a much wider range of statistical
analyses can be conducted using the secure databases with results similar to those using the original
databases. Unlike existing DPS approaches which typically require a joint model for all variables,
MORE requires no modeling of nonconfidential variables, and thus further increases the robustness
of secure databases. Evaluation of MORE through Monte Carlo simulation studies and empirical applications
demonstrates that it performs better than existing data masking methods.
Yi Qian
Department of Marketing
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
yiqian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Hui Xie
Department of Biostatistics
School of Public Health
University of Illinois at Chicago
huixie@uic.edu

Forthcoming in Management Science

Drive More Effective Data-Based Innovations:
Enhancing the Utility of Secure Databases
Databases play a central role in evidence-based innovations in business, economics, social, and health sciences. In modern business and society, there are rapidly growing demands for constructing analytically valid
databases that also are secure and protect sensitive information in order to meet customer and public expectations, to minimize financial losses, and to comply with privacy regulations and laws. We propose new data
perturbation and shuffling (DPS) procedures, named MORE, for this purpose. As compared with existing
DPS methods, MORE can substantially increase the utility of secure databases without increasing disclosure
risk. MORE is capable of preserving important nonmonotonic relationships among attributes, such as the
inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation. Maintaining such relationships is often the key
to determining optimal levels of policy and managerial interventions. MORE does not require data to be
of particular types or have particular distributional shapes. Instead, it provides unified, flexible, and robust
algorithms to mask general types of confidential variables with arbitrary distributions, thereby making it
suitable for general-purpose data masking. Since MORE nests the commonly used generalized linear models
as special cases, a much wider range of statistical analyses can be conducted using the secure databases with
results similar to those using the original databases. Unlike existing DPS approaches which typically require
a joint model for all variables, MORE requires no modeling of nonconfidential variables, and thus further
increases the robustness of secure databases. Evaluation of MORE through Monte Carlo simulation studies
and empirical applications demonstrates that it performs better than existing data masking methods.
Key words : Database; Digital Economy; Innovation; Nonparametric; Perturbation; Privacy; Shuffling.

“The digital age will be to the analog age what the iron age was to the stone age. ”—Joel Mokyr

1.

Introduction

Data Privacy Problem
Data are key to innovations in many industries and are invaluable assets for many entities, including government agencies, firms, nonprofit organizations, and academic institutions. Effective data
management and analytics play a central role in gaining insights on customers, patients, and product and service providers, and in making critical policy and managerial decisions. A foundation to
fulfilling the benefits of such data-based activities is the procurement, construction, analysis, sharing, and dissemination of relevant databases, which also raise data privacy concerns. Data privacy
concerns arise whenever a database contains sensitive attributes that if disclosed without control
to a third party, can lead to negative consequences. These privacy concerns can render these sensitive key data elements unavailable to the third party who needs them for data-based innovations.
To ease the tensions between these data-based activities and privacy concerns, we propose a new
1

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

2

methodology to provide analytically valid data that also protect privacy. Given the importance of
data, our methodology can have important impacts for driving data-based innovations in many
fields.
Data privacy is a very important issue in the new digital economy. For example, Blattberg et al.
(2008) devote an entire chapter to customer privacy, and describe the consequences of customer
privacy concerns for database marketing. Privacy has also emerged as a key concern for innovation
policy (Goldfarb and Tucker 2012). Confidential data are found not only in consumer databases,
but also in databases about firms or organizations (e.g., in business census or surveys). Data privacy
concerns occur in almost all stages of database-related activities, from data procurement, data
construction and analysis (e.g., merging data from multiple sources as noted in Mela 2011 and
Qian and Xie 2013) to data dissemination that fulfills the microdata release requirements from
funding agencies (e.g., NIH and NSF) or journals (Desai 2013). For respondents and the public to
trust that their private information is in good hands, they expect database owners to implement
adequate disclosure control.
Consistent with these expectations, privacy laws and regulations require database owners to
follow certain rules to protect private information. Examples of earlier laws regarding consumer
privacy are the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970, which established consumers’ rights regarding
their financial information, and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
of 1996 in the healthcare industry. Privacy concerns have become increasingly important with
innovations in information technology and e-commerce (Kalvenes and Basu 2006). For example,
public concerns about Web privacy led to the halt of data sharing between a Web ad company,
DoubleClick, and a marketing database company, Abacus, in 1999 (Winer 2001). Insufficient data
privacy protection can also have dire consequences. A recent example is the withdrawal of Netflix
from its once very successful collaboration with academia because of a privacy breach (Mela 2011).
In that case, one was able to combine the Netflix database with the Internet Movie Database and
recover the identities of the customers and their rental histories. The privacy breach caught the
attention of the Federal Trade Commission and prompted a class action lawsuit against Netflix.
Losses in market value and consumer relationships can be large as well. As reviewed in Miller and
Tucker (2011), studies found that (1) negative publicity from privacy breaches causes affected firms
to lose on average 2.1 percent of their stock market values within two days of the announcement,
amounting to $1.65 billion average loss in market capitalization per incident and (2) 31 percent
of survey consumers say they would end their relationship with a firm as a a result of a privacy
breach.
In response to the high demand for confidential data protection, various solutions for creating
secure databases have been proposed. Prior studies demonstrate that an effective approach to
protecting data privacy is data masking through perturbation and shuffling (Willenborg and de

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

3

Waal 2001, Muralidhar and Sarathy 2006). These data masking procedures replace the original
confidential data values in a database with modified values. The resulting masked dataset is secure
in the sense that the masked values, rather than the original values, of the confidential data elements are released to the third-party. In order for the secure database to be useful, these masked
values should be “realistic” so that queries based on the secure database are as close as possible
to those based on the original database. Formally, an ideal data masking procedure should have
the following two key properties (Muralidhar and Sarathy 2003): (1) high data utility: statistical
inferences using the masked confidential values in a secure database remain the same as those
using the original dataset; and (2) low disclosure risk: the release of the masked values does not
improve the ability of intruders to predict the original values of confidential attributes. The two
requirements are often in conflict. The trend in data masking is to develop methods that have data
utility as high as possible while maintaining a sufficiently low disclosure risk.
An Example: Competition and Innovation
Although much past research concerns consumer privacy, similar privacy concerns apply to firms
and organizations supplying confidential data. The insights gained from data-based studies often
have important implications for firms/organizations and market regulators, and are of broad interest to the economics and management community, as well as policy makers. As with consumer
databases, collecting, analyzing, sharing, and disseminating data on firms or organizations also
raise data privacy issues. Data masking provides an attractive approach to harnessing the power
of data while minimizing the harm caused by privacy violations. When only masked datasets can
be released or shared, a key question is whether their users will be able to gain the same insights
as from the original databases on important questions such as “Does competition spur innovation,
and if so, how?”. Answers to such questions are of great interest in innovation policy. Clearly, being
able to provide secure databases with maximal utility is a crucial problem in data masking and has
important managerial and policy implications. As an example, we consider a dataset that provides
information about the relationship between competition and innovation (C&I) using a sample of
311 firms (Aghion et al. 2005). The study measures innovation by the citation weighted patent
count (patcw) and competition by a Competition index (Ci), which is 1 minus the Lerner Index.
Fig 1 plots the distributions of these two attributes. The data cover seventeen two-digit SIC code
industries over the period 1973-1994. Fig 2 shows an inverted-U relationship between competition
and innovation: when the competition level is low, more competition increases innovation activity;
but when the competition is fierce enough, it decreases innovation activity.
Privacy concerns can arise for various reasons in this context. For example, the C&I dataset
contains information on patent count, research and development investment, financial cost, profits,
and sales. Since the release of confidential data (e.g., patent count) can cause reidentification of
firms, other sensitive information about the firms, such as financial cost, profits, sales, and R&D

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

4

investment, can be revealed to intruders (e.g., firms’ competitors), which in turn can compromise
the interests of respondent firms.1
In order for secure databases to provide accurate information while providing adequate disclosure
control, effective data masking procedures should preserve distributional properties of the masked
values as close as possible to those of the original sensitive values. The C&I dataset has several
interesting features that allow us to demonstrate the important benefits of our proposed data
masking procedures for enhancing the utility of secure databases. Due to the rich policy implications
of the inverted-U relationship, this is an ideal example to demonstrate the importance of preserving
nonmonotonic relationships in data masking. Moreover, the key variables in this dataset exhibit
several interesting features and require data masking procedures that can account for these features
properly. Fig 1 shows that the competition measure, Ci, and the innovation measure, patcw, are
bounded and semicontinuous: Ci takes values from 0 to 1, and patcw takes only nonnegative values
with a large probability at the boundary value of zero. One needs to take this into account so that
implausible masked values that are out of bound are not generated. There also exists skewness in
these two variables, with patcw being highly skewed. Our more complex analysis includes Industry
and Y ear, both of which are categorical discrete variables. In sum, the dataset contains various
types of variables with important nonmonotonic relationships among attributes, and we consider
this an ideal empirical example for comparing different data masking procedures.
These important data features are not limited to this dataset, but are frequently encountered
in business applications. Other examples with complex distributional features include sensitive
attributes that are continuous (home value, mortgage balance, net asset value), binomial (number
of occasions using protection measures among all occasions of drug use), count data (number of
times downloading pirated movies and music), and fractional and bounded (fraction of credit debts
repayed, share of wallet for counterfeit products). These types of variables are very informative, and
thus often exhibit complex distributional features, such as heavy tails, outliers, departure from the
nominal variance in the binomial and count outcomes, boundedness, skewness, multimodality, and
zero-inflation. Furthermore, the relationships among these sensitive attributes, as well as between
them and other attributes, can be complex and nonmonotonic. These important data features call
for general and flexible data masking procedures so that the resulting secure databases have high
utility for important managerial and policy decisions.
Contribution
Prior studies have shown that data perturbation and shuffling (DPS) are an important class of
data masking methods, and have a number of advantages as compared with alternative masking
1

The firms in this dataset are public firms traded in the London Stock Exchange. Therefore, most of this sensitive information
is publicly available. However, this is not the case for private businesses or organizations. Our use of this dataset is therefore
mainly for illustration purposes.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

5

methods (e.g., see reviews and comparisons provided in Muralidhar et al. 1995, and Muralidhar
and Sarathy 2006). However, as discussed in Section 3, there are a range of important limitations
of existing DPS methods, some of which are identified in this work. These issues limit the scopes of
distributional properties, as well as the types of attributes and the relationships among attributes
for which the existing DPS methods are applicable, which can affect the ability of users of secure
databases to make optimal managerial and policy decisions.
Our objective in this paper is to develop a new set of nonparametric DPS procedures that
simultaneously address all these limitations of existing procedures while retaining the nice
properties of DPS methods. Our approach is a conditional distribution approach and thus satisfies
the low disclosure risk requirement for an ideal data masking procedure (Muralidhar and Sarathy
2003). It provides secure databases with substantially higher data utility that have important
managerial and policy implications, and therefore represents a significant advance in the area.
More specifically, we develop new nonparametric DPS procedures with the following capabilities:
(1) they provide unified data masking algorithms that are not restricted by the types and
distributions of confidential variables;
(2) they maintain marginal distributions of confidential variables with arbitrary distributional
shapes;
(3) they maintain important and complex relationships among variables, including nonmonotonic
relationships (such as the inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation);
(4) they are applicable to continuous, discrete, and semicontinuous types of confidential
variables with which a much wider range of analyses can be conducted using the masked dataset
with results similar to those using the original one (in particular, they nest the commonly used
Generalized Linear Models for statistical data analysis as special cases);
(5) they preserve the set of the original values of confidential variables, which can lead to greater
acceptance of masked data among the common users;
(6) they further increase the robustness of masked datasets because they directly model the
conditional distribution of confidential variables, instead of modeling the joint distribution of all
variables; and
(7) they evaluate the risk of releasing masked datasets with closed-form disclosure risk measures
that are simple to calculate, regardless of the types and distributions of confidential variables.

2.

Existing Data Masking Methods

A number of approaches to optimally preserve the confidentiality of sensitive information in a
database have been proposed, including aggregation, coarsening, imputation, swapping, and perturbation (Willenborg and de Waal 2001). Past research suggests perturbation is a superior class

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

6

of data masking methods for maximizing data utility and minimizing data disclosure risk (Sarathy
et al. 2002). This approach creates perturbed values, which replace the original confidential values.
Releasing the perturbed version of the datasets makes it much harder for data intruders to recover
the original values of those confidential variables, thereby maintaining data privacy.
There is significant past research on data perturbation methods. Muralidhar et al. (1999) introduce the general additive data perturbation method (GADP), and demonstrate its superior performance in terms of both data utility and security over previous data perturbation methods and
thus also over a range of alternative non-perturbation masking methods (Muralidhar et al. 1995).
When modeling assumptions are satisfied, GADP has optimal performance. For example, it can be
tuned to maintain the linear relationship exactly (Muralidhar and Sarathy 2001). A key assumption
in GADP is that the attributes in a database can be modeled by a multivariate normal (MVN)
distribution. When this assumption is violated, bias can be introduced into the analysis based on
the perturbed dataset, which reduces the utility of secure databases.
Efforts to relax this restrictive assumption have been made recently. There are two main strategies. The first is to apply different, preferably more general and flexible, fully parametric multivariate distributions than the MVN models to perform data perturbation. Muralidhar et al. (1995)
propose using a log-normal distribution to model one skewed confidential attribute. Lee et al.
(2010) propose a more general data perturbation method, STDP. This method is based on a richer
family of parametric multivariate skew-t (MVST) distribution that allows database managers to
model skewness and heavy tails in the data and can better answer higher-level questions. Another
strategy is to use nonparametric models for the joint distribution of all variables in a database.
Sarathy et al. (2002) propose a MVN copula-based GADP (C-GADP) method, which relaxes the
strong parametric distributional assumptions in those fully parametric data perturbation methods
by using the empirical marginal distributions. As a result, for a much broader range of applications, C-GADP can preserve the marginal distributions of confidential variables. In addition, unlike
GADP, C-GADP is capable of preserving monotonic nonlinear relationships among attributes.
Another approach whose performance is on par with perturbation methods is the data shuffling method (DSP) (Muralidhar and Sarathy 2006). Its idea is akin to data swapping (Dalenius
and Reiss 1982), which exchanges confidential values among observations. Consequently, DSP fully
preserves the marginal distributions of confidential variables. It also helps overcome the reservations about using modified confidential data (Wall Street Journal 2001), and can lead to greater
acceptance of masked data in practice. DSP outperforms its predecessor, data swapping, by having
higher data utility and lower disclosure risk.
Another very powerful class of masking approach is the multiple imputation synthetic data
approach (MI, Rubin 1993, Raghunathan et al. 2003, Reiter 2005, Reiter and Raghunathan 2007).

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

7

Unlike the above DPS methods, which view the original data as the population, MI views the original data as a sample drawn from a population, and draws multiply imputed synthetic datasets from
this population. In its most radical form, no unit in the released data is in the original dataset. This
approach has a number of merits, including its ability to assess the inferential uncertainty introduced in the masking process. Raghunathan et al. (2003) and Reiter (2005) discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of MI.
There is also active research on other types of privacy-preserving methods that do not rely
on explicit statistical models. For example, Xiao and Tao (2006) develop a new data generalization framework for personalized privacy. Menon and Sarkar (2007) formulate the frequent itemset
hiding problem as a mathematical integer programming problem, and develop an effective twophase approach to solving the problem. Li and Sarkar (2011) combine recursive partitioning with
bounded swapping to prevent record linkage disclosure. Bertino et al. (2005) outline the issues and
approaches for privacy preserving from the perspective of computer scientists.

3.

Need for More Effective Data Perturbation and Shuffling Methods

We view the research presented here as advancing data perturbation and shuffling (DPS) procedures
based on statistical models. One benefit of such model-based methods is that their performance is
theoretically more predictable and they are supported by statistical theory. By making the modeling
assumptions explicit, the users know better when these methods perform optimally and when there
is a substantial room to improve. For example, a database may contain sensitive attributes of mixed
discrete and continuous types, and various types of statistical analyses can be performed on these
variables. Especially important is the family of Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) (McCullagh and
Nelder 1989), which include normal, binomial, Poisson, Gamma, and inverse Gaussian regression
models as special cases. It is important that data perturbation methods are general and flexible
to ensure that the masked dataset can generate results for this wide range of types of analyses
similar to those using the original database. A trend is therefore to develop effective procedures that
provide high data utility in broader applications with sufficiently low disclosure risk. Although the
existing model-based DPS methods are enlightening and powerful, there exist unresolved problems
which reduce the utility of the resulting secure databases. To motivate the need for new data
perturbation and shuffling methods that can better address these important issues, we describe
these issues below.2
(1) The existing methods may not maintain the marginal distributional properties of confidential variables in general situations. The parametric MVN or MVST distributions rely on strong
distributional assumptions that may not hold for all the variables in a database. Many distributional features, such as boundedness, semicontinuity and discreteness (e.g., those features occurring
2

To be fair to the developers of existing methods, some of these problems are reported in the literature (Muralidhar and Sarathy
2006, Lee et al. 2010) and the authors made clear that their methods are not designed to address these problems.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

8

in the patent count and competition index data), multimodality, outliers, and heterogeneous tail
behaviors, can occur in databases but cannot be accommodated by these parametric models. Consequently, the data masking procedures based on these parametric distributions cannot preserve
the distributional properties of confidential variables in general cases. Similar concerns exist for
copula-based methods that use parametric models for marginals. There is generally a lack of guidelines for choosing suitable marginals, and misspecification of these marginal functions can lead to
similar problems (Kim et al. 2007). This is why a generally preferred approach for copula applications is to use empirical distributions for these marginals. However, such nonparametric copula
modeling is at best fraught with caution for discrete data. As will be shown in a later section,
substantial bias arises when applying such nonparametric copula-based masking procedures for
discrete confidential variables.
(2) The existing methods cannot preserve nonmonotonic relationships. Nonmonotonic relationships, such as an inverted-U relationship, are of great importance for policy and management
decision makers (Aghion et al. 2005, Qian 2007). Such relationships are key to determining optimal policy and managerial intervention. Despite this importance, existing DPS methods lack the
ability to preserve these relationships. The correlation parameters in the MVN model are Pearson
product-moment correlation coefficients, which are only suitable for measuring linear relationships.
The copula-based methods (C-GADP and DSP) are more general. These methods capture the
dependence among attributes by rank order correlation and are able to preserve monotonic nonlinear relationships. However, nonmonotonic relationships are not preserved. For example, when these
masking methods are applied to the C&I dataset, users cannot recover the important nonmonotonic
inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation (Fig 2). Consequently, suboptimal
policy and managerial decisions will be made. One may consider creating subsets of the original
dataset so that within each subset the relationship is monotonic. This may work well in some situations. However, this requires nonrandom subsetting of the dataset and so requires considerably
more prior knowledge about relationships among attributes. Furthermore, this strategy may lead
to small sample sizes in some subsets. What is needed are more flexible DPS methods that can
preserve important nonmonotonic relationships and increase the utility of secure databases so that
opportunities to inform optimal decision making are not missed.
(3) The existing methods lack the ability to handle discrete and semicontinuous confidential variables. Discrete and semicontinuous data occur frequently in the real world. Semicontinuity arises
when an attribute is bounded by a lower and/or upper bound but otherwise is distributed continuously. Typically such variables have a non-zero probability occurring at the bound(s). Examples
of semicontinuous variables are the competition index in our C&I example, respondents’ incomes,
or the amount of expenditures on a product or service in marketing surveys or consumer databases (because many respondents may have no income or no expenditure on certain products or

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

9

services). Despite the abundance of discrete and semicontinuous variables in databases, existing
DPS methods are not designed for masking these types of attributes. Both GADP and STDP
are based on multivariate distributions for continuous data. When applied to discrete and semicontinuous variables, these methods can lead to bias in the masked datasets. Furthermore, both
MVN and MVST have the entire real line as the support, and thus can create masked datasets
with meaningless masked values. One also needs to take extra care when applying C-GADP and
DSP to mask discrete and semicontinuous variables because, as discussed above and as will be
shown later, a nonparametric copula model can lead to biased results in data masking for these
types of confidential variables. Therefore, new DPS masking methods are needed that can handle
these different types of variables and construct secure databases on which a much wider range of
statistical analysis, such as the widely used GLMs, yield results similar to those using the original
data.
(4) The existing methods typically require modeling nonconfidential variables, even though these
variables remain unchanged before and after data masking. Prior DPS methods (GADP, C-GADP,
STDP, and DSP) require a joint model for both confidential and nonconfidential variables. Among
the existing DPS methods, DSP requires minimal modeling of the nonconfidential variables. However, it still requires modeling the relationships among the nonconfidential variables, and imposes
monotonic relationships among them. Intuitively, the modeling of nonconfidential variables can
be avoided because they remain unchanged before and after data masking. The extra modeling
of the nonconfidential variables creates two difficulties. First, it makes it harder to find a suitable joint model that can simultaneously model all the variables in a database reasonably well.
As noted in Muralidhar et al. (1999), the challenge in constructing new data masking procedures
for nonnormal data is the lack of multivariate distributions amenable to model manipulation and
random number generation. The extra modeling of nonconfidential variables further complicates
the issue. Furthermore, misspecified models for nonconfidential variables can have adverse effects
on masked confidential variables. One example is noted in Lee et al. (2010), who indicate that
their STDP procedure has difficulty dealing with heterogeneous tail behaviors. This is because the
MVST used in STDP has only one degree of freedom parameter governing the tail behaviors of
all variables. If nonconfidential variables have different tail behaviors than confidential variables,
the single degree of freedom parameter has to provide a compromise between those differential tail
behaviors, which can introduce bias on the tail behavior estimation of confidential variables.3 As
another example, some nonconfidential variables (e.g., the Y ear dummies) in the C&I data are a
group of binary variables for which some combinations of values cannot occur (e.g., any pair of
3

The alternative approach that uses more general multivariate t distributions with multiple degrees of freedom parameters is
unrealistic due to its unappealing parametric form and difficulty in random number generation (Lee et al. 2010).

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

10

Y ear dummies cannot take the value of one simultaneously). A joint MVN or MVN copula model
is highly questionable for modeling such nonconfidential variables.
These important limitations of existing DPS methods call for more effective data perturbation
and shuffling procedures. The objective of this paper is to propose a new set of procedures, developed below, that can better address the above issues.

4.

The MORE Approach to Enhancing the Utility of Secure Databases

In this section we describe our approach to data Masking by an Odds Ratio Expression (MORE)
of the conditional distribution of confidential variables. We first provide an overview of our overall
approach.
4.1.

Overview

Let S = (S1 , · · · , SLS ) be a vector of length LS containing nonconfidential variables, X =
(X1 , · · · , XLC ) be a vector of length LC containing confidential variables, and Y = (Y1 , · · · , YLC ) be
a vector of the same length containing masked confidential variables. The joint distribution of the
three sets of variables can be written in the following form:
f (S, X, Y) = f (S)f (X|S)f (Y|S, X).
Our overall approach for constructing a secure database consists of the following steps:
• Condition on the nonconfidential variables in S. That is, our approach does not require mod-

eling f (S) because S remains unchanged before and after data masking.
• Estimate an odds ratio model for f (X|S).
• Generate masked data values using f (Y|S, X). In order to achieve high security of Y, we

set f (Y|S, X) = f (Y|S). In order to maintain the distributional characteristics of confidential
variables, we further set f (Y|S) = f (X|S).
It is important to note that the above data masking approach is a conditional distribution approach.
That is, the masked values are generated from the conditional distribution f (X|S). As discussed
in Muralidhar and Sarathy (2003), a conditional distribution data masking approach has good
properties. It satisfies the following two requirements for ideal data masking methods. (1) Data
utility requirement. Because we set f (Y|S) = f (X|S), the relationship between Y and S remains
R
R
the same as that between X and S. Because f (Y) = f (Y|S)f (S)dS = f (X|S)f (S)dS = f (X),
it is readily seen that the marginal distribution of Y remains the same as that of X. (2) Disclo-

sure risk requirement. The conditional approach sets f (Y|S, X) = f (Y|S). Therefore, given the
nonconfidential variable S, X and Y are independent of each other, meaning that knowing the
masked values Y provides no additional information about the original values of X, thereby effectively controlling for the disclosure risk. Of course, these requirements may not be met when the
modeling assumptions in a conditional distributional data masking approach are violated by the

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

11

data. As will be seen below, because our modeling approach is very general, the proposed approach
provides high data utility in much broader applications than existing data masking procedures,
while still effectively controlling for the disclosure risk. Furthermore, unlike prior approaches that
derive f (X|S) from a joint model for f (S, X), we directly model f (X|S) and bypass modeling f (S).
This further increases the robustness of masked data.
4.2.

Representing a Conditional Distribution Using Odds Ratio Models

Key components for the data masking approach include the modeling and estimation of f (X|S),
and the generation of masked values from f (Y|S). Our approach utilizes odds ratio models and
provides a unified, flexible, and robust framework for modeling, estimation, and secure value generation for a wide variety of types of confidential variables. Therefore, the proposed methods are
particularly attractive as general-purpose data masking techniques. The odds ratio model was first
proposed in Chen (2004), and a Bayesian approach was first proposed in Qian and Xie (2011)
that outperforms Chen (2004) for high-dimensional missing covariate problems frequently seen in
business applications. These methods employ odds ratio models for regression covariates, and are
designed for correcting selection bias in parametric regression model estimates due to missingness
in covariates. We adopt the odds ratio models for solving data privacy problems, and study various
issues specific to data privacy problems, including developing and assessing efficient data masking
algorithms that can effectively address the utility issues of secure datasets as described in Section
3, developing disclosure risk measures for evaluating the risk of releasing masked datasets, and
evaluating the utility of masked databases.

4

Before moving to technical details, we first provide some intuitions behind the mathematics so
that users can capture the basic idea of the approach. Consider a simple case where all variables in
a dataset are independent of each other. In this situation a simple robust approach to masking a
confidential variable is to generate perturbed values from its empirical distribution. Our masking
approaches are akin to this idea, except that they allow for and preserve the complex relationships
among variables through flexible odds ratio functions. In fact, by setting all odds ratio functions
to be one, our masking approaches reduce to the simple masking approach using the empirical
distributions. The odds ratio model represents the conditional distribution f (X|S) as follows:
f (X1 , · · · , XLC |S) =

LC
Y
l=1

4

e l ),
f (Xl |S, X

(1)

Because a missing data problem does not have privacy issues, these missing data methods in Chen (2004) and Qian
and Xie (2011) do not consider measuring and controlling for disclosure risk. Furthermore, they do not consider issues
regarding the generation and utility of masked secure datasets.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

12

e l = (X1 , · · · , Xl−1 ) when l > 1, and X
e l reduces to a null set when l = 1. As shown above, a
where X

separate model is posited for each confidential variable. It thus offers the flexibility to model distributional characteristics that are different among attributes, such as heterogeneous tail behaviors.
e l ) as follows:
We then model each conditional distribution f (Xl |S, X
e
e
e
e l ) = R η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, Xl , S0 , Xl0 )f (Xl |S0 , Xl0 ) ,
f (Xl |S, X
e l , S0 , X
e l0 )f (Xl |S0 , X
e l0 )dXl
η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, X

(2)

where the conditional distribution is expressed as a function of two component functions that can
e l , S0 , X
e l0 ), is the odds ratio
be modeled separately. The first component function, η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, X
function as defined below:

e
e
e l , S0 , X
e l0 ) = f (Xl |S, Xl )f (Xl0 |S0 , Xl0 ) ,
η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, X
e l )f (Xl |S0 , X
e l0 )
f (Xl0 |S, X

(3)

e l0 , Xl0 are fixed and prespecified reference points for the odds ratio function in the sample
and S0 , X
e l , and Xl , respectively. Theoretically, it does not matter how these reference points
space of S, X

are chosen. However, if a reference point is absurdly chosen to be extremely remote from the center

of a distribution, it may cause numerical instability in the likelihood evaluation. Thus, for the
purpose of computational stability we recommend using the mean of each variable as the reference
point. Note that from the definition of the odds ratio function given in Equation (3), we have
e
e
e
e l ) = η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, Xl , S0 , Xl0 )f (Xl |S0 , Xl0 ) ,
f (Xl |S, X
e l0 )/f (Xl0 |S, X
e l)
f (Xl0 |S0 , X

and integrating both sides of the above equation with respect to Xl we see that the denominator of
R
e l , S0 , X
e l0 )f (Xl |S0 , X
e l0 )dXl . Replacing
the righthand side in the equation above is η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, X

the denominator with this integral immediately leads to Equation (2).
e l , S0 , X
e l0 ), captures the dependence of Xl on S and X
e l.
The odds ratio function, η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, X
e l ) when the odds ratio function
It reduces to the case of independence between Xl and (S, X

e l , S0 , X
e l0 ) is one for all possible values of Xl , X
e l , and S. The odds ratio function can
η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, X

be modeled in a generalized log-bilinear form (Chen 2004) as follows:
e l , S0 , X
e l0 ) =
ln ηγ (Xl , Xl0 ; S, X

LS Mv
X
X

v =1 m=1

γlvm (Xl − Xl0 )(Sv − Sv0 )m +

Mw
l−1 X
X

γlwm (Xl − Xl0 )(Xw − Xw0 )m(4)
.

w=1 m=1

As shown below, the choice of the log-bilinear odds ratio function makes clear that odds ratio
models nest GLMs as special cases. The above odds ratio function includes higher-order terms up
to the order of M . By increasing the value of M , this form of odds ratio function can approximate
any odds ratio function arbitrarily smooth. In particular, it allows for both monotonic and nonmonotonic relationships. With this added flexibility, one would need to determine optimal value(s)
of M that adequately capture the relationships among attributes in a parsimonious manner. The
selection of values for M can be formulated as a model selection problem. Because our approach is

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

13

based on statistical models, a set of model selection methods developed in the statistical field can
be applied for this purpose, such as the one based on the likelihood ratio test (Chen 2007). There
is a close connection between the log-bilinear form of odds ratio function with the GLMs that are
frequently used in practical database analyses. To see this, let Xl follow a GLM, and its mean, µl ,
is g(µl ) = α0 + α1 S1 + · · · + αLS SLS + αLS +1 X1 + · · · + αLS +l−1 Xl−1 , where g(·) is the canonical link.
The corresponding odds ratio function can be derived to be
e l , S0 , X
e l0 ) =
ln η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, X

LS
LS +l−1
X
X αv
αv
(Xl − Xl0 )(Sv − Sv0 ) +
(Xl − Xl0 )(Xv−LS − X(v−LS )0 ),
a(τ )
a(τ )
v=1
v=L +1
S

where a(τ ) is the dispersion function in GLMs. This is a reduced form of the generalized logbilinear odds ratio function in Equation (4), where M = 1. Sometimes it can be useful to consider
a transformed log-bilinear odds ratio model as follows:
e l , S0 , X
e l0 ) =
ln η(Xl , Xl0 ; S, X

LS
X

γlv (Gl (Xl ) − Gl (Xl0 ))(Hv (Sv ) − Hv (Sv0 ))

v=1
l−1
X

+

γlw (Gl (Xl ) − Gl (Xl0 ))(Gw (Xw ) − Gw (Xw0 )),

(5)

w=1

where G(·) and H(·) are monotone transformation functions. For example, Gl (·) and Hv (·) can be
the distribution functions for Xl and Sv that are related to rank-order-based models and procedures.
e l0 ), the density function of
We next move to modeling the second component function, f (Xl |S0 , X

e l0 ). The odds ratio model models this function nonparametrically.
Xl at the reference point (S0 , X

Let (xl1 , · · · , xlKl ) be the unique values of Xl observed in the dataset. A nonparametric model for
e l0 ) assigns point mass (pl1 , · · · , plK ) on these unique values, such that PKl plk = 1, and
f (Xl |S0 , X
k=1
l
plk > 0 ∀k = 1, · · · , Kl . To remove the model constraint, we can reparametrize the parameters in
e l0 ) such that λlk = ln plk ,
fλ (Xl |S0 , X
p
lKl

∀k = 1, · · · , Kl . On the other hand, in GLMs the density

e l0 ) follows a parametric distributional model. Therefore, it is readily seen that
function f (Xl |S0 , X

the odds ratio model nests the commonly used parametric GLMs as special cases. It is also impor-

tant to note that, because a MVN model is equivalent to a product of conditional normal models,
it follows that the odds ratio model nests the MVN as a special case.
4.3.

The MORE Procedures

We develop two data masking procedures using the odds ratio modeling approach. The first (second) procedure generates perturbed (shuffled) values for confidential variables. We describe these
procedures below. In order to help understand these materials and the MORE procedures in general, we also provide a small example that demonstrates numerically how the MORE procedures
perform data masking in the Appendix.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

14

4.3.1.

MORE-P Procedure

The first procedure creates perturbed values and uses them to replace the original values of
confidential attributes. This procedure is termed as MORE-P and is described below.
• Step 1: Estimate the odds ratio model parameters θ = (λ, γ) in fθ (X = x|S = s) using the

observed data (s, x), where γ and λ can be considered the location and scale parameters, respectively. Because the model likelihood factorizes as in Equation (1), the estimation can proceed for
each set of parameters, θl , l = 1, · · · , Lc , separately by the method of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) as follows:
θ̂l = (λ̂l , γ̂l ) = argmaxλl ,γl

N
X
i=1

e il = x
eil ),
ln Li (λl , γl |Xil = xil ; Si = si , X

where i = 1, · · · , N is the index for independent observations, and N denotes the sample size. The
e il = x
eil ), is
likelihood from the ith observation, Li (λl , γl |Xil = xil ; Si = si , X
e il = x
eil ) =
Li (λl , γl ) ∝ fθl (Xil = xil |Si = si , X

PKl

eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λlk )
k=1 1{xil =xlk } ηγl (xlk , xl0 ; si , x
.(6)
PK l
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λlk )
k=1 ηγl (xlk , xl0 ; si , x

There is generally no closed-form MLE solution so an iterative optimization algorithm is required
for finding the MLEs. We find that the Quasi-Newton (QN) algorithm performs well for obtaining
the MLEs of model parameters. The QN algorithm requires evaluating the derivatives of the loglikelihood function, which are derived as follows:
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λlk )
ηγ (xlk , xl0 ; si , x
∂ ln Li (λl , γl )
= 1(xil =xlk ) − PNl l
∂λlk
′
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λlk′ )
k′ =1 ηγl (xlk , xl0 ; si , x
PNl
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λlk′ )(xlk′ − xl0 )(siv − sv0 )m
ηγ (xlk′ , xl0 ; si , x
∂ ln Li (λl , γl )
′
= (xil − xl0 )(siv − sv0 )m − k =1 l PNl
∂γlvm
′
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λlk′ )
k′ =1 ηγl (xlk , xl0 ; si , x
∂ ln Li (λl , γl )
= (xil − xl0 )(xiw − xw0 )m −
∂γlwm
PNl
′
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λlk′ )(xlk′ − xl0 )(xiw − xw0 )m
k′ =1 ηγl (xlk , xl0 ; si , x
.
PNl
′
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λlk′ )
k′ =1 ηγl (xlk , xl0 ; si , x

As shown above, these derivatives are given in closed form containing no integrals. Only a summation over a finite number of points is required, and can be evaluated straightforwardly. The

evaluation of the model likelihood and derivatives is fed to the IMSL Fortran library routine
UMING to perform the functional optimization.
• Step 2: Simulate the perturbed values of confidential variables from fθ (Y|S). To ensure a high

utility for the secure database, we set θ to be θ̂ estimated in Step 1 above. One could simulate
the perturbed values for all the confidential variables altogether, which may involve evaluating
the probabilities over a large number of combinatorial terms. A computationally much simplified

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

15

approach is to generate perturbed values for one confidential variable at a time. For the ith observation of the lth confidential variable, Yil , we generate yil from the following multinomial distribution
on the set of values (xl1 , · · · , xlKl ) uniquely observed in the original dataset:
e il = y
eil ) ∼ multinomial([Pil1 , · · · , PilKl ]),
Yil |(Si = si , Y

e il = (Yi1 , · · · , Yi,l−1 ) if l > 1 and it reduces to a null set if l = 1 and the kth component in
where Y

the multinomial probability vector [Pil1 , · · · , PilKl ], for k = 1, · · · , Kl , is given as
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λ̂lk )
ηγ̂ (xlk , xl0 ; si , y
Pilk = PKl l
.
′
eil , s0 , x
el0 ) exp(λ̂lk′ )
k′ =1 ηγ̂l (xlk , xl0 ; si , y

(7)

It is important to note that the simulated values are in the set of the values observed in the dataset,
and therefore can lead to greater acceptance of data perturbation methods in practical users.
• Step 3: Report Y as the perturbed values of confidential attributes in the released database.

4.3.2.

MORE-S Procedure

MORE-P is only able to preserve the marginal distributions asymptotically. If one needs to preserve the marginal distributions exactly, a useful idea is data shuffling (Muralidhar and Sarathy
2006) based on which we develop a shuffling procedure, named as MORE-S. Its algorithm is
described below.
• Step 1: Apply MORE-P to generate perturbed confidential values, named as Yp = (Y1p , · · · , Ylpc ).
• Step 2: Rank the values of the lth perturbed variable Ylp , l = 1, · · · , lc , and denote the vector of

ranks for Ylp as Rlp . Then replace the perturbed value for the ith observation, YilP , with the original
value having the same rank, X(Rp ),l . When ties occur in computing ranks, the values in each set
l

of ties are assigned rank values randomly from a set of consecutive ranks such that the assigned
ranks for all observations go from 1 to N (the number of observations), and there are no ties in
ranks. Denote the resulting values as Yl , l = 1, · · · , lc .
• Step 3: Release Y = (Y1 , · · · , Ylc ) as the shuffled values in the secure database.

4.3.3.

Security Measures Provided by MORE

In this section we develop a disclosure risk measure based on the distance/closeness between the
original value and the masked value that can be useful for quantifying the security level provided
by MORE. We define the expected mean perturbation distance (EMPD) for the lth confidential
variable as
EM P D = E

" PN

i=1 D(Yil , xil )

N

#

=

PN PKl
i=1

k=1 D(yilk , xil )Pilk

N

,

(8)

where Pilk is given in Equation (7) and D denotes a perturbation distance function. The quantity
inside the bracket is the mean perturbation distance between the perturbed and original values,

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

16

and the expectation is taken with respect to the distribution of perturbed values. This security
measure is consistent with the concept of data perturbation that considers the original data as
the population. An intuitive choice for the perturbation distance function D(a, b) is the absolute
difference, i.e., |a − b|, which is used in later sections. As seen in Equations (7) and (8), one
advantage of MORE is that this disclosure risk measure can be computed simply as a by-product
of masking, and has a closed-form expression regardless of the types and distributions of masked
values.
The security measure is very useful for quantifying and diagnosing the expected prediction disclosure risk of releasing a secure database under a specific data masking setting. For example, a
very low value of EMPD means a high prediction power, implying a high predictive disclosure
risk. This is likely because there is a nonconfidential variable or a combination of several nonconfidential variables that predict well the confidential attribute. In extreme cases, the confidential
attribute may collinear with the nonconfidential variables or close to be a deterministic function
of the nonconfidential variables. In practice, database owners make judgments on a suitable cutoff value for disclosure risk. When the EMPD is less than this cutoff value, the secure data may
not satisfy the disclosure risk requirement and the data masking setting may need to be changed,
e.g., by considering highly predictive nonconfidential variables to be also sensitive attributes. The
security measure can thus provide very useful information for quantifying the disclosure risk and
for diagnosing what actions need to be taken to increase the security level.
4.3.4.

Computational Cost and Simple Strategies to Manage It

We conclude the description of the MORE procedures with an analysis of computational cost
and a discussion of recommended strategies to manage it. In the analysis, we will evaluate the
impact of various elements, including the numbers of variables, of distinct values, and of estimation
iteration steps, on the computational costs of MORE procedures. First, because MORE masks
sensitive attributes one by one, the computational cost is the sum of that for masking each sensitive
attribute. Thus, the computational cost increases additively, rather than multiplicatively, with
the number of confidential variables that need to be masked. Second, when masking a generic
lth confidential variable, the computational cost-determining step is the model estimation step
(i.e., Step 1 of MORE-P procedure as described in Section 4.3.1) because this step requires an
iterative optimization process. Note that the number of parameters involved in masking the lth
sensitive attribute is nl = nλl + nγl , where nλl (nγl ) is the number of parameters in λl (γl ). Thus,
the bottlenecks of computational time are those sensitive attributes that are continuous and have
many unique values.5 For any such bottlenecking sensitive attribute, nλl , which equals the number
5

It is also important to note that these bottleneck variables exclude nonconfidential variables because they are not modeled in
MORE. Furthermore, confidential variables that have only a limited number of unique values (e.g., count data) in a massive
dataset are also not bottlenecking variables.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

17

of unique values of this attribute, is much larger than nγl in big data and is the main factor
affecting computational time. The well-established limited-memory Quasi-Newton method is often
the choice for large-scale optimization problems. It has an acceptable linear convergence rate, and
at each iteration step has a low storage and computation cost that is on the order of O(mnl )
where m is typically fixed at a number between 3 and 20 (Nocedal and Wright 1999, chap. 9).
More specifically, the algorithm does not need to store or compute the nl × nl Hessian matrix.
Instead it stores only the first derivatives of size nl from the most recent m iterations, which are
used for updating parameter estimates via an inexpensive two-loop recursion scheme that requires
approximately 4mnl multiplications (Nocedal and Wright 1999, chap. 9).
We recommend the following strategies to manage the computational cost when using MORE
to mask these bottlenecking sensitive variables in big data. One convenient way to reduce the
number of the unique values and thus the number of model parameters is rounding. The analysis in
Section 5.6 shows that rounding can sufficiently control computational time without affecting the
utility of secure datasets. Another simple strategy to further reduce computation time, if desired,
is splitting data into random subsets. Although all our computations in this paper are executed on
a single processor, data masking for each random subset can be executed on different processors
simultaneously using parallel computing. These recommended strategies are simple and flexible to
implement and can be easily tailored to the available computational power.

5.

Performance of MORE Procedures

In this section we first conduct Monte Carlo simulation studies to evaluate and compare the
performance of the proposed MORE procedures with existing DPS approaches for solving data
security problems, and then apply MORE to two applications. These evaluations and comparisons
demonstrate the capabilities of the MORE procedures to overcome the limitations of the existing
DPS methods. We first describe simulation setup.
5.1.

Simulation Setup

Our setup emulates a database marketing example. We simulate data consisting of five variables
for consumer data from a retail store with the following distributions. The first three variables,
S1 , S2 , X1 , representing income, age, and log expenses of a consumer in the store, are simulated from
a trivariate normal with a zero mean vector and a variance-covariance matrix in which the diagonal
elements are 1 and the off-diagonal elements are 0.5. The fourth variable, X2 , representing the
dollar amount of coupons redeemed by the consumer, is generated from the following distribution,
X2 |S1 ∼ N (β41 S1 +β42 S12 , 1), where β41 and β42 are set to be 0 and 1, respectively. The fifth variable,
X3 , representing the number of transactions made by the consumer in the store, is generated
from a Poisson distribution with its rate parameter λ = exp(β51 S1 ), where β51 is set to be 1. In
the simulation study, the first two variables (S1 , S2 ) are nonconfidential and remain unchanged

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

18

after data masking. The other three variables (X1 , X2 , X3 ) are confidential variables whose original
values need to be masked. The above simulation setup aims to emulate the following situations
under which we can study and compare the performances of different data masking procedures:
(1) the classical case of a multivariate normal setting using the confidential variable X1 ; (2) a
confidential variable X2 having a nonmonotonic nonlinear relationship with the other variables;
and (3) a discrete and nonnormal confidential variable X3 .
For each simulated original dataset, we create datasets that mask the three confidential variables
using five methods: GADP, C-GADP, DSP, MORE-P, and MORE-S.6 Both C-GADP and DSP
utilize a nonparametric MVN copula model for the joint distribution of all the variables. We then
conduct a range of analyses on the masked datasets and compare the results with those based
on the original dataset. In this way we can investigate the performance of different data masking
procedures to maintain statistical properties of the original dataset. Using the distributional characteristics of the original data as the true value, we calculate the biases of those of the masked
datasets. The bias measures the closeness of the masked datasets to the original dataset and is
a sensible measure of the utility of a secure database. Note that the confidential variable X3 is a
type of count data taking only non-negative integer values. However, both GADP and C-GADP
can generate masked values that are negative or non-integer. To improve the performance of these
two methods for X3 , we postprocess the masked data values of X3 from these two methods and
round the masked values of X3 to the nearest integer values. Any negative values are reassigned a
value of zero. We repeat the simulation 500 times and calculate the average and standard deviation
(SD) of the biases. The sample size is varied at the values of 100, 500, and 1000. We summarize
and discuss the Monte Carlo simulation results below, which reveal that only the proposed MORE
approaches perform well in all these situations.
5.2.

Preserving Distributional Characteristics of Confidential Variables

We first study the ability of different approaches to maintain marginal distributions of confidential
variables. We apply the nonparametric Komogorov-Smirnov (KS) tests to measure the overall
closeness of marginal distributions of masked confidential values to those of original values. Because
the simulated original dataset is considered the underlying finite population, we apply a KS test
that considers the empirical distribution of the original values as the reference distribution. The KS
test measures the distance between the empirical distribution of masked values and this reference
distribution. The smaller value of the KS test statistic, the closeness of the distribution of the
masked values to that of the original values and thus the more faithful preservation of marginal
distribution of confidential variables. Therefore, the KS statistic serves as a measure of bias in the
6

The more recent STDP approach (Lee et al. 2010) performs better for heavy tails and highly skewed data than GADP.
However, as a parametric approach for continuous data, STDP shares some important limitations with GADP. Thus, for the
sake of relative ease in implementation, we use GADP as the benchmark model to compare with.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

19

overall distribution of masked values. We calculate the average and SD of the KS test statistics over
all 500 simulated datasets for each data masking procedure. We also perform similar analyses for
some other important but less comprehensive distributional summaries, including moments (Mean,
Variance, Skewness, Kurtosis), and quantiles at 5%(Q05), 25% (Q25), 50% (Q50), 75% (Q75), and
95% (Q95). The results are summarized in Table 1. DSP and MORE-S are not included in this
table because these two methods shuffle the original values among records, and as a result the
marginal distributions of confidential variables are preserved exactly. We also exclude GADP from
the table because it can generate biased masked data when the assumption of MVN is violated.
As expected, we do find significant bias when GADP is used for masking variables X2 and X3 .
Therefore, in Table 1 we summarize the results for the two nonparametric perturbation procedures,
C-GADP and MORE-P.
(1) For confidential variable X1 , which follows a multivariate normal with the two nonconfidential
variables, the results in Table 1 show that both C-GADP and MORE-P perform well. The KS
test statistics are small and decrease as the sample size increases, implying that as data become
richer, the marginal distribution of a confidential variable can be estimated more accurately and
all methods can preserve this marginal distribution arbitrarily well. We observe the same pattern
for moments and quantiles. Although the results for GADP are not presented here for reasons
given above, they show that both C-GADP and MORE-P perform somewhat better than the
parametric GADP, even though the data are simulated from a MVN. The reason is that the observed
original values are considered as the finite population in data masking. The two nonparametric
procedures, C-GADP and MORE-P, can adapt better to the shape of the empirical distribution
of the observed original values than GADP. Therefore, these two methods can better preserve the
marginal distributions of the observed original confidential data.
(2) For confidential variable X2 , which has a nonlinear relationship with the nonconfidential
variables, the results show that both C-GADP and MORE-P perform well in preserving the marginal distributions, although MORE-P performs noticeably better. GADP performs worse than
C-GADP and MORE-P because of the restrictive linear dependence structure of the MVN model,
the modeling approach adopted in GADP. Because the correlation parameters in a MVN are Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients, GADP allows only for linear relationships between
attributes. Because marginals and the dependence structure are jointly estimated in the MVN
model, the misspecification of the dependence structure can have adverse effects on the estimation
of marginal distributions. Unlike GADP, MORE is capable of allowing for nonlinear relationships
and thus preserving the marginal distributions in the presence of nonlinear relationships. It is
interesting to note that the preservation of marginal distribution in C-GADP is more robust than
GADP, even though the dependence structure is still of a multivariate normal nature. The reason is that C-GADP uses the nonparametric empirical distributions for marginals and therefore

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

20

forces the preservation of marginal distributions. However, as will be seen later, the nonmonotonic
relationship will not be preserved in C-GADP.
(3) For confidential variable X3 , the results in Table 1 show that MORE-P performs best. In this
case, we find that the KS statistics for both GADP and C-GADP remain large even when the sample
size increases. Similar patterns are found for moments and quantiles. Note that the confidential
variable X3 is a count variable, which is nonnormal and discrete and takes no negative values. In
this case, because the normality assumption is violated, it is not surprising that GADP performs
poorly as GADP is designed for MVN data. What is less obvious is the suboptimal performance of
C-GADP. There are two reasons. First, C-GADP invokes a MVN model for dependence structure.
Such dependence structure can become incompatible with the nonlinear relationships that involve
nonnormal data. Another important reason is that the copula model can have difficulty handling
discrete data. Below we discuss more about the latter reason, an issue that is less known in the
literature.
Copula modeling has been very popular recently for modeling multivariate distributions. Various parametric approaches to copula estimation have been proposed (see Qu et al. 2009 for a
discussion). In practice, a nonparametric copula that uses empirical marginal distributions may
be preferred because they rely less on the correct specification of marginal distributions. Copula
modeling proves to be very successful for modeling multivariate continuous data. In fact, all previous applications of copula-based data masking procedures (C-GADP and DSP) have focused on
continuous variables. On the other hand, the literature on copula-based data masking has been
scarce for discrete data, despite the abundance of discrete variables in business fields. One difficulty is that many key properties in the copula theory for continuous data do not hold for discrete
data. Genest and Neslehova (2007) review various facts about copula modeling for discrete data,
and provide both theoretical derivations and empirical examples demonstrating how discreteness
in a probability distribution invalidates various familiar properties that are fundamental to copula
theory in the continuous case. The cause of difficulties in discrete data cases lies in the fact that the
inverse of a discrete distribution function has plateaus. Therefore, for the discrete data, although
the existence of a copula representation is guaranteed, a copula representation compatible with
the data is not unique. This nonuniqueness creates an identifiability issue. Consequently, copula
inference (and particularly nonparametric rank-based inference) from discrete data is fraught with
identification difficulties. Although the estimation through a parametric copula remains possible in
some situations, it is unclear under what conditions identifiability is achieved. Furthermore, such
a fully parametric copula is computationally more intensive (Qu et al. 2009), and does not have
the same level of robustness as its nonparametric counterpart.
Because of the identifiability issue, our simulation results show significant bias in the distributions
of masked values. The moments and quantiles of the distributions are also substantially different

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

21

from those of the original values. These biases do not reduce with larger sample size. In contrast,
our approach does not have this problem because no inverse mapping from a discrete distribution
function is required.
5.3.

Preserving Nonmonotonic Relationships

We next study the performance of different data masking procedures in their ability to preserve
various types of relationships among attributes. For the confidential variable X1 , we compute its
Pearson correlation coefficients with S1 (i.e., ρ31 ) and with S2 (i.e., ρ32 ). For the confidential variable
X2 , we fit a quadratic regression model that regresses X2 on S1 and S12 , and obtain the estimates
for the corresponding regression parameters β41 and β42 . For the confidential variable X3 , we fit
a Poisson regression model with a log link that regresses X3 on S1 , and obtain the estimate for
the corresponding regression parameter β51 . These analyses are performed on both the original
simulated datasets and those masked datasets for each data masking procedure. We then compute
the average and SD of the biases over all 500 simulated datasets.
Because the confidential variable X1 and the nonconfidential variables S1 and S2 are jointly
distributed as a MVN, the Pearson correlation coefficients ρ31 and ρ32 fully capture the linear
relationships between X1 and S1 and S2 , respectively. In this linear relationship case, we expect
and do find that all data masking procedures perform well. Although a linear relationship is
a simple and parsimonious way to describe relationships among variables, it is by no means a
universally applicable one. As discussed in an earlier section, nonmonotonic relationships are critical
for making optimal policy and management decisions. Such nonlinear relationships can occur for the
confidential variable X2 , with which S1 has a U-shaped relationship. In this case, GADP, C-GADP,
and DSP all lead to significant bias in the estimates of regression parameters (β41 and β42 ) because
these methods are not designed to maintain the nonmonotonic relationship. Instead of identifying
a U-shaped relationship, these methods assert there is no relationship between X2 and S1 . This
is not surprising because the MVN model, the basis of these masking procedures, cannot model
nonmonotonic relationships. In contrast, the MORE procedures allow for general nonmonotonic
relationships, and thus can preserve the potentially complex but important relationships of variables
in the masked datasets. A nonlinear relationship could also arise in a nonlinear regression model,
as for the case of confidential variable X3 . The methods GADP, C-GADP, and DSP all have sizable
biases for the parameter β51 that remains when the sample size increases. These biases arise for
two reasons. First, as discussed above, these methods cannot handle the discrete confidential data.
Second, they have a restrictive dependence structure that cannot adequately capture the nonlinear
relationship in a Poisson regression model. In contrast, the results in Table 2 show that MORE-P
and MORE-S perform well in preserving these different relationships. Because GADP, C-GADP,
and DSP are not designed for preserving these more complex relationships, we omit results for
them in the table.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

22

5.4.

Disclosure Risk

While as shown above MORE can substantially enhance the utility of secure databases, a remaining
important point is to ensure that these utility improvements do not compromise the security of
resulting databases. As explained in Section 4.1, MORE ensures that the masked values in Y are
independent of X given S, thereby causing no increase in disclosure risk, given that the released
data preserve statistical properties of the original data. As described in Section 4.3, MORE has
two equivalent ways to generate the masked values Y . The first is to generate the perturbed values
for all the confidential variables together, and the other is to generate perturbed values one at a
time using a sequence of conditional distributions. Both ways satisfy the conditional independence
requirement and are just different approaches to generating values from the same distribution.

7

To validate the above theoretical justification, we perform simulation studies to evaluate the
value disclosure risk of MORE that uses the conditional simulation approach. We simulate datasets
of sample size n(= 100, 500, 1000) from a bivariate normal distribution with a specified correlation
coefficient (ρ = 0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 0.95). Both variables were to be masked. We then compute
the proportion of variability in a confidential variable explained by the corresponding masked
variable. In this case, since S is null, the confidential and masked variables should be independent
of each other if the conditional independence assumption is satisfied, and therefore we expect that
the masked variable should have no power to explain the confidential variable. Table 3 reports
the average proportion of explained variability for each combination of correlation coefficient and
sample size for DSP, MORE-P, and MORE-S. It is evident that all three methods provide essentially
the same level of excellent protection from the value disclosure risk. In all cases, the proportion of
variability explained in the confidential variable using the masked variable is essentially zero.
Table 1 also compares the disclosure risk level between two nonparametric perturbation methods,
C-GADP and MORE-P. Both approaches are conditional, and have similar EMPD for X1 .8 On
the other hand, for X2 and X3 C-GADP has a larger EMPD. This is expected because C-GADP
does not preserve statistical properties of these two confidential variables and thus can have a
lower disclosure risk. As explained in Section 4.3, the EMPD can be very useful for quantifying the
disclosure risk and informing data owners when actions are needed to increase the security level, e.g.,
by masking nonconfidential variables that are highly predictive of the confidential variables. With
suitable adjustment of the security level, MORE can provide maximal utility for legitimate users
and adequate disclosure control for intruders, thereby achieving optimal user-intruder information
equilibrium (Muralidhar and Sarathy 2003).
7

Scheuer and Stoller (1962) show that to generate a vector of random variables, one approach is to generate values for a
sequence of conditional distributions one at a time in the same way as used in the conditional simulation approach of MORE.
We choose the conditional simulation approach purely because of its computational simplicity, although it will generate secure
values from the same distribution as the joint simulation approach.
8

There is no close-form expression of EMPD for C-GADP. We therefore generate a large number (e.g., 100) of perturbed
datasets using C-GADP and use the sample mean of the mean perturbation distance as an estimate of EMPD.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

5.5.

23

Application of MORE to the Competition and Innovation Data

We next apply the MORE procedures to the competition and innovation dataset. As shown below,
the proposed data masking procedures can properly account for important features in this dataset.
The methods are flexible to preserve the nonmonotonic relationship between innovation and competition in the original dataset. Because masked values are in the set of the observed values, the
bound requirement is automatically satisfied, which ensures no out-of-bound values are generated.
Because of the nonparametric distributional modeling, features such as skewness are also preserved.
For our illustrative purpose, in our data masking analysis we will consider the masking of the
confidential variable X = ptcw and the nonconfidential variables S = (Y ear, Industry, Ci). We first
consider a simplified analysis that includes only Ci in S. Figure 3 presents the PP-plots that
compare the distributions of masked values of patcw from GADP, C-GADP, and MORE-P with
the distribution of the original values of patcw. Both GADP and C-GADP can generate negative
perturbed values of patcw that are not meaningful. We thus reassign any negative values to a
value of zero. The shuffling methods, DSP and MORE-S, are not reported because they preserve
the marginal distribution exactly. A PP-plot compares the cumulative distribution functions from
two datasets and provides a graphical evaluation of whether two datasets agree closely. When the
masked data resemble the original data, the points in the plot should be close to the straight
diagonal dotted line. Figure 3 shows a large discrepancy between the distribution of the masked
values using GADP and that of the original values. C-GADP performs much better in preserving
the marginal distribution of patcw but there is still a noticeable discrepancy for small values of
patcw. MORE-P performs best because the curve formed by the points is almost indistinguishable
from the diagonal line, indicating the excellent preservation of the marginal distribution.
We also perform KS tests to formally evaluate the ability of these methods to preserve the
marginal distribution of patcw. Table 4 summarizes the results, which show the KS test rejects
the null hypothesis that the perturbed values generated using GADP come from the distribution
of the original values with a p-value of < .0001. There are also substantial biases in the moments
and quantiles compared with those calculated from the original values. As a comparison, C-GADP
performs much better with a substantially smaller KS statistic and a borderline significant p-value
(0.0418). The moments and quantiles of the C-GADP are also much closer to those of the original
values as compared with GADP, indicating that the nonparametric marginal method is performing
better. MORE-P performs best with much smaller KS statistics and a highly nonsignificant p-value
of 0.9989, indicating the masked values preserve the marginal distribution very well.
As a test to verify whether the masked values can preserve the important inverted-U relationship,
we run a Poisson regression model on the original values and the masked values of patcw for
each data masking procedure.9 The Poisson regression model regresses patcw on Ci and Ci2 . This
9
Note that patcw is a citation weighted patent count and therefore can take noninteger positive values. The Poisson regression
routines in many software packages (e.g., R and Stata) are extended to handle noninteger response values, even though the
classical Poisson regression requires integer values.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

24

mimics a scenario to assess the ability of different data masking procedures to allow a user of a
secure database to discover the inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation using
the masked values of patcw. The regression results using the original data and masked data are
reported in Table 5. The prior data masking procedures, GADP, C-GADP, and DSP, are all based
on a joint MVN-type model and are not designed for maintaining a nonmonotonic inverted-U
relationship. Therefore, using the masked values based on these methods will not preserve the
inverted-U relationship. In fact, the analyses from these methods assert no relationship between
competition and innovation, as seen from the nonsignificance of regression parameters for Ci and
Ci2 . In contrast, MORE-P produces the regression parameters that are closest to those based on
the original values and that can preserve the inverted-U relationship. Figure 2 compares the fitted
regression curves using each data masking procedure with that using the original data. The figure
shows that only MORE-P and MORE-S are able to maintain the inverted-U relationship existing
in the original dataset.
We next consider a refined analysis that includes (Y ear, Industry, Ci) in S. Note that Y ear
and Industry are categorical variables, which are typically incorporated into analyses as a set
of dummy variables. This would create additional 21 (for Y ear) + 16 (for Industry) dummy
variables. This substantially enlarges the modeling work for a joint data masking approach that
models these variables, even though these variables remain unchanged after data masking. On the
other hand, MORE procedures condition on these variables. Table 6 reports the analysis results. As
compared with the simpler analysis that excludes Y ear and Industry, the performance of all data
masking procedures improves, although the order of different data masking procedures on their
performance remains the same. The KS statistics reduce in size and the corresponding p-values
increase, indicating better preservation of the distribution of the original values. The preservation
of moments and quantiles also improves for all methods. The results based on Poisson regressions
on the original and masked values are summarized in Table 7. In addition to Ci and Ci2 , the
Poisson regressions control for year and industry dummies. The parameter estimates in the column
of “Original” are the same as those reported in Aghion et al. (2005) and show a strong inverted-U
pattern between competition and innovation. As in the simplified analysis, prior methods (GADP,
C-GADP, and DSP) cannot preserve the nonmonotonic inverted-U relationship and essentially
conclude no relationship between these two variables. In contrast, MORE-P and MORE-S maintain
this important relationship. Consistent with our simulation results, because MORE-P preserves
statistical distributional properties better, it has a somewhat smaller EMPD than GADP and CGADP for the simplified analyses, as shown in Table 4. The difference in EMPD among different
methods is reduced for the refined analyses, as reported in Table 6, likely because of a much
improved fit for all methods in the refined analyses.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

25

We further compare MORE with the multiple imputation synthetic data (MI) approach to data
masking, as described in Raghunathan et al. (2003) and Reiter (2005). In order to maintain complex relationships among attributes, we use their parametric MI procedure in which data owners
need to specify different types of parametric imputation models for masking mixed types of confidential variables, and then employ different algorithms tailored for generating synthetic data for
different types of variables. This is in contrast with MORE, which provides a single nonparametric masking model and algorithm applicable for mixed types of confidential attributes, which is
important for general purpose automatic data masking. When generating synthetic datasets, we
set the imputation models to be the same as the analysis models, i.e., to be the Poisson regression
models for patcw conditional on S as specified for fitting data in Tables 5 and 7. This mimics a
scenario in which data owners know the types of analyses to be performed on masked datasets.
Notice that our odds ratio perturbation models nest the Poisson imputation models as special
cases. As shown next, this benefit has important consequences in preserving a much wider range
of statistical properties of sensitive attributes.
One hundred synthetic datasets are drawn from the posterior predictive distribution of the sensitive attribute patcw using flat priors on the Poisson imputation model parameters. The results
from these synthetic datasets are combined using the rules developed by Raghunathan et al. (2003).
Because the MI uses the same imputation models as the analysis models, we expect the synthetic
datasets to preserve the inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation. This is confirmed by the results under columns “MI” in Tables 5 and 7, which show comparable performance of
MORE-P/S and MI, and both are capable of preserving this relationship. The parameter estimates
from MI are somewhat closer to the estimates from fitting the original data than MORE. This is
because MI takes the average of the 100 estimates from synthetic datasets and thus eliminates the
variability of the estimates, which can be appreciable unless sample size is very large. The standard
errors from MI are somewhat larger than from MORE, reflecting this added variability. On the
other hand, Tables 4 and 6 report the means of the marginal distribution characteristics over 100
synthetic datasets, showing that these synthetic datasets do not preserve the marginal distributions of the confidential variable patcw. In both tables, the average KS test statistics and P-values
under the columns “MI” show high statistical significance, suggesting a large discrepancy between
overall distributions of synthetic datasets and that of the original data. Many summary measures,
except mean, show substantial differences from the original ones, which can affect inferences based
on these measures. Overall, these synthetic datasets do not preserve the marginal distribution of
patcw as well as MORE does. This analysis demonstrates the value of the robustness of MORE in
preserving a much wider range of statistical properties of sensitive attributes.
The primary advantage of MI over MORE-P/S methods proposed here is its ability to incorporate the added variability that results from the data masking process into statistical inference of

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

26

secure datasets. A disadvantage of MI is the increased analytical complexity and the need to store
and process multiple synthetic datasets (Raghunathan et al. 2003). For instance, simple masking
algorithms in DPS may need to be replaced with computationally more expensive algorithms in
MI. Avoiding negative standard error estimates in MI would require generating a large number of
synthetic datasets or using more a complicated formula involving numerical integrations. Storing
and processing a large number of synthetic datasets for masking massive datasets may not always
be desirable for data users. Thus, the choice of which class of methods to use in practice will depend
on a number of factors, and it is helpful to offer users both types of methods. For situations in
which the variability added from data masking and its impact on statistical inference are relatively
small (e.g., with a large sample size), one may favor MORE-P/S for its relative analytical simplicity
and low cost, robustness, and ability to nest GLMs as special cases. In situations in which the variability introduced in data masking must be properly incorporated, it is desirable to overcome this
limitation of MORE-P/S by developing an MI version of MORE. Because of substantial conceptual
and implementation differences between the two classes of methods, we leave this development for
future research.
5.6.

An Additional Application: An Organizational Data Warehouse Example

Our second application is on an organization data warehouse example described in Muralidhar and
Sarathy (2006). This dataset contains six variables with three nonconfidential ones (Gender, Marital
Status, and Age) and three confidential (Home Value, Mortgage Balance, and Total Net Asset
Value). A large dataset with 50,000 observations was generated using the procedure described in
Muralidhar and Sarathy (2006). The authors use the dataset to illustrate the applicability of DSP to
large datasets and the capability of DSP to maintain the monotonic relationships among variables
in this dataset. Unlike the prior application, the relationships between variables have nonlinear but
monotonic relationships. One approach is to use the polynomial odds ratio functions to approximate
these nonlinear relationships. Another approach is to model the relationships using the transformed
log-bilinear form as specified in Equation (5). We adopt this simpler second approach here and
use the distribution functions as the transformation functions. After using MORE-P to generate
the perturbed values on the transformed variables, we perform data shuffling to obtain the masked
dataset. In this dataset, each of the three confidential variables has a large number (> 10, 000)
of unique values. To speed up the computation, we create five random subsets with equal sample
sizes (i.e., 10,000 observations per random subset). For each subset, we round the transformed
variables to the third decimal place to further reduce the number of unique values. Table 8 reports
the analysis result as was done in Muralidhar and Sarathy (2006). As we see, both DSP and
MORE-S perform similarly well and both can maintain the rank-order correlations accurately. We
also consider the cases where only Home Value (MORE-S1), Mortgage (MORE-S2), or Total Net
Asset Value (MORE-S3) is confidential and needs to be masked. As we see from Table 8, MORE

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

27

performs well in all these cases where different variables are selected for masking. Computationally,
DSP requires no iterative optimization of model parameters, but MORE does. Therefore, unlike
the C&I dataset, when the requirements for using DSP are satisfied (such as in this data warehouse
example), DSP offers a computationally simpler approach, is as effective as MORE-P or MORE-S
in maintaining security and utility, and needs not be replaced.
To investigate the effectiveness of the rounding strategy as recommended in Section 4.3.4, we
conduct an alternative analysis that rounds the transformed variables to the first decimal place.
As seen in Table 8, the different levels of rounding produce very similar results.10 For this large
dataset, on a desktop computer with a 2.7GHZ Intel Xeon Processor and 4GB memory, rounding
to the first decimal place reduces computational time from about 3 minutes to only 22 seconds,
which approaches the computation time of DSP (12 seconds). This analysis demonstrates that the
simple rounding strategy can very effectively reduce computational time with negligible effects on
the utility of secure datasets.

6.

Discussion

Modern evidence-based research and practice in many areas, such as database marketing, strategy,
business census, and public health, depend heavily on the construction, sharing, and dissemination of effective databases. There are rapidly increasing demands for secure database construction
methods that can protect sensitive information while maintaining the high utility of databases
shared with third parties. In this article we have developed new data perturbation and shuffling
procedures for building secure databases more effectively. As compared with existing ones, our
procedures substantially enhance the utility of secure databases while maintaining low disclosure
risk. The proposed methods have a number of features particularly attractive for general-purpose
data masking. The modeling, estimation, and generation of masked sensitive values in MORE do
not rely on the distributional properties of any variables in the dataset, and are applicable to mixed
continuous, semicontinuous, and discrete confidential variables. An important benefit of MORE is
that the data masking models nest GLMs, a large family of statistical models widely used in business, economics, social science, and health database analyses, as special cases. Therefore, a much
wider range of statistical analysis can be conducted on the resulting secure databases with results
similar to those using the original ones. Furthermore, MORE is capable of preserving nonmonotonic
relationships among attributes, addressing an important issue unresolved from prior research in
model-based data perturbation and shuffling methods. MORE directly models the conditional distribution of those confidential data elements, and therefore can further increase the robustness of
secure databases.
10

Because the results for MORE-S1, MORE-S2,and MORE-S3 with different levels of rounding are also very similar,
we omit results when rounding to the first decimal place in Table 8.

28

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

These benefits of the proposed methods have rich managerial and policy implications. As shown
in our empirical application regarding an inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation, the flexibility of the odds ratio function allows one to reproduce this nonmonotonic relationship. Because of the robust nonparametric distribution modeling ability, MORE is capable of
preserving the distributional characteristics of confidential variables and can automatically account
for important data features, such as bounded support, discreteness, outliers, skewness, and heavy
tails. As a result of these benefits, MORE preserves the inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation while the existing DPS methods create masked datasets that lead to the
conclusion of no relationship between competition and innovation, a difference with huge managerial and policy implications. As indicated in Aghion et al. (2005), such an inverted-U relationship
provides crucial insights into the impact of competition and closeness in technology space on innovation. For market regulators, such effects would be critical for antitrust and competition policy
applications and potential reforms. For the manager of a firm who plans to enter a market, the
inverted-U relationship can be very important to predict the responses of incumbent firms in the
market and to formulate entry strategies. As demonstrated in our application, secure databases
using different methods can lead to different estimated competition-innovation relationships and
substantively different or even opposite predictions of incumbent firms’ response behavior after
entry. In the application, MORE substantially enhances the utility of secure databases and provides
opportunities to make optimal policy and managerial decisions for the users of these databases.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

29

Appendix. Illustration of the MORE Methods in a Small Dataset
We illustrate the steps in applying MORE procedures for data masking using a small simulated dataset
that has one nonconfidential variable S and one confidential variable X. For ease of illustration, a random
sample of 10 observations is generated from a bivariate normal distribution with mean zero and a variancecovariance matrix in which the diagonal elements are one and off-diagonal elements are 0.5. The purpose is
to use this small dataset to demonstrate numerically the steps involved in applying MORE procedures.
• A.1: Estimate the odds ratio model parameters θ = (λ, γ) in fθ (X|S). The reference point (X0 , S0 ) in the
odds ratio model is chosen to be the mean of (X, S). In this dataset, the unique values of X are


−1.306 −0.415 −0.196 0.055 0.160 0.314 0.457 0.778 1.226 1.617

In our model estimation, we have the estimates of parameters in fλ (X|S0 ) assigned to this set of unique
values as


λ̂ = −0.077 0.165 0.199 0.224 0.230 0.233 0.231 0.205 0.120 0.000 ,

and the estimate of the parameter γ in the log odds ratio function: ln η(X, X0 , S, S0 ) = γ(X − X0 )(S − S0 )
is γ̂ = 0.954.
• A.2: Evaluate the security level of the current data masking setting. The EMPD is computed to be 0.821,
which is larger than 50% of the standard deviation of the sensitive variable X. The EMPD value is useful for
database owners to determine whether the current data masking setting has sufficient control of disclosure
risk by comparing this EMPD value with a prechosen cutoff value. Our example assumes that this EMPD
value is larger than the cutoff value, indicating the current data masking setting has sufficient control for
disclosure risk. If EMPD is less than this cutoff value indicating insufficient disclosure control, the data
masking setting needs to be revised. For example, database owners may consider masking the nonconfidential
attribute S, too, which will increase the EMPD value and further reduce the disclosure risk.
• A.3: Generate the perturbed values of the confidential variable X. For the first observation, [S, X] =
[-0.787, -1.306], we generate the masked value of X from a multinomial distribution on the set of the values
shown in A.1, and the probability vector in the multinomial distribution is computed as


P1 = 0.201 0.141 0.126 0.109 0.103 0.093 0.084 0.066 0.045 0.031 .

The random number generated from the above multinomial distribution represents the perturbation value
for the sensitive attribute X of the first observation, which is -0.196, and is used to replace the original
value of -1.306. The random number generation is then repeated for every observation, leading to the final
perturbed dataset.
• A.4: For MORE-S, we perform the data shuffling step. For the first observation, we replace its perturbed
X value with the value of X in the original dataset that has the same rank as that of this perturbed value in
the perturbed dataset. This shuffling step replaces the perturbed X value (-0.196) for the first observation
with the shuffled X value of 0.055. The shuffling operation is repeated for every observation, leading to the
final shuffled dataset.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

30

References
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., and Howitt, P. (2005) “Competition and Innovation: An
Inverted U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 701–728.
Bertino, E., Byun, J., and Li, N. (2005) Privacy-Preserving Database Systems in Foundations of Security
Analysis and Design III, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Blattberg, R.C., Kim, B. and Neslin, S.A. (2008) Database Marketing: Analyzing and Managing Customers,
Spring, New York.
Chen, H. Y. (2004) “Nonparametric and Semiparametric Models for Missing Covariates in Parametric Regression,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 99, 1176–1189.
Chen, H. Y. (2007) “A Semiparametric Odds Ratio Model for Measuring Association,” Biometrics, 63,
413–421.
Dalenius, T., and Reiss, S.P. (1982) “Data-swapping: A Technique for Disclosure Control,” Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 6, 73–85.
Desai, P. (2013) “Marketing Science Replication and Disclosure Policy,” Marketing Science, 32, 1-3.
Genest, C., and Neslehova, J. (2007) “A Primer on Copulas for Count Data,” Astin Bulletin, 37(2), 475–515.
Goldfarb, A., and Tucker, C. (2012) “Privacy and Innovation,” Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol.
11, Josh Lerner and Scott Stern (Eds), NBER.
Kalvenes, J., and Basu, A. (2006), “Design of Robust Business-to-Business Electronic Marketplaces with
Guaranteed Privacy,” Management Science, 52:1721-1736.
Kim, G., Silvapulle, M.J., and Silvapulle, P. (2007), “Comparison of Semiparametric and Parametric Methods
for Estimating Copulas,” Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 51:2836-2850.
Lee, S., Genton, M.G., and Arellano-Valle, R.B. (2010), “Perturbation of Numerical Confidential Data Via
Skew-t Distributions,” Management Science, 56:318-333.
Li, X., and Sarkar, S. (2011), “Protecting Privacy Against Record Linkage Disclosure: A Bounded Swapping
Approach for Numeric Data,” Information Systems Research, 22: 774-789.
McCullagh, P., and Nelder, J.A. (1989) Generalized Linear Models, 2nd Ed., Chapman & Hall/CRC, BR.
Mela, C. (2011) “Data Selection and Procurement,” Marketing Science, 30: 965-976.
Menon, S., and Sarkar, S. (2007), “Minimizing Information Loss and Preserving Privacy,” Management
Science, 56:318-333.
Miller, A., and Tucker, C. (2011), “Encryption and the Loss of Patient Data,” Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management, 30:534-556.
Muralidhar, K., Batra, D., and Kirs, P.J. (1995) “Accessibility, Security, and Accuracy in Statistical Database: The Case for the Multiplicative Fixed Data Perturbation Approach,” Management Science, 41(9),
1549-1564.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

31

Muralidhar, K., Parsa, R., Sarathy, R. (1999) “A General Additive Data Perturbation Method for Database
Security,” Management Science, 45(10), 1399-1415.
Muralidhar, K., Sarathy, R., and Parsa, R. (2001) “An Improved Security Requirement for Data Perturbation
with Implications for E-Commerce,” Decision Sciences, 32, 683-698.
Muralidhar, K., and Sarathy, R. (2003) “A Theoretical Basis for Perturbation Methods,” Statistics and
Computing, 13, 329-335.
Muralidhar, K., and Sarathy, R. (2006) “Data Shuffling – A New Masking Approach for Numerical Data,”
Management Science, 52(5), 658-670.
Nocedal , J., and Wright, S.J. (1999) “Numerical Optimization,” Springer Series in Operation Research, NY.
Qian, Y (2007), “Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a Global Patenting Environment? A Cross-Country Analysis of Pharmaceutical Patent Protection, 1978-2002,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 436–453.
Qian, Y and Xie, H (2011), “No Customer Left Behind: A Distribution-Free Bayesian Approach to Account
for Missing Xs in Marketing Models,” Marketing Science, 30(4), 717–736.
Qian, Y and Xie, H (2013), “Which Brand Purchasers Are Lost to Counterfeits?,” Marketing Science,
Forthcoming.
Qu, L., Qian, Y. and Xie, H. (2009). “Copula Density Estimation by Total Variation Penalized Likelihood,”
Communications in Statistics: Simulation and Computation, 38:9, 1891-1908.
Raghunathan, T. E., Reiter, J. P., and Rubin, D. B. (2003) “Multiple imputation for statistical disclosure
limitation, ” Journal of Official Statistics, 19, 1–16.
Reiter, J. P. (2005) “Releasing multiply-imputed, synthetic public use microdata: An illustration and empirical study, ” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 168, 185–205.
Reiter, J. P., and Raghunathan, T. E. (2007) “The multiple adaptations of multiple imputation,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 102,1462–1471.
Rubin, D.B. (1993) “Discussion: Statistical Disclosure Limitation,” Journal of Official Statistics, 9, 461–468.
Sarathy, R., Muralidhar, K., Parsa, R. (2002) “Perturbing Nonnormal Confidential Attributes: The Copula
Approach.” Management Science, 48(12), 1613-1627.
Scheuer, E.M. and Stoller, D.S. (1962) “On the generation of normal random vectors.” Technometrics, 4,
278-281.
Wall Street Journal. (2001) “Bureau Blurs Data to Keep Names Confidential,” February, B1–B2.
Willenborg, L., and de Waal, T. (2001) Elements of Statistical Disclosure Control, Springer, New York.
Winer, R.S. (2001) “A Framework for Customer Relationship Management,” California Management Review,
43(4), 89–105.
Xiao, X., and Tao, Y. (2006) “Personalized Privacy Preservation.” Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, 229-240.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

32
Table 1

Simulation Study Results on the Performance of Perturbation Methods to Preserve the Marginal
Distributions of the Confidential Variables.
X1

Criteria
KS

Mean

Var

Skewness

Kurtosis

Q05

Q25

Q50

Q75

Q95

EMPD

Table 2

N

C-GADP

100 0.0807 (0.0229)
500 0.0374 (0.0104)
1000 0.0269 (0.0075)
100 0.0044 (0.0765)
500 0.0033 (0.0366)
1000 0.0050 (0.0247)
100 -0.0765 (0.1160)
500 -0.0217 (0.0571)
1000 -0.0109 (0.0403)
100 -0.0053 (0.2258)
500 0.0048 (0.1058)
1000 -0.0010 (0.0709)
100 -0.0141 (0.4156)
500 -0.0190 (0.2041)
1000 -0.0190 (0.1499)
100 0.0633 (0.2084)
500 0.0192 (0.0931)
1000 0.0119 (0.0631)
100 0.0256 (0.1217)
500 0.0077 (0.0561)
1000 0.0085 (0.0387)
100 0.0086 (0.1134)
500 0.0036 (0.0517)
1000 0.0035 (0.0369)
100 -0.0229 (0.1207
500 -0.0011 (0.0580)
1000 0.0034 (0.0384)
100 -0.0778 (0.2157)
500
-0.0133 (0.963)
1000 -0.0031 (0.0662)
100
0.8726(0.0884)
500 0.9125 (0.0415)
1000 0.9147 (0.0274)

X2
MORE-P

C-GADP

0.0734 (0.0222) 0.0845 (0.0236)
0.0349 (0.0106) 0.0395 (0.0119)
0.0251 (0.0072) 0.0281 (0.0083)
-0.0031 (0.0755) -0.0140 (0.1561)
0.0001 (0.0386) 0.0014 (0.0736)
0.0002 (0.0269) 0.0053 (0.0535)
-0.0043 (0.1362) -0.2742 (0.7066)
-0.0003 (0.0590) -0.0691 (0.3414)
0.0043 (0.0425) -0.0414 (0.2525)
0.0095 (0.2074) -0.1218 (0.4899)
-0.0136 (0.1071) -0.0577 (0.3453)
-0.0048 (0.0722) -0.0209 (0.2755)
-0.0002 (0.4202) -0.5334 (2.7035)
-0.0003 (0.2029) -0.4323 (2.9978)
-0.0079 (0.1501) -0.1797 (2.3016)
0.0024 (0.2216) 0.0792 (0.2510)
-0.0088 (0.1018) 0.0222 (0.1068)
-0.0080 (0.0659) 0.0196 (0.0738)
0.0009 (0.1251) 0.0292 (0.1645)
0.0014 (0.0577) 0.0098 (0.0732)
-0.0033 (0.0381) 0.0118 (0.0548)
-0.0078 (0.1040) 0.0057 (0.1578)
0.0015 (0.0545) 0.0067 (0.0788)
0.0008 (0.0382) 0.0072 (0.0533)
-0.0081 (0.1269) -0.0299 (0.2300)
-0.0010 (0.0612) -0.0032 (0.1150)
0.0017 (0.0425) 0.0037 (0.0759)
0.0004 (0.2079) -0.1500 (0.7898)
-0.0052 (0.0881) -0.0398 (0.3470)
0.0017 (0.0651) -0.0196 (0.2267)
0.8801 (0.0883) 1.7414 (0.2264)
0.9160 (0.0383) 1.7953 (0.1030)
0.9191 (0.0272) 1.7999 (0.0687)

X3
MORE-P

C-GADP

MORE-P

0.0702 (0.0236)
0.0332 (0.0096)
0.0237 (0.0074)
0.0002 (0.0966)
0.0034 (0.0484)
0.0087 (0.0341)
0.0160 (0.2915)
0.0208 (0.1679)
0.0683 (0.1360)
0.0030 (0.2239)
0.0010 (0.1505)
0.0148 (0.1128)
0.0031 (0.9473)
-0.0291 (0.9852)
-0.0235 (0.7853)
-0.0055 (0.2537)
0.0056 (0.1074)
0.0022 (0.0753)
-0.0055 (0.1660)
0.0000 (0.0717)
-0.0018 (0.0510)
-0.0003 (0.1465)
0.0015 (0.0639)
-0.0004 (0.0475)
-0.0056 (0.1710)
0.0017 (0.0836)
0.0094 (0.0579)
0.0278 (0.4471)
0.0284 (0.2232)
0.0608 (0.1566)
1.0762 (0.1099)
1.1336 (0.0505)
1.1529 (0.0384)

0.2293 (0.0405)
0.2241 (0.0175)
0.2240 (0.0128)
0.3569 (0.1725)
0.3892 (0.0700)
0.4036 (0.0490)
-2.8628 (4.2329)
-2.8060(2.2193)
-2.6266 (1.2602)
-1.1302 (1.1871)
-1.6904 (1.7420)
-1.9032 (1.8016)
-6.7014 (10.8616)
-17.6801 (33.3058)
-23.5202 (43.1230)
0.0019 (0.0425)
0.0000 (0.0000)
0.0000 (0.0000)
0.9925 (0.0842)
1.0000 (0.0000)
1.0000 (0.0000)
0.6250 (0.4778)
0.8180 (0.3784)
0.9200 (0.2678)
0.5325 (0.5144)
0.8910 (0.3071)
0.9810 (0.1339)
-0.5749 (0.9834)
-0.4443 (0.5724)
-0.4380 (0.5086)
1.4071 (0.2133)
1.4298 (0.0970)
1.4327 (0.0657)

0.0475 (0.0205)
0.0215 (0.0090)
0.0160 (0.0065)
-0.0008 (0.1215)
0.0091 (0.0577)
0.0121 (0.0433)
0.0564 (1.3124)
0.1472 (0.7497)
0.2528 (0.7049)
-0.0435 (0.3991)
-0.0386 (0.3646)
0.0516 (0.4020)
-0.4007 (3.4543)
-0.7367 (5.4429)
0.0634 (7.3234)
0.0000 (0.0000)
0.0000 (0.0000)
0.0000 (0.0000)
0.0095 (0.1063)
0.0000 (0.0000)
0.0000 (0.0000)
-0.0170 (0.2175)
0.0000 (0.0000)
0.0000 (0.0000)
0.0235 (0.3989)
0.0395 (0.2354)
0.0160 (0.1195)
0.0505 (1.0712)
0.0701 (0.5464)
0.0323 (0.4550)
1.0833 (0.1645)
1.1670 (0.0756)
1.1839 (0.0512)

Simulation Study Results on the Performance of MORE to Preserve Relationships Among Attributes.

Criteria
N
ρ31 = 0.5 100
500
1000
ρ32 = 0.5 100
500
1000
β41 = 0
100
500
1000
β42 = 1
100
500
1000
β51 = 1
100
500
1000

MORE-P
0.0040 (0.0654)
-0.0017 (0.0318)
-0.0064 (0.0220)
-0.0015 (0.0681)
-0.0016 (0.0317)
-0.0062 (0.0220)
0.0014 (0.1031)
-0.0016 (0.0518)
-0.0003 (0.0384)
-0.0094 (0.0767)
-0.0253 (0.0443)
-0.0368 (0.0329)
0.0001 (0.0872)
-0.0038 (0.0381)
-0.0090 (0.0285)

MORE-S
0.0002 (0.0660)
-0.0027 (0.0318)
-0.0067 (0.0220)
-0.0057 (0.0697)
-0.0024 (0.0318)
-0.0066 (0.0220)
0.0046 (0.1024)
-0.0027 (0.0537)
-0.0006 (0.0385)
-0.0098 (0.0476)
-0.0294 (0.0305)
-0.0489 (0.0256)
-0.0207 (0.0523)
-0.0146 (0.0253)
-0.0200 (0.0233)

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

33
Table 3

N

ρ

100

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.95
500 0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.95
1000 0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.95

Table 4

Criteria

Value Disclosure Risk.

DSP
X1 |Y1
0.000116
0.000101
0.000097
0.000109
0.000099
0.000088
0.000004
0.000004
0.000004
0.000004
0.000004
0.000006
0.000001
0.000001
0.000001
0.000001
0.000001
0.000001

MORE-P
MORE-S
Proportion of Variability Explained
X2 |Y2
X1 |Y1
X2 |Y2
X1 |Y1
X2 |Y2
0.000111 0.000091 0.000100 0.000092 0.000102
0.000113 0.000109 0.000110 0.000107 0.000111
0.000093 0.000105 0.000113 0.000106 0.000113
0.000103 0.000096 0.000095 0.000096 0.000094
0.000094 0.000111 0.000097 0.000113 0.000096
0.000083 0.000094 0.000103 0.000093 0.000103
0.000003 0.000004 0.000003 0.000004 0.000003
0.000004 0.000003 0.000004 0.000004 0.000004
0.000004 0.000004 0.000005 0.000004 0.000005
0.000004 0.000004 0.000004 0.000004 0.000004
0.000004 0.000004 0.000004 0.000004 0.000004
0.000006 0.000004 0.000004 0.000004 0.000005
0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001
0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001
0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001
0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001
0.000002 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001
0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001 0.000001

Marginal Distributions of ptcw with Original and Perturbed Values When S = (Ci).

Original

GADP

C-GADP

MORE-P

MI

KS
0.1836 (< .0001) 0.1045 (0.0418) 0.0282 (0.9989) 0.4375 (0.0000)
Mean
6.6554
7.3322
6.7049
6.9243
6.7513
Var
71.1421
48.0904
61.3625
80.2012
7.0243
Skewness 1.6354
0.7864
1.5200
1.7185
0.3809
Kurtosis 5.2310
2.9131
4.6862
5.5888
3.1173
Q05
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
2.7450
Q25
0.4453
0.1282
1.0789
0.4551
4.9425
Q50
3.3498
6.0219
3.8915
3.2436
6.5350
Q75
9.3848
11.9146
9.5400
9.6585
8.2450
Q95
25.0600
20.4321
23.5460
26.8393
11.2510
EMPD
—
8.34
8.05
6.45
6.70

Table 5

Estimates of Relationship Between Innovation and Competition When S = (Ci).

Criteria

Original GADP C-GADP

165.12∗∗ -64.36
(54.77) (47.77)
Competition2 (Ci2 ) -88.55∗∗ 34.51
(29.08) (25.36)
Competition (Ci)

33.29
(51.44)
-18.28
(27.32)

DSP

MORE-P MORE-S

41.06 199.70∗∗
(55.09) (52.11)
-19.36 -109.53∗∗
(29.16) (27.73)

MI

175.29∗∗ 169.53∗∗
(52.65) (70.08)
-96.43∗∗ -90.94∗∗
(28.02) (37.09)

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

34
Table 6

Marginal Distributions of ptcw with Original and Masked Values When S = (Industry, Y ear, Ci).

Criteria

Original

GADP

C-GADP

MORE-P

MI

KS
0.1186 (0.0137) 0.1017 (0.0514) 0.0254 (0.9998) 0.1151 (0.0292)
Mean
6.6554
7.1618
6.5441
6.4748
6.7370
Var
71.1421
57.3740
62.9778
65.7977
65.0568
Skewness 1.6354
1.2019
1.5614
1.5507
1.5874
Kurtosis 5.2310
3.6744
4.6564
4.7391
5.7508
Q05
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Q25
0.4453
1.0212
0.6715
0.3764
0.9850
Q50
3.3498
4.8538
3.5306
3.4114
4.0650
Q75
9.3848
10.6395
9.3014
9.3850
10.4000
Q95
25.0600
22.4616
24.9842
24.4802
23.7090
EMPD
—
3.5459
3.2766
3.2263
3.1820

Table 7

Estimates of Relationship Between Innovation and Competition When S = (Industry, Y ear, Ci) .

Criteria

Original

GADP C-GADP

387.46∗∗∗ -67.42
(67.74) (59.31)
2
2
Competition (Ci ) -204.55∗∗∗ 38.25
(36.17) (31.71)
Competition (Ci)

Table 8

Correlation
Home Value and
Gender
Marital Status
Age
Mortgage Balance
Total Net Asset Value
Mortgage balance and
Gender
Marital Status
Age
Total Net Asset Value
Total Net Asset Value and
Gender
Marital Status
Age

Original

6.54
(62.52)
-2.09
(33.44)

DSP

MORE-P MORE-S

MI

-125.95∗ 411.50∗∗∗ 430.31∗∗∗ 395.05∗∗∗
(59.59)
(71.26)
(70.30)
(74.44)
∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
66.96
-215.13
-225.47
-194.72∗∗∗
(31.89)
(38.01)
(37.49)
(39.41)

Rank Order Correlation

DSP

MORE-Sa MORE-Sb MORE-S1a MORE-S2a MORE-S3a

-0.00373
-0.00187
0.57146
0.58229
0.68129

-0.00701 -0.00402
-0.00060 -0.00621
0.60600 0.57029
0.59072 0.58574
0.68126 0.68866

-0.00409
-0.00093
0.28334
0.78156

-0.00491 -0.00574 -0.000895
0.00001 -0.00469 -0.00743
0.29953 0.28344
0.29004
0.78341 0.77916
0.78088

-0.00510 -0.00696 -0.00737
0.07426 0.07639 0.07858
0.37367 0.38865 0.37754

-0.00313
-0.00753
0.56050
0.58327
0.68745

-0.00987
0.06200
0.37890

Note: a and b denote rounding to the third and first decimal places, respectively.

-0.00657
0.00307
0.56977
0.57843
0.67873

0.57820
0.68076
-0.00758
-0.00243
0.27983
0.77841

0.78046
-0.00658
0.07410
0.37487

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

100

Frequency

0

0

10

50

20

30

Frequency

40

150

50

60

200

70

35

0.86

0.88

0.90

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1.00

0

10

20

Competition Index

Figure 1

20
5
0
0.85

0.90

0.95

MORE−P

MORE−S

1.00

0.85

0.90

0.95

1.00

Lerner Index

15
10
0

5

10

Patcw

15

20

Lerner Index

20

10

Patcw

15

20
15
1.00

5

Patcw

10

Patcw

0
0.95

Lerner Index

0
0.85

0.90

0.95

Lerner Index

Figure 2

DSP

5

10
5

Patcw

15

20

C−GADP

0

0.90

40

Histograms of Ci and P atcw in the Original Dataset.

GADP

0.85

30

Patcw

1.00

0.85

0.90

0.95

1.00

Lerner Index

Comparison of the Relationships Between Competition and Innovation Estimated with the Original

Dataset and Masked Datasets. The solid curve represents the inverted-U relationship estimated using the original
dataset. The dotted curve represents the relationship estimated using the masked dataset generated by the data
masking method given on the top of the plot. The points in the plots represent the original data values and only
observations with patcw < 20 are plotted.

Qian and Xie
Forthcoming in Management Science;

36

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

PP−plot with C−GADP

1.0

PP−plot with GADP

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

PP−plot with MORE−P

0.0

Figure 3

0.2

0.4

0.6

PP Plots for the Masked Values of patcw for GADP, C-GADP, and MORE-P.

