NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSTRUCTING A PCE-WEIGHTED CONSUMER PRICE INDEX
Caitlin Blair
Working Paper 19582
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19582

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

This paper was originally prepared for the NBER/CRIW Conference on Improving the Measurement
of Consumer Expenditures, December 2011 while the author was employed by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. The author would like to thank Rob Cage, Sara Stanley, Josh Klick, Madeleine Saxton, Bill
Passero, Ronald Johnson, Anya Stockburger, Charles Mason, and John Greenlees of the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and Clinton McCully and Brent Moulton of the Bureau of Economic Analysis for
their support and input on this project. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and
do not necessarily represent the views of the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the Department of Labor.
The author takes full responsibility for any errors. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Please contact
Anya Stockburger of the BLS (stockburger.anya@bls.gov) with any questions related to this paper.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Caitlin Blair. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Constructing a PCE-Weighted Consumer Price Index
Caitlin Blair
NBER Working Paper No. 19582
October 2013
JEL No. E31
ABSTRACT
This study investigates the effects of simulating the Consumer Price Index (CPI) with alternately sourced
weights on the inflation experience for an average US consumer. The Bureau of Labor Statistics currently
uses household spending data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) to construct expenditure
category weights, or “item” weights, in the CPI. The Bureau of Economic Analysis also estimates
consumer expenditures, but does so at a national level for publication of Personal Consumption Expenditures
(PCE) in the National Income and Product Accounts. In this paper, 2005-2010 price indexes that utilize
PCE weights instead of CE expenditure weights are compared with the CPI-Urban in order to evaluate
current CPI weighting methods. These comparisons show that the annualized growth rate over five
years of an adjusted PCE-weighted CPI is slightly lower than that of the CPI-U, while a reweighted
index that uses PCE expenditure definitions grows much more quickly than the CPI.

Caitlin Blair
United States International Trade Commission
Formerly of the Bureau of Labor Statistics
caitlin.blair@usitc.gov

1. Introduction
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) data are a source of frequent debate in the federal statistical
community. Pundits have criticized the household survey with arguments ranging from population and
item coverage bias to inaccurate reporting as disadvantages of using CE data.2 However, alternatives to
the Consumer Expenditure Survey are scarce, and CE data have many advantages, including scope and
population specificity. A variety of agencies and statistical programs utilize CE data, but one of the most
important uses of CE data is in the construction of weights for the U.S. Consumer Price Index (CPI),
produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Reported expenditures in the CE survey are used to
calculate the relative importance, or expenditure weight, of each item category in the index. In order for
the CPI to be an accurate measure of price change, it is vital that the weight data are accurate and
representative of the appropriate population. If there is a systemic bias in the CE weights, there could be a
bias in the resulting CPI.
This paper examines CPI weights using an alternate weighting scheme under current CPI
methodology. This is done by comparing official 2005-2010 CPI index values with index values derived
from secondary source weights. Creating these indexes and comparing them to the published CPI allows
us to gain a better understanding of item representativeness and item response accuracy in the CE-sourced
CPI aggregation weights. In this study, Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) data from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis are the secondary source. Ultimately, we find that an index weighted to PCE levels
matches the urban Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) very closely in trend and magnitude but grows at an
annualized rate that is about 0.1% lower than the CPI-U growth rate over the 2005-2010 period. An index
weighted to PCE levels that is not adjusted for definitional differences has an annualized 5-year growth
rate that is 0.3% higher than the CPI-U rate.

2

Garner, Thesia I., George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia provide a brief chronology of work
comparing CE and PCE in “The CE and the PCE: a comparison.” Monthly Labor Review, September 2006, pp. 20-46.

2

2. Importance of CE in the CPI
One reason that CE data are currently used in CPI production is the level of item, geographic, and
population disaggregation available from the survey. The CPI utilizes expenditure values for five distinct
population sub-groups, which are then combined to create a variety of indexes for specific populations
such as “Urban”, “Wage-Earner”, and “Elderly”. Detailed demographic data ranging from respondent age
to housing tenure to social security recipiency status are collected in the CE Survey and can be used in
index research. In addition, CE data are collected for 38 geographic zones known as index areas, which
are the primary level of geographic index aggregation in the CPI. These sub-national population and
geographic distinctions are possible because in the CE, survey data are collected at the household rather
than national level.
CE collates expense reports for over 200 unique expenditure categories, which can then be used
to construct category expenditure estimates. The survey is conducted continuously on a monthly basis,
providing users the ability to derive monthly, quarterly, and annual expenditure estimates. In this regard,
the CE Survey is unique. It is currently the exclusive source of monthly and annual expenditure estimates
as required by the CPI program to construct elementary item-area indexes for the CPI.3
The alternative source of consumer expenditure data in this report, the PCE component of the
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), is produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
These data are based on a census of retail establishments conducted every five years and on a variety of
other sources rather than on a single survey, and they are widely used as a measure of national
consumption expenditures. This paper examines the accuracy and reliability of CPI data by comparing the
official CPI, based on CE expenditure weights, to experimental indexes based on PCE expenditure levels
using a PCE/CE spending factor. Because the PCE data are national data and the CE data are available at
a local area level, the PCE/CE spending factor used in the paper must be applied identically across all
areas and population groups. The comparisons that follow discuss indexes created for the years 20052010.
3

CPI methodology is explained in detail in the BLS Handbook of Methods, available at http://stats.bls.gov/opub/hom.

3

Two alternative indexes were constructed for the analysis. The first of these indexes, called PCEUNADJ, uses PCE expenditure levels with CPI item definitions without adjusting PCE data for coverage
differences (for example the inclusion of expenditures for rural households) or conceptual differences (for
example PCE‟s inclusion of employer-provided health insurance). The second index, called PCE-ADJ,
uses PCE expenditure levels adjusted for CPI item definitions, coverage, and concepts. A PCE alternate
weighting scheme is also useful in providing a check of the two data sources against each other. Both
PCE and CE measure consumer expenditures, but they do so with very different approaches.

3. Data and Hybrid Index Design
Previous work has studied weighting bias, deflator differences, and expenditure ratios between
PCE and CE to stimulate discussion and methodological improvement. This paper builds upon that body
of work by reconstructing CPI aggregation weights using PCE expenditure levels and item definitions to
create hybrid indexes. These hybrid indexes use CPI index methodology and CE expenditure data to
construct weights as the CPI does; however, CPI expenditures in the hybrid index aggregation weights are
multiplied by factors that adjust them to PCE expenditure levels. The following pages discuss the realities
of creating such PCE-calibrated CPIs using current CPI methodology and describe both results and
drawbacks of such work. Designing a PCE-calibrated CPI is especially valuable to the current discussion
of CE design, as it gives us a better idea of whether CE item response is both accurate and representative.4
The similarity of the CPI-U and PCE-calibrated indexes and item relative importances provides insight
into CE accuracy.
To create PCE-calibrated indexes, a concordance between CPI and PCE item classifications is
required. With this concordance, PCE expenditures are approximately matched to CPI item classifications
and used to adjust the CPI expenditure weights to the levels where they would be if the CE reported
absolute expenditures at the same level as PCE. This constitutes the PCE scope index in this study: an

4

For a description of the current CE redesign project, see http://www.bls.gov/cex/geminiproject.htm.

4

index that is calibrated to PCE expenditure levels in the CPI goods and services categories that
correspond to PCE categories. The PCE scope index is referred to as PCE-UNADJ in this paper.
The other created index goes one step further and tries to account for the fact that some PCE
categories match CPI categories in concept but not in expenditure definition; in this index, factors derived
from secondary source data are used to adjust PCE expenditures to match CPI definitions in categories
where the two data sources differ. For example, both PCE and CPI measure eggs and milk expenditures in
the same way, but they measure medical expenditures differently. CPI only uses out-of-pocket consumer
spending for medical goods and services including insurance premiums, whereas PCE includes all
expenditures made both by and on behalf of consumers for medical goods and services, taking into
account additional expenditures such as employer and government contributions. Therefore, this index
includes a factor that adjusts PCE medical expenditures to include out-of-pocket payments only. This
index is referred to as PCE-ADJ for the purposes of this paper. The methodology section below elaborates
on this process.

3.1 Previous Consumer Expenditure Data Comparisons
Numerous authors have undertaken important research into the comparison of PCE and CPI data
on consumer expenditures to examine the quality and accuracy of CE. This previous work delves further
into potential causes of bias and error between PCE and CE. Lebow and Rudd (2003) approached the
issue of weighting bias in the CPI after the 1990s brought about tremendous change in CPI methodology. 5
They constructed a set of PCE weights to compare to CPI weights in the same time period by performing
a variety of adjustments to PCE data and then aggregating the weights. They excluded out-of-scope items,
adjusted medical, housing, and education expenditures to more closely align with CPI values, and they
attempted to adjust for population differences between the two data sources using a factor.
Fixler and Jaditz (2002) compared the CPI and the PCE deflator, the BEA‟s price index computed
from PCE data, to derive the magnitude of index difference attributable in 1992-1997 to each type of
5

See Lebow, David E. and Rudd, Jeremy B. “Measurement Error in the Consumer Price Index: Where Do We Stand?” Journal of
Economic Literature, March 2003, pp. 159–201.

5

major difference: formulaic, conceptual, and implementation-related.6 They focused on what they called
an “accounting” solution that attempted to adjust for each of the major differences and calculate its ratio
of the index discrepancies; Fixler and Jaditz did not try to examine weighting or pricing issues directly.
McCully, Moyer, and Stewart (2007) built on work like that by Fixler and Jaditz to expand the
time period addressed forward to 2007 and calculated formula, scope, weight, and “other” effects, such as
seasonal adjustment, that cause fundamental differences between the deflator and the CPI.7
Garner, Janini, Passero, Paszkiewicz, and Vendemia (2006) have produced a variety of papers in
which they construct and update expenditure category ratios between PCE and CE data.8 Those authors
constructed ratios for both comparable and non-comparable goods and services categories, taking care to
examine each category in their paper and explain the caveats to the comparison and provide some reasons
why ratios differ from one. A ratio of indicated a perfect expenditure match for a given item category
between PCE and CE. Many other authors including Clark (2003), Triplett (1978 and 1981), and others
have also examined the PCE and CPI; the work of the authors mentioned above adds to the debate about
differences between the two subjects.
All of the papers discussed above bring to light a variety of fundamental issues in attempting to
relate PCE and CE or CPI data. Garner, Janini, Passero, Paszkiewicz, and Vendemia (2006) explain data
collection methodology differences between the two. CE obtains its data through a series of diary and
interview surveys of consumers. In contrast, PCE data come from a variety of data sources but are
primarily derived from the quinquennial Economic Census, with data from trade and industry surveys to
supplement in the off years (or non-benchmark years).
Many authors speak of the item scope differences between the two surveys. As McCully, Moyer,
and Stewart (2007) explain, CPI includes out-of-pocket consumer expenditures and PCE includes
purchases both by and on behalf of consumers. Two big conceptual differences discussed by Fixler and
6

See Fixler, Dennis and Jaditz, Ted. “An Examination of the Difference Between the CPI and the PCE Deflator.” BLS Working
Paper 361, June 2002.
7
For more information see McCully, Clinton P., Brian C. Moyer, and Kenneth J. Stewart. “A Reconciliation between the
Consumer Price Index and the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index.” September 2007.
8
See Garner, Thesia I., George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia. “The CE and the PCE: a
comparison.” Monthly Labor Review, September 2006, pp. 20-46.

6

Jaditz (2002) are population and implementation at the component level. In most cases, they argue, CE
data should be a subset of PCE data. PCE includes expenditures by military personnel and third party
payers such as employers that CE does not allow. However, CE and CPI go outside of the bounds of PCE
in some areas. PCE does not include items that it considers coercive, such as vehicle registration and
licensing, which are included in both CE and the Consumer Price Index. PCE also does not include CPI
and CE items such as lawn mowers and garden tractors, household maintenance and repairs, and fishing
and hunting licenses.
There are even differences in definition between items that match each other in the two indexes,
such as apparel and food. In many cases, PCE and CPI categories will be a perfect match, except that the
item classification results in CPI arranging items in a way that is slightly different from how it is done in
PCE. For example, CPI and PCE apparel categories concord perfectly, except that CPI includes wallets,
umbrellas, and purses in apparel under accessories. PCE includes these items not in apparel but in
luggage. Some of this structure knowledge comes from concordance research conducted as a
collaborative effort between the CE, CPI, and PCE offices at the Bureau of Labor Statistics and Bureau of
Economic Analysis (Blair, Cage, Garner, McCully, and Passero 2011).
Garner, Janini, Passero, Paszkiewicz, and Vendemia (2006) note that previous studies have
shown that although underreporting in CE and diminished representativeness or respondent accuracy may
be a cause for the difference between PCE and CE results, the magnitude of PCE revisions indicates that
there are potential estimation issues coming from those data as well. Issues may also arise in the way that
PCE uses a variety of data sources. The general consensus among authors who studied both PCE and CE
data was that one could not be chosen as the whole source of bias and difference between the two, and all
agreed that there was further work to be done.

7

3.2 Index Methodology
There are two experimental indexes in this study: an index that is PCE-calibrated using PCE
valuation of consumption (PCE-UNADJ) and an index that is PCE-calibrated using CPI valuation of
consumption (PCE-ADJ). PCE-UNADJ is created in the following manner:
1. A CPI entry level item9 (ELI) to PCE series code10 concordance is created with input from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics and the Bureau of Economic Analysis. This is because the CPI uses a proprietary
classification system that does not align perfectly with the PCE system: there are many goods and
services that are classified in general categories in one system and in disaggregated categories in the
other system. There are also goods and services that have different definitions between PCE and CPI
and no clear match between their PCE and CPI classification codes. In the concordance, ELIs are
assigned to the lowest-level matching PCE series code publicly available. Although this is sometimes
a perfect match, sometimes multiple ELIs matched to one broad PCE code, and sometimes an ELI
had to be split between multiple PCE codes in the concordance. Using this concordance, all ELIs are
broken down into one of three categories: out of PCE scope, one PCE series code per ELI, and
multiple PCE series codes per ELI. One example of an ELI that falls outside the scope of PCE is
TF011:

Table 1: Out-of-Scope ELI Example
ELI

ELI Description

PCE Series
Code

PCE Description

Allocation
Ratio

TF011

STATE VEHICLE REGISTRATION
AND DRIVER'S LICENSE

N/A

N/A

0.00

CPI apparel demonstrates an example of the other two types of ELIs, ELIs that match to exactly one
PCE series code and ELIs that must be split between multiple PCE series codes:

9

More information on ELIs can be found in BLS Handbook of Methods Chapter 17 (http://stats.bls.gov/opub/hom): “Within
each item stratum, one or more substrata, called entry-level items (ELIs), are defined. There are a total of 305 ELIs, which are the
ultimate sampling units for items as selected by the BLS national office. They represent the level of item definition from which
data collectors begin item sampling within each sample outlet.”
10
PCE series code names and definitions can be found in National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) Underlying Detail
Table 2.4.5U. Personal Consumption Expenditures by Type of Product. Further information about the PCE series structure is
available in the NIPA Handbook at http://www.bea.gov/national/pdf/NIPAchapters1-9.pdf.

8

Table 2: In-scope ELI Examples
ELI

ELI Description

PCE Series
Code

AA021

MEN'S UNDERWEAR,
HOSIERY AND NIGHTWEAR

DMBCRC

AA022

MEN'S ACCESSORIES

DMBCRC

AA022

MEN'S ACCESSORIES

DLUGRC

PCE Description
Men's and boys'
clothing
Men's and boys'
clothing
Luggage and similar
personal items

Allocation
Ratio
1.00
0.93
0.07

The ELI AA021 maps into only one PCE series code, DMBCRC. AA022, however, maps mostly into
DMBCRC but also maps in part to DLUGRC. This is because CPI includes wallets and umbrellas in
apparel, whereas PCE includes those items in luggage.11
2. Allocation ratios are assigned to each ELI-PCE code combination so that all ratios for an ELI
summed to one.12 All ELIs that matched perfectly to one PCE code, regardless of the number of ELIs
per PCE code, receive a value of „1‟ as in the example above for ELI AA021. ELIs that are not
included in the scope of PCE are given a value of „0‟, as shown above in the TF011 example.13 All
other ELIs are divided into their component PCE series codes using underlying CE expenditure data
at the observation level. For most ELIs, this means using data at the CE Diary survey level. For the
few split ELIs that are only available in the interview portion of CE, an even split ratio is provided for
all PCE codes that mapped to the ELI. This is the case in two education ELIs and one other goods and
services ELI. In the apparel example above, a scan of all 2003-2008 AA022 Diary data shows that 7%
of all AA022 expenditures were wallets and umbrellas, whereas 93% of AA022 consists of other
accessories. Therefore, the AA022 allocation ratios are 0.93 for DMBCRC and 0.07 for DLUGRC.

11

The ELI-to-PCE-series-code concordance can be viewed on the CPI website at http://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpipceconcd.pdf.
If the ELI did not completely map to PCE, i.e., part but not the ELI but not the entire ELI was out of PCE scope, then the ratios
for that ELI would sum to the percentage of ELI expenditures that were within scope for both CE and PCE. For example, the
ratios for EE031, “Other Information Services”, sum to approximately .98 because a small web services component of that ELI
does not map to PCE at all.
13
In some cases, it may be possible to find expenditure data in the National Income and Product Accounts that corresponds to
these goods and services. However, this study makes no attempt to supplement PCE expenditure data with secondary source data
in such a manner to account for item categories included in the CPI but excluded from PCE. A similar procedure could be
implemented in a later version of this paper.
12

9

3. The ratios are multiplied by CE expenditure data and then summed by PCE code assignment to create
a set of total CPI expenditures by PCE code for each year in the period.
4. Using NIPA underlying table 2.4.5U. Personal Consumption Expenditures by Type of Product and
the CPI expenditure data from Step #3, PCE/CPI factors are created for each PCE series code. For
example, in a PCE category where PCE reported $200 of expenditures and CE reported $100 of
expenditures, the PCE/CPI factor would be two.
5. The factor is applied to expenditure data and then applied to the CE micro-level data to recalibrate
CPI aggregation weights to PCE values for the 2003-2008 period. For example, an ELI that matched
one-to-one in definition with a PCE series code would have a recalibration factor of one. If PCE
reported $200 in expenditures for that PCE code and CPI reported $100 in expenditures for that PCE
code, then the factor would be two as in Step #4. Because of the perfect definition match, the PCE
calibration for this ELI would simply apply a factor of two to the micro-level data.
6. The adjustments in Step #5 are made for each ELI at the reported CPI expense level. The resulting
adjusted costs are then weighted and summed to the elementary CPI item-area category level,
annualized for the 2003-2004, 2005-2006, and 2007-2008 expenditure reference periods, and
converted into aggregation weights.
7. The new aggregation weights are used to create indexes for 2005-2010 using standard CPI-U
methodology.
Because two market basket structure changes have taken place in the CPI over the past few years, the
aggregation weights are adjusted depending on the market basket structure used in that year. The final
result of this work is a set of annualized biennial expenditure weights by CPI item-area category that are
used to create PCE-UNADJ using CPI index aggregation methods. That is, the indexes presented here all
employ the same formula and biennial weight update process used in the CPI-U, whereas the PCE
indexes published by the BEA use quarterly weights and a Fisher Ideal index formula.

10

An important difference between the CE and PCE weights is that the former are calculated and
implemented in the CPI at the item-area level. For example, the CPI employs “apple” category weights
for 38 geographic areas and matches them to 38 corresponding area-level basic price indexes. In contrast,
PCE weights and indexes exist only at the national level. This paper uses elementary item-area prices and
adjusted weights. Due to data availability, we assume that the PCE/CPI expenditure ratio is uniform
across US areas and create the calibration factors and PCE-ADJ adjustment factors at a national level to
apply them to the local 38-area CPI data.
To create PCE-ADJ, the original recalibration factors are modified by secondary source data to
create a new set of factors that not only reflect differences in item definition, but also reflect differences
in expenditure definition. The CPI apparel example above is a difference in item definition: CPI wallets
and umbrellas are listed in clothing accessories, whereas PCE wallets and umbrellas are included in
luggage; the ratios for both PCE-UNADJ and PCE-ADJ are created so that the wallet and umbrella value
from CPI apparel is recalibrated by PCE luggage expenditures. An expenditure definition difference can
be seen in CPI education: CPI higher education tuition reflects only out-of-pocket payments, whereas
PCE higher education tuition reflects all payments – out-of-pocket and third party; the expenditure factor
must be adjusted by a constant that represents the average US out-of pocket spending on college tuition as
a percentage of total US spending on college tuition. After this proportion adjustment is made, the process
aligns perfectly with the process used to create PCE-UNADJ in Steps #4-7 above.
In this project, a variety of adjustments are made to differentiate PCE-ADJ from PCE-UNADJ, or
to adjust PCE categories with different expenditure definitions to fit CPI expenditure definitions. In many
cases, this adjustment removes third party payments from PCE expenditure data. Table 3 below contains
the adjustments and affected ELIs.
For PCE-ADJ, student tuition and board expenditures from PCE-UNADJ are adjusted to exclude
third party payments such as grants using National Center for Education Statistics data on total and out-

11

of-pocket costs of college for American students.14 Medical expenditures that typically include some
insurance payment component are adjusted to exclude third-party payments made by employers,
government, and others using data from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality‟s Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (2008).15 Utilities, rent, homeowners‟ insurance, financial services fees, vehicle
insurance, and vehicle maintenance and repair are adjusted using the CE-PCE ratios in Garner, Janini,
Passero, Paszkiewicz, and Vendemia (2006) to fit PCE levels.

Table 3: PCE-ADJ Adjustments by ELI
ELI(s)
All “EB” ELIs
FV051
GD051
HA011
HD011
HF011
HF021
HG011

CPI Description
Tuition, other school fees, and
childcare
Board, catered events, and other food
away from home
Checking accounts and other bank
services
Rent of primary residence
Tenants' and household insurance
Electricity
Utility (piped) gas service
Residential water and sewerage
service

PCE
Code(s)

PCE
Description

Adjustment
Factor

All

All

0.59

DMSLRC

Meals at schools

0.59

NCES

0.08

GJPPV

All
All
All
All

Financial service
charges and fees
All
All
All
All

All

DFEERC

All

0.69

GJPPV

All

0.17

AHRQ

All

MA090 and
MG090

Unsampled rent or repair of medical
equipment

DOMORC

All “MC” ELIs
All “MD” ELIs
except MD031
All “ME” ELIs
MB023 and
MG013

Professional medical services

All

All other
professional
medical services
All

Hospital and related services

All

Health Insurance
Supportive and Convalescent Medical
Equipment
Motor Vehicle Maintenance and
Repair
Motor Vehicle Insurance

14

17

GJPPV
GJPPV
GJPPV
GJPPV

Prescription drugs

TE011

16

NCES

0.98
8.00
1.02
0.86

MA011 and
MF011

All “TD” ELIs

Data
Source

18

0.17

AHRQ

0.17

AHRQ

All

0.17

AHRQ

All

All

0.17

AHRQ

All

All

0.17

AHRQ

All

All

0.67

GJPPV

All

All

2.11

GJPPV

The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) data used is derived from Tables 1 and 2 in “What Is the Price of
College? Total, Net, and Out-of-Pocket Prices in 2007-2008.” (Wei, 2010)
15
MEPS data comes from “Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Table 1: Total Health Services-Median and Mean Expenses per
Person With Expense and Distribution of Expenses by Source of Payment: United States, 2008.”
16
NCES refers to the National Center for Education Statistics publication “What Is the Price of College? Total, Net, and Out-ofPocket Prices in 2007-2008.” (Wei, 2010)
17
GJPPV refers to Garner, Janini, Passero, Paszkiewicz, and Vendemia (2006).
18
AHRQ refers to the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality‟s Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (2008).

12

The homeowners‟ insurance ratio of 8 is an approximation from the text of the paper rather than
an official ratio, and it is used because homeowners‟ insurance is included in a large-scope ratio of “other
household operations” that has a value closer to 1.03. The ratios from Garner, Janini, Passero,
Paszkiewicz, and Vendemia (2006) are not ideal for such an index because they include other factors
beyond expenditure difference such as item under- or over-reporting.19 However, in these cases, quality
national data that separated item costs by the expenditure type needed are unavailable.

4. Results
4.1 Item Representation
In the 2007-2008 annualized weights (which correspond to the 2010 index values), the mean item
stratum PCE-UNADJ-to-CPI-U expenditure ratio is 1.65 – this is a simplified approximation of the ratio
that was applied to CE data in Step #3 to create weights for PCE-UNADJ and PCE-ADJ. The mean item
stratum PCE-ADJ-to-CPI-U expenditure ratio for the same time period is 1.51. It aligns well with the
final expenditure totals: at $9.3 trillion, the 2010 final weighted PCE-UNADJ expenditure total was
slightly less than twice the CPI-U expenditure total of approximately $5.1 trillion. In contrast, the 2010
final weighted PCE-ADJ expenditure total of $7.5 trillion was 1.46 times the CPI-U total – these
expenditure totals correspond with the 2007-2008 annualized weights.

Table 4: Top 5 CPI-U/PCE-ADJ Expenditure Ratio Maximums
ITEM
SEEB03
SEMC03
SEMC02
SEHE02

SEHB02

ITEM
DESCRIPTION
Child care and
nursery school
Eyeglasses and
eye care
Dental services
Other household
fuels
Other lodging
away from home
including hotels
and motels

2005
RATIO

ITEM

4.155

SEEB03

2.529

SEMC03

2.006

SEHE02

1.806

1.763

ITEM
DESCRIPTION

2007
RATIO

ITEM

4.556

SEEB03

2.820

SEMC03

Other household
fuels

2.450

SEHE02

SEMC02

Dental services

2.112

SEMC02

Dental services

1.986

SEHB02

Other lodging
away from home
including hotels
and motels

1.623

SEME03

Health
Maintenance
Plans

1.509

Child care and
nursery school
Eyeglasses and
eye care

19

ITEM
DESCRIPTION
Child care and
nursery school
Eyeglasses and
eye care
Other
household
fuels

2009
RATIO
4.182
2.708
2.640

The goal of this paper is to produce broad-level PCE/CE ratios to shed a critical light on how the two have changed over the
years. These ratios may differ from one for a variety of reasons other than differences in the way category consumer expenditures
are measured.

13

Tables 4 and 5 show more detail for the items with the highest and lowest CPI-U/PCE-ADJ ratios
– this is the inverse of the PCE-ADJ-to-CPI-U ratio discussed previously. These cases in which the
adjusted PCE expenditure value differs most from the CPI value can be indicative of item representation
issues or of areas where the PCE-ADJ secondary source adjustments could be more finely tuned. “Child
Care and Nursery School”, as seen leading Table 4, is an excellent example of this. Babysitting, a personto-person component of child care, frequently involves payments between individuals and is therefore
more likely to be represented in the CPI. For the purposes of this paper, child care in one‟s home has been
removed from the ratio allocations to account for this definition difference, because that is the lowest
accurate level at which the “Child Care and Nursery School” data can be disaggregated to remove
babysitting. However, not all in-home child care is considered to be babysitting, which may be the cause
behind the high ratio seen below.

Table 5: Bottom 5 CPI-U/PCE-ADJ Expenditure Ratio Minimums
ITEM

ITEM
DESCRIPTION

2005
RATIO

ITEM

SEGD01

Legal services

0.136

SEFW02

0.133

SEEE02

0.132

SEMD03

SEEE02
SEEB04

Computer software
and accessories
Technical and
business school
tuition and fees

ITEM
DESCRIPTION

2007
RATIO

ITEM

0.136

SEEE02

0.117

SEFW02

Care of invalids and
elderly at home

0.112

SEHH01

Distilled spirits at
home
Computer software
and accessories

SERA03

Other video
equipment

0.128

SERA03

Other video
equipment

0.099

SEEB04

SEHH01

Floor coverings

0.100

SEHH01

Floor coverings

0.090

SERA03

ITEM
DESCRIPTION
Computer software
and accessories
Distilled spirits at
home
Floor coverings
Technical and
business school
tuition and fees
Other video
equipment

2009
RATIO
0.131
0.131
0.117

0.087
0.087

Table 5 lists item strata with the lowest CPI-U/PCE-ADJ expenditure ratio– this is equivalent to
the highest PCE-ADJ/CPI-U expenditure ratio. Item strata that consistently have much higher PCE-ADJ
expenditure levels than CPI-U expenditure levels include “Floor Coverings”, “Other Video Equipment”,
and “Technical and business school tuition and fees”. In Table 4, there are multiple notable medical item
strata, which is indicative of the possibility that the broadly applied medical expenditure adjustment used
in PCE-ADJ may not be a perfect fit for all medical expense categories.
Figures 1 and 2 show scatterplots of the CPI-U and PCE-ADJ expenditure values for each item
stratum, with rent and a few other large expenditures such as tuition and vehicles excluded in Figure 2 so
14

that all other item trends may be more easily examined. From these scatterplots, it is easy to see that the
expenditure levels used to calculate the PCE-ADJ and CPI-U are similar, because their ratio lies along the
45-degree line. In other words, after secondary source adjustment to CPI definitions, these items have
roughly the same absolute expenditure value in both CE and PCE.

In both figures, a 1:1 ratio line illustrates item stratum expenditure level trends; items below the
line have a higher PCE-ADJ expenditure level than CPI-U expenditure level, while items above the line
have a higher CPI-U expenditure level than PCE-ADJ expenditure level. A majority of the 211 item strata

15

fall below the line, which indicates, as expected due to the PCE weight adjustments, that overall
expenditure levels for most items are higher in the PCE-calibrated CPI-U than in the published CPI-U.

Table 6 shows item category relative importances for the three indexes using December 2005
weights. As expected, there are large differences in medical relative importances between PCE-UNADJ
and PCE-ADJ and small differences in these relative importances between the CPI and PCE-ADJ. Shelter
relative importances are very different between both PCE indexes and the CPI-U not because of dramatic
differences between the two data sources in housing expenditure levels, but rather because of total
expenditure differences in other categories (such as medical care). In other words, although the budget
share of housing is smaller using PCE data than CE data, both PCE and CE agree on how much is spent
16

total on shelter – the share itself changes because other goods and services increase their proportions of
total spending in the PCE indexes.

Table 6: December 2005 Item Relative Importances
CONSUMPTION CATEGORY
FOOD AND BEVERAGES
Food at home
Food away from home
Alcoholic beverages
HOUSING
Rent
Owner's equivalent rent
Other housing
APPAREL
MEDICAL CARE
TRANSPORTATION
Motor vehicles
Gasoline
Other transportation
EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION
RECREATION
TOBACCO
OTHER GOODS AND SERVICES

CPI-U
15.1%
8.0%
6.0%
1.1%
42.4%
5.8%
23.4%
13.1%
3.8%
6.2%
17.4%
7.9%
4.2%
5.4%
6.0%
5.6%
0.7%
2.8%
100.0%

PCE-Calibrated Indexes

PCE-UNADJ
13.8%
7.1%
4.9%
1.8%
26.5%
3.4%
12.9%
10.2%
4.5%
22.3%
13.9%
5.3%
3.4%
5.2%
5.4%
6.8%
1.0%
5.8%
100.0%

PCE-ADJ
17.0%
8.7%
6.0%
2.3%
32.9%
4.1%
15.9%
12.9%
5.5%
5.0%
17.3%
6.5%
4.3%
6.5%
6.7%
8.4%
1.2%
6.0%
100.0%

It is also important to note that some items show larger differences between the CPI-U and PCEADJ, which could be indicative of an item representation issue in CE. Four categories that are commonly
cited as being underrepresented in CE due to respondent behavior are apparel, other goods, tobacco, and
alcohol. The evidence from this study supports the expectation that those four categories might have
lower CE representation than PCE representation. Tobacco and alcohol, which are believed to be
underreported because of their sensitive nature, also have a significantly smaller relative importance in
the CPI-U than in PCE-ADJ index. Apparel and other goods may be underreported in CE because of
proxy reporting: if only one member reports expenditures for the entire household, they may be more
aware of family food, housing, and education purchases than of the clothing and other personal goods

17

purchases made by all household members.20 Both of those categories also have significantly higher
relative importance values in both PCE-calibrated indexes than they do in the CPI-U.
PCE-UNADJ relative importances are slightly different. Because medical care is measured so
differently between the two sources (CE and PCE) and therefore carries a large adjustment in this study,
medical care makes up almost a quarter of PCE-UNADJ, but makes up only five percent of the CPI-U
and PCE-ADJ. In accordance with the other adjustments made to create PCE-ADJ, the PCE-UNADJ
transportation and housing categories have lower relative importances than the corresponding CPI-U and
PCE-ADJ categories, while PCE-UNADJ education is a bit higher. Slight variations exist in some of the
other item categories such as recreation and other goods. This merits further investigation; it is possible
that there could be a significant difference in item representation in one of those categories as well.
4.2 Index Levels and Change
When the PCE-calibrated indexes and the CPI-U are compared between 2005 and 2010, it is clear
how closely the published CPI-U and PCE-ADJ track each other. As shown in Figure 1 above, the CPI-U
tends to be slightly higher than PCE-ADJ. However, overall the PCE-ADJ 5-year annualized growth rate
is 0.071% lower than the CPI-U 5-year annualized growth rate. In contrast, the PCE-UNADJ 5-year
annualized growth rate is 0.338% higher than the CPI-U 5-year annualized growth rate.
Lebow and Rudd (2003), constructing an index similar to PCE-ADJ, concluded that the CPI has
an upward bias of approximately 0.1 percent per year due to inaccurate weights. Their conclusion was
based on comparison of indexes using CE and PCE weights over the 1987-2001 period, with those
weights computed at the 24-item level. This paper, using a later time period and a more detailed weight
and index decomposition, shows a difference of 0.071 percent, which is of the same magnitude as Lebow
and Rudd‟s results but slightly lower.
Figure 3 demonstrates the shape and direction of the indexes. As previously noted, both indexes
containing the CPI definitions (CPI-U and PCE-ADJ) exhibit similar rates of change and rise more slowly
20

Garner, Thesia I., George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia provide an in-depth discussion of
underreporting in the context of PCE/CE ratios in their 2006 paper.

18

than the index that uses PCE expenditure valuation (PCE-UNADJ). The fact that the CPI-U and PCEADJ indexes exhibit similar rates of change is logical because their expenditure definitions match in two
large categories: medical expenses and education.

Figure 3 also shows that the PCE-UNADJ index has risen more quickly than the CPI-U and PCEADJ indexes. The PCE-UNADJ index series diverges from the CPI-U and PCE-ADJ index series after
October 2008 due to the larger weight given to medical care and education items. From October 2008 to
the end of the study period, the All-Items CPI-U index increased 1.20%, while the medical care and
education CPI-U indexes increased 7.16% and 8.93% respectively. Combined, these categories contribute
to a larger rate of inflation for the PCE-UNADJ series compared to the CPI-U and PCE-ADJ series.
Most items in the CPI-U and PCE-ADJ indexes have similar relative importances between the
two indexes, with one notable exception. Shelter, the category that has a relative importance almost 10
percentage points higher in the CPI-U than in the PCE-ADJ, might be expected to be the reason that the

19

PCE-ADJ diverges from the CPI-U for most of the time between 2005 and 2010.21 The shelter CPI-U
index increased 0.46% from October 2008 through December 2010 – a price change lower than the AllItems index change. Between October 2008 and December 2010, the average monthly shelter-only CPI-U
index change differed from the average monthly CPI-U index change for all items by a mere 0.010%. A
look at 1998-2010 CPI-U data reveals that the two average monthly CPI-U index change values differed
by only 0.015% (with the All-Items index increasing slightly more rapidly than the shelter-only index)
between the two indexes. Despite the difference in weights, shelter price change is more similar to the rest
of the CPI than education and medical services, and so it has a lower impact on the experimental index
results than the latter two items.

Figure 4 shows the 12-month index change values for each of the three indexes. While 2006-2010
average 12-month index change for the CPI-U is approximately 2.013%, that value is 0.003% lower for
21

Section 4.1 includes a discussion of why shelter relative importances differ between PCE-ADJ and CPI-U.
20

PCE-ADJ and 0.441% higher for the PCE-UNADJ index. However, the difference between CPI-U and
PCE-ADJ 12-month index change ranges from 0.371 to -0.373 over the 2006-2010 period.

4.3 Caveats
As mentioned above, there are a variety of ways in which it is nearly impossible to create a
perfect PCE-calibrated CPI due to differences in the nature of the data. Although secondary source data
make the ratio estimates for education and medical expenses more useful, they are applied broadly in the
creation of PCE-ADJ rather than disaggregated down to the item level. It is unlikely that the ratio of
medical expenditures paid out-of-pocket by consumers will be identical for the purchase medical
specialist services and prescription drugs or primary care doctor visits. It is also possible that the
proportions of education expenditures for public and private universities are different between the CPI
and the NCES survey from which the tuition ratio is derived. There may ratios other than those created by
Garner, Janini, Passero, Paszkiewicz, and Vendemia (2006) in which the non-consumer portion of the
ratio can be removed in aggregation, although they are difficult to find in secondary sources.
In addition, the populations covered by the aggregate CPI-U and PCE data are very different.
CPI-U data cover urban, non-military, non-institutional households, whereas PCE data cover domestic
consumers including third parties that make purchases on behalf of consumers. PCE does not include
domestic consumers who have been and will be in the country for less than one year.
Across all time periods, the total expenditure values for items HA01 and HC01 – the two major
CPI shelter categories – are nearly identical for the CPI-U and its PCE-calibrated counterparts. As shown
in Figure 1 above, Owners‟ Equivalent Rent falls extremely close to the CPI-U/PCE-ADJ=1 line in 2005.
However, the relative importance of housing in the CPI-U is higher than the relative importance of
housing in both PCE-UNADJ and PCE-ADJ because CE expenditure levels in housing more closely
match PCE expenditure levels than expenditure levels in other item categories do; in many item
categories outside of housing, CE expenditure levels are lower than PCE expenditure levels.

21

Other small discrepancies may arise in specifics of the concordance and in the scope of the two
consumption datasets; PCE and CPI both contain items that are out-of-scope in the other consumption
data. To produce the two indexes above, four ELIs from the three market basket structures used had to be
removed altogether because they are considered out-of-scope in PCE and therefore have no expenditure
value. Vehicle registration and license fees are seen as coercive and not included in PCE, while gardening
and lawn services and inside home maintenance and repair are not included in PCE because they are
considered intermediate expenditures of homeowners. Some additional portions of CPI items, such as
hunting and fishing licenses, are excluded from PCE. In such cases, the portion of the ELI that is not used
in PCE was removed, causing these ELI proportions to sum to less than one. There is also the potential
for item definition differences that were not addressed in the concordance used for this study. This is
because CE uses survey data, and item definition interpretations can vary from respondent to respondent.
For example, PCE disaggregates the CPI “souvenirs” UCC out to categories that describe the individual
components. Guidebooks and programs are included in books, postcards are included in stationery, and tshirts are a part of apparel. However, determining this disaggregation in the CPI can be nearly impossible
because some respondents simply write “$20 souvenirs” rather than “$15 t-shirt, $5 postcards” in the
diary portion of the survey.
Finally, an unsolved methodological debate arose during this project that involves the way in
which PCE-CPI expenditure ratios were calculated for ELIs that had to be split between PCE codes. Data
are PCE-calibrated by fitting CPI expenditures into PCE series categories, but the data must then be
mapped back into CPI items (one level above ELIs) to construct expenditure weights as CE data are in
CPI production. For the purposes of this paper, data are mapped into the item categories corresponding to
the ELIs from which their CPI expenditures originally came. However, a future improvement to this
methodology would be to identify the CPI items that best match where the PCE expenditures map so that
CPI price quotes are functionally “moved” into the categories that best fit the PCE calibration rather than
staying in their original item categories.

22

5. Future Research
PCE and CE data have been compared for years at the Bureau of Labor Statistics and in the
broader federal community.22 There is still much work to do, however. If anything, this paper illustrates
the need for further analysis in this area. The PCE-calibrated price indexes constructed here explore only
a few of the many possibilities that exist in bringing current CPI data closer to the data used in PCE.
Although some of these possibilities seem infeasible currently, there is always the hope that more light
will be shed on them in future efforts.
One area in which methodological improvements could be made is in population matching. CE
and CPI populations differ from the PCE population, which is a problem rooted in the way the data are
collected. PCE data come primarily from the production side as part of the National Income and Product
Accounts and are typically the result of equations that remove all non-consumer use allocations from the
total purchase value of a good or service to create a personal consumption value. CE (and therefore CPI)
data are collected directly from the consumer, a practice that allows for more population limiting
specificity. These data are limited to non-military, non-institutionalized households and, in the case of the
CPI-U, can be further limited to exclude consumption by rural households. Finding a method by which to
more closely match the CPI population to the PCE population would allow for more accurate use of PCE
weights in an alternate CPI.
Further study into the historical differences between the CPI-U and an index similar to PCE-ADJ
would also be very useful. Being able to see ten or more years of comparative data instead of five would
help researchers better understand the differences and how they have changed with time and item
structure updates in both the CPI and PCE. CPI has undergone two item structure changes in the past few
years, and PCE has moved from one benchmark year period to the next. These changes could potentially
have a large effect on the data but also help us more easily identify bias and data inaccuracies as they
change from structure to structure or period to period.

22

See Lebow and Rudd (2003) or Fixler and Jaditz (2002) for examples of this.

23

A larger-scale update to the methodology used in this paper lies in the items themselves.
Although this concording exercise focuses on the weight side of the Consumer Price Index, it would be
beneficial to create a hybrid CPI that matches PCE definitions for both weighting and pricing. Similarly, a
set of hybrid indexes created using concorded UCCs rather than concorded ELIs could create a more
accurate comparison by fine-tuning the good- and service-level comparisons. UCC structure can also
change, and the methodology used here only focused on item and ELI structure changes when
determining allocation ratios.
Finally, there are a few ways in which data from the Consumer Price Index can be used to create
a more accurate representation of a PCE-calibrated index. An index could be constructed by modifying
the level of aggregation in the CPI. A CPI aggregated to the major group (apparel, education and
communication, food, other goods, housing, medical, recreation, transportation) level would remove
many definitional discrepancies between PCE and CPI, allowing us to focus on the largest differences.
Going in the opposite direction, more detailed concording research could be done to break data down for
classification at the individual observation level, causing each data point in the CPI or PCE data to be
intentionally mapped to its correct ELI or PCE series code. This would mean the creation of a “true”
PCE-UNADJ or PCE-ADJ but would also involve mapping both NIPA and CPI data to underlying
categories.

6. Conclusion
This paper contrasts current BLS Consumer Price Index values with the values derived from
PCE-calibrated Consumer Price Indexes adjusted to PCE and CPI good and service definitions.
Ultimately, the results indicate that adjusting PCE weights to CPI expenditure definitions yields an index
(PCE-ADJ) that closely tracks the CPI-U. However, there are also strong differences between the two
indexes, particularly once results are disaggregated to the item level. We see differences in item relative
importance in the apparel, alcohol, and tobacco categories that may be indicative of an item

24

representativeness issue in those categories in the CE survey. Overall, the PCE-UNADJ annualized
growth rate over five years is 0.338% higher than that of the CPI-U, while the PCE-ADJ annualized
growth rate over five years is 0.071% lower than that of the CPI-U.
As shown above, there is still a lot of ground to cover in order for this work to accurately
represent the two indexes. Some aspects may be more difficult to correct in future work, such as
adjustments for population and scope differences between PCE and CPI, while others may provide an
excellent opportunity for further research, such as more detailed item concording using further
disaggregated data from both the BLS and the BEA. The closer these indexes come to accurately
representing the real CPI and a real PCE-valued CPI, the more useful they are in examining the
representativeness of CE survey data. Finding that PCE and CE have similar item-level outcomes may be
useful in future survey design to reduce respondent burden or allow for detailed data quality checks.
Large differences would indicate that it may be time to reexamine the motivations and methodology in the
two consumer expenditure datasets. Although, when using this index data, we cannot show whether
match issues are due to CE bias or PCE methods, the above results and future work will help us to better
determine how to continue refining our data collection and aggregation methods.

7. References
Agency for Healthcare and Research Quality, “Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Table 1: Total Health
Services-Median and Mean Expenses per Person With Expense and Distribution of Expenses by
Source of Payment: United States, 2008.” Accessed online at http://www.meps.ahrq.gov in 2011.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. “Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts.”
Bureau of Economic Analysis, October 2009. Accessed online at http://www.bea.gov/methodologies in
2011.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. “National Economic Accounts Table 2.4.5U. Personal Consumption
Expenditures by Type of Product.” Accessed online at http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb in 2011.

25

Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Handbook of Methods." Accessed online at http://stats.bls.gov/opub/hom in 2011.
Clark, Todd E. (2003) “A Comparison of the CPI and the PCE Price Index.” Economic Review, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Third Quarter 1999, pp. 15-29.
Emails and concordance discussions with Clinton McCully (BEA), William Passero (BLS), Thesia Garner
(BLS), and Rob Cage (BLS), 2011.
Fixler, Dennis and Jaditz, Ted. “An Examination of the Difference Between the CPI and the PCE Deflator.”
BLS Working Paper 361, June 2002.
Garner, Thesia I., George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia. “The CE and the
PCE: a comparison.” Monthly Labor Review, September 2006, pp. 20-46.
Gemini Project. Gemini Project Materials. Accessed online at http://www.bls.gov/cex/geminimaterials.htm in 2011.
Lebow, David E. and Rudd, Jeremy B. “Measurement Error in the Consumer Price Index: Where Do We
Stand?” Journal of Economic Literature, March 2003, pp. 159–201.
McCully, Clinton P., Brian C. Moyer, and Kenneth J. Stewart. “A Reconciliation between the Consumer Price
Index and the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index.” September 2007.
Triplett, Jack E. “Reconciliation of Quarterly Changes in Measures of Prices Paid by Consumers.” Survey of
Current Business, March 1978, pp. 6-9, 24.
Triplett, Jack E. “Reconciling the CPI and PCE Deflator.” Monthly Labor Review, September 1981, pp. 3-15.
Wei, Christina Chang. “What Is the Price of College? Total, Net, and Out-of-Pocket Prices in 2007-2008.”
Stats in Brief, National Center for Education Statistics – Institute of Education Sciences, December
2010.

26

