NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN SIMPLE INFORMATIONAL NUDGES INCREASE EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION
IN A 401(K) PLAN?
Robert L. Clark
Jennifer A. Maki
Melinda Sandler Morrill
Working Paper 19591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19591

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

This article is forthcoming in the Southern Economic Journal, and this preprint version appears with
the permission of the Southern Economic Association. Copies of the computer programs used to generate
the results presented in this article can be made available upon request, but the data used are proprietary.
The authors would like to acknowledge support from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA)
funded as part of the Financial Literacy Research Consortium. The authors would like to thank Annamaria
Lusardi, Olivia Mitchell, Sarah Holden, and Lina Walker, as well as participants at the 2010 Financial
Literacy Consortium meetings, the George Washington University and Federal Reserve Board Financial
Literacy Seminar Series, the 2012 Society for Labor Economists annual meeting, and the 2012 APPAM
annual meeting for useful comments. The authors also thank Steve Reeder for his participation in
this research project, for making the data available to us, for facilitating the sending of the surveys
and flyers, and for his ideas and suggestions throughout the research project. The opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA,
National Bureau of Economic Research, any agency of the Federal Government, any other institution
with which the authors are affiliated, or the employer with which we partnered.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Robert L. Clark, Jennifer A. Maki, and Melinda Sandler Morrill. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Simple Informational Nudges Increase Employee Participation in a 401(k) Plan?
Robert L. Clark, Jennifer A. Maki, and Melinda Sandler Morrill
NBER Working Paper No. 19591
October 2013
JEL No. J26,J32
ABSTRACT
We report results from a field experiment in which a randomized subset of newly hired workers at
a large financial institution received a flyer containing information about the employer’s 401(k) plan
and the value of contributions compounding over a career. Younger workers who received the flyer
were significantly more likely to begin contributing to the plan relative to their peers in the control
group. Many workers do not participate in their employers’ supplemental retirement savings programs,
even though these programs offer substantial tax advantages and immediate returns due to matching
contributions. From a survey of new hires we find that many workers choose not to contribute to the
plan because they have other financial priorities. However, some non-participants lack the financial
literacy to appreciate the benefit. These findings indicate that simple informational interventions can
nudge workers to participate in retirement saving plans and enhance individual well-being and retirement
income security.

Robert L. Clark
Poole College of Management
Box 7229
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
and NBER
robert_clark@ncsu.edu
Jennifer A. Maki
Center for Healthcare Economics & Policy
FTI Consulting
1101 K Street
NW Suite B100
Washington, DC 20005
jamaki@ncsu.edu

Melinda Sandler Morrill
Department of Economics
North Carolina State University
Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu

3

1. Introduction
The importance of saving for retirement is widely acknowledged, yet employers often
find workers fail to enroll in the optional retirement saving plans they offer. If employees
choose not to participate in their employer’s 401(k) plan because they have other financial
priorities or for other reasons perceive that greater retirement saving is not in their own best
interest at the present time, it may be difficult to increase participation and increasing retirement
saving might actually lower lifetime utility for some employees. However, if the relatively low
rate of participation for employees is attributable to inertia or lack of knowledge, a low cost
intervention may be an effective tool to increase participation and improve employee well-being.
To explore these issues empirically, we partnered with a large financial institution, hereafter
referred to as LFI.
Our discussion begins with background information on employer-provided retirement
savings plans and employees’ choice of whether to participate. We then describe LFI, its
retirement benefits, and the characteristics of its employees. Using detailed administrative data,
we describe the patterns of participation in the company’s 401(k) plan. To better understand the
choices that workers are making, we investigate reasons for non-participation through a unique
survey of all newly hired workers at LFI over a six month period. Respondents report a variety
of reasons for non- and limited participation in the 401(k) plan, including paying off credit card
debt and not having enough room in one’s budget to save money for retirement. Using a set of
financial knowledge questions, we find many survey respondents that are not currently
participating in the 401(k) plan are unaware of the full range of benefits associated with saving
through a tax qualified retirement saving plan. The survey indicates an important role for

4

financial literacy and knowledge regarding retirement savings in the decision to contribute to
such plans.
For our main analysis, we report results from a field experiment. We designed a low-cost
intervention whereby LFI distributed a flyer to a randomly selected subset of 401(k) plan nonparticipants who were hired in 2008 through 2010. The flyers contained a message encouraging
employees to take advantage of the employer match using the common catchphrase, “Don’t
Leave Money on the Table.” In addition, the flyers highlighted the long term value of small but
continuous contributions to the savings plan that were matched by the employer. We find young
employees who received the nudge had a statistically significantly larger increase in participation
rates compared to workers of a similar age that did not receive the flyer. However, for workers
over age 45, the percent initiating participation among the treatment group was statistically
significantly lower than the control. These findings highlight the potential effectiveness of
informational “nudges” for non-participants. They also suggest that the materials employers
distribute to newly hired workers should be tailored to the particular needs and concerns of
specific groups.
2. Influencing Employees’ Choices to Participate in a 401(k) Plan
Although many large corporations still provide their employees with defined benefit
pension plans, these types of plans are becoming less common as firms move towards voluntary
defined contribution plans. As of 2007, 63% of all workers had a defined contribution 401(k)
plan as their only form of employer sponsored retirement savings (Munnell et al. 2009). The
benefits of participation in an employer sponsored 401(k) plan include the employer match,
investment growth, and the tax advantages of retirement saving. Despite the advantages of
contributing to the supplemental retirement saving plan, many newly hired workers decline to
participate in company-provided 401(k) plans. Lack of participation may stem from inadequate

5

information about the characteristics of the plan or inadequate financial literacy to understand the
value of the plan. On the other hand, employees might have other financial considerations that
lead them not to participate, such as the need to pay off other debts or saving for other priorities
such as a house or their children’s education. In addition, an employee might decline to
participate because they perceive that they are already accumulating sufficient assets for
retirement through prior employment, their company’s defined benefit plan, a spouse’s
employer-sponsored retirement savings plan, and/or expected Social Security benefits.
Factors Affecting the Choice to Participate in a 401(k) Plan
There are several factors that might influence a worker’s decision to participate in an
employer-sponsored 401(k) plan. First, workers need to know and understand both the tax
advantage of contributing to a 401(k) and the size of any employer match in order to correctly
assess the tradeoff of lower consumption today in return for higher consumption in retirement. If
the employee does not fully appreciate these benefits, then he or she may place less value on
contributions to the 401(k) plan simply because his or her calculation of the future return to these
contributions is too low. In this case, providing information about the benefit of retirement
savings might lead to higher participation rates. On the other hand, if an individual is saving
according to a “rule of thumb” strategy that overvalues retirement savings, then providing
additional information may cause the individual to revise downward the value of saving.1 Of
course, beyond participation, one must also consider the intensive margin of the level of

1

Benartzi and Thaler (2007) discuss the rule of thumb savings heuristics often used by individuals to

determine savings behavior.

6

savings.2 While financial literacy plays a strong role in retirement saving, the levels of financial
literacy in the population vary across demographic groups.3
Besides knowledge and understanding of the benefits of participating in a 401(k) plan,
financially literate individuals might be more likely to make the effort to enroll in a plan.
Signing up for a 401(k) plan is costly in the sense that it requires the individual to allocate
sufficient time to decide on a retirement plan, complete the appropriate allocation forms, and
work with the company human resources (HR) office and the plan provider. Workers may suffer
from inertia and choose not to actively enroll in the plan simply to avoid the cognitive burden of
figuring out how to enroll or calculating the benefits. In addition, the sheer volume of
information employees receive during orientation may lead to information overload which can
prevent individuals from taking positive actions necessary to enroll in retirement saving plans.
Hanoch et al. (2011) and Schram and Sonnemans (2011) find in an experimental setting that
although having more options increases the probability that a good match exists, increasing the
number of options available in general often results in individuals making suboptimal choices.
2

To determine the optimal level of saving, Scholz, Seshardi, and Khitatrakun (2006) present a life cycle

model for households to determine the optimal level of wealth accumulation. They account for
uncertainties in longevity, earnings, and medical expenses, as well as taxation and government transfers.
They then compare the calculated optimal targets with actual wealth accumulation and find, surprisingly,
that over 80% of households in their sample have accumulated sufficient wealth to reach their optimal
level of saving. However, their primary data was collected during 1992-1993, a period of strong stock
market performance which can affect wealth accumulation.
3

Gale, Harris, and Levine (2012) note that a large proportion of American adults with lower income, low

levels of education, and on either end of the age spectrum (the very young and the very old) lack a basic
understanding of financial concepts. Using the Planning and Financial Literacy Module of the 2004 wave
of the Health and Retirement Survey, Lusardi and Mitchell (2011) find that financial literacy varies by
race and gender.

7

Similarly, Besedeš et al. (2012a, b) find that increasing the number of options available leads to
greater reliance on heuristics among participants in an experiment. Sethi-Iyengar, Huberman,
and Jiang (2004) find that employers with fewer plan options, and hence a simplified investment
choice, saw higher 401(k) participation rates. Even though employees receive information about
their 401(k) plan during orientation, there may be some benefit from resending that same
information several months later when the worker may have more time to process and act on it.
If inertia and information overload are inhibiting employee participation, then sending a simple
flyer several months after orientation might both provide information and a “nudge” to
encourage the employee to undergo the initiation process.
A second factor that determines the relative value of saving for retirement is employer
matching contributions. Most prior research finds that workers are sensitive to match rates and
higher employer matching contributions are associated with higher participation rates among
employees (Papke 1995; Papke and Poterba 1995). In contrast, Mitchell, Utkus, and Yang
(2007) compare benefits across firms and find that the existence of a match provides only a small
incentive to participate. However, it may be that workers in firms that offer a match but also
have a tenure requirement to be eligible for the match delay participation to coincide with when
they become eligible for the employer match. Such a finding would imply that workers would
have contributed to the plan sooner if the match was effective at the time of hire.
Of course, many other factors outside of an employer’s control contribute to an
individual’s decision to participate in a 401(k) plan. Previous literature modeling the choice to
participate in a defined contribution plan has found that participation rates are greater among
higher earners, older workers, workers with longer tenures, workers with higher levels of
education, men, and white (when compared to black and Hispanic) workers (see, e.g., Bassett,

8

Fleming, and Rodriguez 1998; Munnell, Sunden, and Taylor 2002; Madrian and Shea 2001).
The level of participation also varies depending on employee and company characteristics.
Many of the factors that influence participation are also correlated with higher contribution
amounts (Holden and VanDerhei 2001).
While it is difficult to isolate the direct causal links, several factors that affect the relative
weighting of current consumption to the future value of a benefit in retirement are associated
with these demographic characteristics. First, the magnitude of the tax advantage is dependent
on the worker’s annual salary. Thus, we may see those with higher salaries contributing at
higher levels both because they have more disposable income and because they see a higher
benefit to savings through tax advantaged retirement savings plans. Similarly, an individual has
a personal discount rate which is used to value future consumption relative to today’s
consumption. Personal discount rates may also affect investments that individuals make in
human capital and may change as individuals get closer in age to retirement. The market returns
to savings will also determine the value of contributing to a plan.
It is common in this literature to find lower participation rates for women (see, e.g.,
Carroll et al. 2009). It might be that women earn less, so see less benefit from participating. It
might also be that women are less informed about the benefits. If the latter is true, then we
would expect women to initiate participation at higher rates if more information is provided.
However, if women are less likely to incorporate new information into their evaluation of the
benefit of participating, then an intervention might be less effective for women than men.
There are several reasons why we might expect participation rates to vary by age.
Employees have other opportunities to save that will compete for any dollars that the worker
might consider saving. These opportunities include saving for other factors besides retirement

9

(home, car, etc) and also debt reduction through paying down credit card debt and paying off
student loans. Thus, the existence of these debts would be expected to lower the probability of
newly hired workers enrolling in the 401(k) plan. These factors are likely to be correlated with
age and salary. Further, the age of the individual is an indicator of how far away retirement is
for the worker. Older workers might have a clearer picture of the future or more recognition of
the current lack of sufficient resources to fund an adequate retirement. If younger workers are
less informed because retirement is a far-off and abstract concern, then these individuals will not
participate at higher levels even though their actual benefit might be larger due to compounding
and tax advantages. Providing information to younger workers might produce a larger change in
the probability of participating relative to older workers, if younger workers are indeed less
informed about the benefits of participating and the power of having many years of
compounding returns.
Recent research suggests that the behavior of peers might also influence an individual’s
choice to participate in a company 401(k) plan. Duflo and Saez (2002) find that the choice to
enroll in an employer sponsored retirement savings account is affected by the enrollment status
of other employees within the same department. Beshears et al. (2011) evaluate the effect of
social norms marketing (providing information about peer behavior) on retirement plan
enrollment. The intervention in their study is designed to facilitate employee action by allowing
the employee to either sign up or increase their contribution rate to the amount required to
receive the full employer match by checking a box and returning it by a specified date. A subset
of the sample received a version of the flyer which included a statement regarding peer saving
rates. They find that for unionized employees, the likelihood of enrollment was negatively
correlated with the magnitude of communicated peer information. Peer participation was

10

provided by age range, and some age ranges had higher levels of plan participation than others.
Among those individuals who received the intervention, those in subgroups with higher peer
participation rates were less likely to initiate participation relative to those in subgroups with
lower peer participation rates. Although our study also explores peer effects and how they relate
to plan participation, we focus on the effect of an informational intervention which highlights the
importance of saving over time and the value of the employer match.
Plan Design versus Employer-Provided Financial Education
Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2004) describe several features of plan designs that
encourage participation including employer match rates, the menu of funds, options for taking
loans from the plan, the presence of a defined benefit plan, and automatic enrollment. Several
studies of individual employers have found automatic enrollment to be successful at increasing
participation rates in 401(k) plans (e.g., Madrian and Shea 2001; Munnell, et al. 2009; Choi et al.
2004). As discussed in O’Neill (2007), although these types of plans are effective in increasing
participation, they are costly for employers and may lead to individuals being defaulted into
plans that are not optimal for their personal circumstances (see also Brown, Farrell, and
Weisbenner 2011). Carroll et al. (2009) describe how “active decisions” can be an appealing
alternative to defaults if the population of employees is sufficiently financially literate.
Employers interested in increasing participation in a 401(k) plan might consider
providing an informational nudge to their employees to address concerns of lack of knowledge
and inertia. Employers that do not want to implement an automatic enrollment policy, but do
want to encourage higher participation rates, might find that providing targeted and timely
information to workers is an effective alternative. Low cost informational interventions have
been found to be successful in other contexts. For example, Liebman and Luttmer (2011)

11

conducted a field experiment that provided information about social security provisions and
found significant effects on female labor force participation. In a randomized experiment
conducted at a large university, Duflo and Saez (2003) found people who were exposed to
employees that received more information about their 401(k) plan were more likely to
participate.
Choi et al. (2012) explore the effect of anchoring, goal setting, and savings-threshold
salience on the savings behavior. Using a field experiment, the authors found that recipients did
respond to cues in email messages on the value of 401(k) plan participation and higher
contribution rates. Their study differs from ours in that they focus on increasing contribution
rates among participating employees (the employer implemented an automatic enrollment policy
in 2007), while our primary focus is on increasing plan participation by sending an informational
nudge.

Karlan et al. (2010) provide theoretical support for the effectiveness of reminders and

demonstrate in a series of field experiments that savings in consumer bank accounts can be
increased through timely reminders. Goda, Manchester, and Sojourner (2012) perform a large
scale field experiment to test for bias in the way individuals think about compounding. Using a
low cost intervention, they inform recipients about how current saving translates into future
retirement income using a variety of different frameworks. They find that the information was
effective in increasing contribution levels. Their results highlight the effects of behavioral
influences in the decision making process.
3. The Large Financial Institution Descriptive Statistics
The large financial institution (LFI) with whom we partnered is a publically traded
banking, insurance, and investments company and is among the top 10 largest financial service
corporations in the United States. LFI has over 30,000 active workers located in 13 states. At
LFI, all newly hired employees participate in a company orientation program. The orientation

12

occurs during the first two weeks of employment and includes discussion of the defined benefit
and 401(k) plans. LFI provides employees with access to Pro Nvest, a company that has
partnered with LFI to provide retirement planning services and education. The 401(k)
participant guide, discussed during the orientation, provides the employee with information
about investing. The guide includes formulas for calculating how much is needed for retirement,
explanations of the importance of considering inflation when planning for retirement, and
illustrations of compounding power. There is an extensive discussion of the tax advantages of
the company sponsored retirement plan and examples demonstrating the advantage of pre-tax
retirement savings. The information distributed in our “nudge” is adapted from these materials,
so should be familiar to all employees. Employees are also encouraged to participate in the
401(k) plans during annual reviews.4
LFI offers a traditional final average pay defined benefit plan to its full-time employees.
In addition, employees are offered the option of participating in the company’s 401(k) plan.
Employees can make contributions to the plan starting the first day of the calendar month
following employment. To be eligible for the matching contributions, the employee must be at
least 21 years of age and must complete 1000 hours of service within the 12 months following
his or her hire date.5 LFI offers a 100% match on the first 6% of compensation contributed to the
plan.6 LFI allows employees to contribute to up to 50%of their pay to the plan. Employees may
4

Annual reviews for officers occur in February; for non-officers all reviews occur at the employee’s one

year anniversary.
5

Nearly all (99.5%) the workers hired in 2008 and 98.2% of workers hired in 2009 were match-eligible as

of February 2011.
6

The match on the first 4% is referred to as the basic match contribution while the remaining 2% is called

the supplemental match. The supplemental match is subject to vesting requirements which state that it

13

enroll in the plan by using LFI’s PlanTrac Web site or may enroll over the phone. Changes can
be made on a daily basis and contribution rates can be changed at any time. Participants may
invest in the plan’s core funds or in a self-directed brokerage account (available through TD
Ameritrade). The plan allows for both loans and hardship withdraws.
LFI provided us with detailed, de-identified administrative data on all employees hired
between January 1, 2008 and December 31, 2010. For this analysis, we restrict our attention to
those who were still actively employed on June 20, 2011. The data include annual
compensation, gender, date of birth, date of hire, match eligibility status, date of first
contribution to the 401(k) plan, and contribution amount (as a percent of salary).7 Table 1
provides summary statistics of the 7218 employees hired by LFI between 2008 and 2010. The
table reports the proportion of employees participating in the plan as of February 28, 2011, the
average contribution rate among participants, and the proportion of participants contributing at
least 6 percent of salary (i.e., enough to receive the full employer match if eligible).8 The first

may be forfeited if the employee engages in misconduct including embezzlement, theft, or larceny or
engages in direct competition with the firm, unless the employee has three years of continuous
employment with the firm or has reached age 65.
7

Because signing and year-end bonuses make measuring the annual compensation for recent hires

somewhat complicated, we make adjustments to the annual compensation reported in the data. We define
salary as the total 2010 compensation reported in February of 2011 for those hired in 2008 and 2009. For
those hired in 2010, we adjust the year-to-date compensation reported in June 2011 to be an annual salary.
8

Note that we have 144 observations with a valid date of first contribution but a missing value for the

percent contributing. It is likely that these workers began participating but either suspended their
contributions or took a loan from their account. For the purposes of our analysis, we have chosen to
define “participating” as those that have ever contributed to the plan since these individuals have an
account and an account balance. Although these workers are classified as participating, they are excluded
from calculations using contribution rates.

14

row of Table 1 reports that 49% of all workers hired between 2008 and 2010 were participating
in the 401(k) plan as of February 2011. The average contribution rate among participants was
6.6% of annual salary, while 68.2% of participants were contributing at least 6% of annual
salary.
Next, we consider how participation differs by match eligibility status.9 We see that
workers that are eligible for the matching contributions are 25.4 percentage points more likely to
be participating than their match-ineligible peers (59.6% versus 34.2%). Interestingly, among
participants, those that are eligible for the match have similar average contribution rates to those
that are not yet match eligible. As expected, average participation rates are higher among men,
older workers, and those earning the highest salaries. Note that the majority of low salary
workers are part-time employees (such as bank tellers), but are still eligible to participate in the
401(k) plan. Overall, we observe that plan participation and average contribution rates move in
the same direction; those groups with higher participation rates also have higher average
contributions conditional on participating. This indicates that not only are men, older workers,
and higher earning workers participating more, but they are also saving a higher fraction of their
salaries.
Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of contribution rates for 49% of new hires enrolled in
the 401(k) plan as of February 28, 2011. Among these workers, 45.2% were contributing exactly
6% of their annual salary (i.e., the minimum amount needed to receive the full employer match).

9

Additionally, because participation in the 401(k) plan is supposed to be discussed by managers during

annual reviews, the group that is match eligible may also have a higher participation rate due to this
reminder from their managers.

15

We also observe that over 23% of those enrolled in the 401(k) plan were contributing amounts
above the 6% level.
Next, we estimate a multivariate regression of the choice to participate in the 401(k) plan
for the 7218 workers hired between 2008 and 2010. The estimated average marginal effects
from a logit model are presented in column 1 of Table 2. Since all of the individuals in our study
are employed by LFI, they all face the same plan characteristics and the terms of the employer
match do not vary across workers. However, time since being hired should influence the
decision to enroll for three reasons. First, as the employer match goes from 0 to 100% at the
moment the tenure requirement is fulfilled we expect to see a rise in participation at that time.
Second, we expect that longer tenures are associated with higher participation rates because
workers have the opportunity to sign up at any time. Finally, workers with longer tenures have
demonstrated that they have a higher match quality with the firm.
In Table 2, we find that, controlling for match eligibility and basic demographic
characteristics, workers with longer tenures are more likely to participate. In addition, match
eligibility is associated with a significantly higher participation rate. The average marginal effect
presented in Table 2 indicates that individuals who are eligible for the match are 12.2 percentage
points more likely to participate relative to those that are not yet match eligible, controlling for
tenure. This is consistent with the raw differences presented in Table 1. Female employees of
LFI are significantly less likely to be participating in the 401(k) plan, but the difference is small
in magnitude. Higher salary is associated with an increase in the participation rate. Finally, we
observe that individuals aged 18-24 and 35-44 have statistically significantly lower participation
rates than those ages 25-34.

16

Column 2, Table 2 presents estimates from an OLS regression on the percent of salary
contributed by employees hired between 2008 and 2010, limited to plan participants only. Here
we see no statistically significant difference in the contribution rate conditional on participation
by tenure or match eligibility. Among participants, women contribute significantly less to the
saving plan than men, while workers age 45 and above contribute approximately 2% more of
salary relative to workers age 25 to 34. And, finally, employees with greater annual incomes
contribute a larger percentage of their salary to the 401(k) plan.10
In the final column of Table 2, we consider a binary indicator for whether the individual
is contributing 6% or more of salary (i.e., taking full advantage of the employer matching
contributions, if eligible). Estimated average marginal effects from a logit model are reported.
In general the patterns are very similar to those found looking at contribution rates. One notable
exception is that match eligibility is associated with a statistically significant 6.3 percentage
point higher probability of contributing at least 6% of salary, which is consistent with
predictions.
4. Attitudes and Knowledge of Newly Hired Workers
In order to better understand why workers are making key retirement saving choices, we
developed a short survey. LFI distributed the surveys between March 2011 and August 2011 to
all employees hired between December 2010 and May 2011 approximately 60 to 90 days after

10

Here we find that income and contribution percentage are positively correlated. Holden and VanDerhei

(2001) find in their analysis of the 1999 contribution behavior of 1.7 million 401(k) participants that
salary and deferral percentage are positively correlated up to an annual earning amount of $80,000 after
which point the correlation become negative. They note that many of the plans included in their analysis
allow for a maximum contribution of $10,000, which may be driving this result. LFI, on the other hand,
allows employees to contribute up to 50% of salary so we do not expect to see a similar trend here.

17

hire. This lag was chosen to ensure that all survey recipients would have had sufficient time to
enroll in the 401(k) plan prior to responding. We focus on newly hired workers so that we can
observe the employee’s evaluation of the information received during orientation without
introducing recall bias among workers with longer tenures.
The surveys were available online to employees at the first of every month, and the link
to the survey remained open for the duration of that month. New links were sent each month,
for a total of six months. Surveys were sent to 1947 new hires, and 356 individuals completed
and returned the surveys for a response rate of 18.3%. Note that the surveys cover workers hired
between December 2010 and May 2011. We do not have administrative data on workers hired in
2011, and we are not able to link surveys to the administrative records for the December 2010
new hires. Appendix 1 discusses how representative the survey respondents are compared to the
administrative data from the 2008-2010 new hires. Survey respondents are much more likely to
be participating in the 401(k) plan, are slightly older, earn more, and are more likely to be male
relative to the full group of 2008-2010 new hires.
The first objective of the survey was to learn more about employee attitudes regarding the
information they were provided concerning the 401(k) plan. We present responses disaggregated
both by age group and by participation status in the 401(k) plan. Note that all of the survey
respondents were eligible to participate in the plan, but none had earned sufficient tenure to
qualify for employer matching contributions as of the survey date. Table 3 presents responses to
select questions regarding the employee’s perception of the value of information he or she
received and on the sources of information the employee relied upon when making his or her
participation decision. Although the most common rating of the information LFI provided was
that it was “very comprehensive,” participants gave higher ratings than non-participants.

18

Approximately one-third of younger workers who were already participating in the plan reported
that they would have benefitted from more information. Interestingly, the older workers were
over twice as likely relative to younger workers to not have read the information that their
employer provided about the 401(k) plan. Further, in response to a question about how the
information influenced their participation decision, we find that over half of all workers said the
information did not influence their participation decision. Nearly 80% of older workers not yet
participating in the plan stated that the information they received did not influence their
participation decision, compared to about 60% of younger non-participating workers.
The bottom row of Table 3 shows large differences by age group in the sources of
information that respondents report as influencing their decision to participate. Younger workers
are far more reliant on family, relatives, colleagues, friends, and the internet than are older
workers. The employer resources, including the plan website and benefit office, were reported to
be useful sources of information by both age groups and both participants and non-participants.
The reliance on employer resources highlights the potential impact of the human
resource/benefits department on employee retirement saving behavior and decision making.
Interestingly, participants reported being influenced by a financial advisor, newspapers, books,
and magazines more frequently than non-participants. Taken together, the responses reported in
Table 3 indicate that younger workers may be more responsive than older workers to receiving
additional information from their employer. We find younger workers are more likely to seek
out information from their employer and that that information influences their participation
decision.
The second goal of the survey was to learn more about the financial constraints that
affected the participation and contribution rates of new hires. If new hires are not participating

19

because they have other financial obligations, such as paying down high interest loans, then an
employer intervention aimed at increasing participation may not be effective. To understand the
reasons for limited or non-participation, we included parallel questions for participants and nonparticipants. For those that were currently participating in the 401(k) plan, the question asked
what factors limit the amount the respondent is currently contributing. For non-participants, the
question asks what factors are inhibiting the choice to contribute. Both questions listed a series
of possible reasons where the respondent could select all that applied. Responses to these
questions are reported in Table 4, listed separately for the two age groups.
The employer match emerges as a key factor in the decision to participate in the 401(k)
plan and the level of contributions among participants. Recall that none of the survey
participants were currently eligible for the matching contributions, which begin after 12 months
of employment. Among those who were not yet contributing to the 401(k) plan, over 50%
indicate that they plan to start contributing when they meet the eligibility conditions for the
employer match. The second most common response is that “my salary covers my monthly
living expenses with no extra room for retirement savings.” This reason is more common for the
younger workers than older workers. Also more common for younger workers is the need to pay
off debt including credit card debt, student loans, mortgages, or other debts. Furthermore,
younger workers are also significantly more likely to be saving for a large purchase such as a car
or home. Older workers participating in the plan are significantly more likely than younger
workers to report that taking into account Social Security, pensions, and spouse’s retirement, “I
expect that I will have sufficient retirement income with the amount I am currently contributing.”
The responses reported in Table 4 suggest that not all employees would benefit from
being automatically enrolled in a 401(k) plan. Rather, for some employees their non-

20

participation results from an evaluation of their own financial portfolio. However, one should be
cautious in drawing too broad a conclusion from these results since the survey response rate was
less than 20% and the sample of respondents is not necessarily representative of the full
population of newly hired workers.
Next, we explore how important financial literacy is to the choice to participate in the
plan. The survey included five questions designed to measure the basic financial literacy of the
newly hired employees. The questions, shown in Appendix 2, focus on the individual’s
knowledge concerning the importance of compounding interest rates, the effect of inflation on
real income, the importance of investment diversification, tax advantages associated with
investing in the 401(k) plan, and the value of the employer match. The instructions state that if
the respondent does not know the correct answer, he or she should provide his or her best guess.
We limit the sample to those that left no more than two questions blank. If the respondent left
the question blank or selected “don’t know” it is recorded as an incorrect response. Table 5
shows the proportion of new hires by enrollment status who answered these questions correctly.
First, in aggregate, the knowledge score is highest for participants relative to nonparticipants and for older relative to younger workers. The largest differences between
participants and non-participants are in knowledge of inflation, investment diversification, and
the 401(k) tax advantage. The inflation and investment questions are measuring general
financial literacy, while the 401(k) tax advantage question specifically addresses the value of
participating in the plan. In general, the tax advantages of 401(k) plan participation are not well
understood by any group, with fewer than half of all respondents able to correctly identify the net
effect of a 401(k) contribution on after-tax take home pay (see Appendix 2, Question 4).
Because participants have higher financial literacy than non-participants, efforts to improve

21

financial knowledge could lead to an increase in 401(k) plan participation for both older and
younger workers.
The results of our survey indicate that an employer intervention aimed at both educating
and encouraging employee participation in the 401(k) plan could be effective. Workers,
particularly those under age 45, report looking to their employer for information about saving for
retirement. Although many workers report having too little extra money to save for retirement
after paying down debts and saving for a large purchase, many also do not exhibit a full
appreciation for the tax advantage of contributing to a 401(k) plan. These results indicate that
providing information could increase worker well-being if the employee does not fully recognize
the long-term benefits of participating in the 401(k) plan. However, if workers are fully
informed and financially literate, then providing additional information could still affect
participation through “nudging” them to sign up.
5. Nudging Non-participants: A Randomized, Controlled Experiment
We designed a field experiment to test whether additional employer-provided financial
education could be effective in increasing 401(k) plan participation. All employees hired during
2008 through 2010 who were not participating in the plan as of February 28, 2011 were
randomly assigned to treatment and control groups. Appendix 3 describes the randomization and
presents means verifying the success of the randomization.11 The treatment group received a
11

The treatment group was broken into two subgroups. The first was given a version of the flyer that had

an additional statement on the savings behavior of all employees in the company to test for peer effects.
Ultimately, no difference was found between the two treatment groups. It is possible that there was a
second type of “peer effect” where recipients of the flyers shared information with peers in the control
group. Because of the study design and institutional context, it is unlikely that this was a major
confounding factor. New hires are mixed with longer tenured workers, those not participating in the
401(k) plan are mixed with those who were contributing, and the workers are spread across many cities.

22

flyer that included a brief example of investment growth over time and instructions on how to
sign up for the company’s 401(k) retirement savings plan. The control group did not receive any
additional information, but both groups still received packets at orientation and follow-up
encouragements during annual reviews. A copy of the flyer is included in Appendix 4. The
information contained in the flyer is adapted from information that was already presented to all
workers in their benefits package. The intervention highlights the benefits of saving, and, in
particular, the value of compounding and potential for investment growth over time. The flyer
was not altered for any specific group and illustrated the wealth accumulation that would occur
with 40 years of savings.12 The flyer itself was adapted from material that LFI already provides
to newly hired workers during orientation, with some small modifications including the addition
of an emphasis on employer matching contributions.13 The orientation materials are not targeted
to certain age groups or planning horizons and also include a 40 year investment horizon.
The intervention was designed to isolate the effect of information on retirement saving
behavior as measured by the proportion of workers who are active participants in the 401(k)
plan. Nearly 4000 workers participated in the experiment, allowing for the exploration of
heterogeneity in responses by demographic characteristics. The recipients were unaware that
Still, if there was sharing of information between the treatment and control groups this would simply
cause our treatment group to look more like the control and bias our estimates of the effect of the flyer
towards zero. Full results broken down by treatment group status are included in Appendix 3.
12

Although tax advantages are also important, they were not addressed in the intervention in the interest

of simplicity.
13

The examples showing the savings from reduced consumption on certain items and the impact of

investing these funds in the 401(k) plan were taken from the retirement plan’s handbook. For
consistency, the flyer made the same assumptions concerning the investment period and rate of return as
used by the plan provider in the information given to newly hired employees.

23

their behavior was being observed, and because the researchers observe the outcome of interest
in administrative data, there is no reporting bias. Therefore, any difference in the rate of
initiating participation in the 401(k) plan that is observed between the treatment and control
group can be attributed to the receipt of the low-cost flyer.14
The flyers were distributed to employees at LFI in mid-April 2011. Most of the flyers
were distributed by email, but employees that did not have regular access to a computer at work
were sent a black and white print-out of the flyer through interoffice mail. Appendix Table 3.1
illustrates that the delivery method was not randomized, although in Appendix Table 3.2 we see
that the impacts were similar. We measure participation initiation as of June 20, 2011, which
allowed employees approximately two months to respond to the information they received.
Employees who terminated employment during the study period were excluded from the
analysis.15
Table 6 presents statistics on the percent participating as of June 20, 2011. Because the
sample includes only those that were not participating as of February 28, 2011, the percent
participating in June is an indication of the percent of workers that initiated participation during
our study period. Although the average participation rate of employees in the treatment group is
1.0 percentage points (17%) higher than the control group, the difference is not statistically
significant. However, when the sample is disaggregated by demographic characteristics, we see
that the intervention did significantly affect the retirement saving behavior of some groups of
14

We chose to focus only on the choice to participate and not on the level of contribution. In results

available upon request, the intervention had no effect on the level of contribution among those that
initiated participation.
15

Four hundred and seventy two employees were terminated during the study period. Termination was

not correlated with receipt of intervention material, results available upon request.

24

employees. First we consider whether, on average, the intervention was more effective for those
that were eligible for the match prior to the start of the study in February 2011 (eligible before),
those that became eligible for the match between February and June 2011 (newly eligible), and
those that were not yet eligible as of June 2011 (not yet eligible). There is no statistically
significant effect, on average, when the sample is divided by match eligibility status or gender.
When we disaggregate the sample by salary, we find that the intervention was associated with a
large and statistically significant increase in the percent signing up for the plan for those earning
between $30,000 and $59,999. However, this effect is being driven by differences in age that are
correlated with salary levels.16
The largest effect of the intervention can be seen when comparing employees in different
age groups. Results indicate that younger employees, those 18 – 24 years old, were 4.5
percentage points more likely to join the 401(k) plan if receiving an intervention relative to the
control. For this group, those receiving the intervention were over twice as likely to initiate
participation in the plan relative to the control group. A similarly large and statistically
significant difference was observed for workers ages 35-44. On the other hand, for the age group
45 years and older, those receiving the intervention were a statistically significant 4.4 percentage
points less likely to initiate participation relative to the control group. As the intervention
highlighted the importance of saving early by demonstrating investment growth over time, it is
possible that this older group of workers were actually discouraged from participating in their
employer 401(k) plan.

16

In results not shown, when we control for age in a regression framework we find this difference is due

to age rather than income-level.

25

Table 7 presents the estimated average marginal effects from a logit regression on the
individuals’ choice to initiate participation over the study period. Each column includes
regression estimates on the age group as indicated in the column heading. The regressions
include controls for tenure, match eligibility, gender, salary, and age categories (in the full
sample). Here we see again that the intervention significantly increased participation for workers
ages 18-44, while it significantly decreased the likelihood to initiate participation among those
workers ages 45 and older.
In Table 7, the regression specification includes controls for those that were matcheligible before the study period and those that became match-eligible between February and June
2011 (the omitted group is not yet eligible for the match in June 2011). The estimates indicate
that becoming match eligible increases the probability of initiating participation over the study
period by approximately 9 percentage points. This is a large effect (representing almost a 150%
increase over the mean on average) and is similar across the age groups, although it is largest in
both magnitude and percent for the youngest workers. However, in contrast to the results present
in Table 2, we find no difference in the probability of initiating participation for those that were
already match-eligible before the study period and no difference by tenure. Similarly, we find no
statistically significant differences in the probability to initiate participation by salary or gender.
Next, in Table 8 we explore heterogeneity in the effect of the intervention by match
eligibility, gender, and salary. Here we report estimates from separate regressions on subsets of
the population. If there are particular groups that are more responsive to the intervention, then
those may be targeted in the future to increase participation rates. Because the effects of the
intervention are so different between the older and younger age groups, we present all analysis
for the two groups separately. The first row of Table 8 repeats the estimates presented in column

26

5 of Table 7 for reference. When disaggregating by match eligibility status among the younger
workers, we see the only group with a statistically significant effect of the intervention is those
not yet match eligible. However, the estimate is nearly identical for the group that became
match-eligible over the sample period. This finding indicates that those that are most recently
hired are likely to be responsive to an intervention. When disaggregated by gender, the positive
effect of the intervention for younger workers is concentrated among men, whose participation
rate was increased by 4.2 percentage points over the control group. Among younger worker, the
intervention was more effective in increasing participation for those that were earning less than
$60,000 annually relative to those earning more.
The bottom half of Table 8 indicates that for those ages 45 and above, the negative effect
on participation due to intervention is stronger for higher salaried workers, males, and those not
yet match-eligible. Similar to the findings for younger workers, those that are newly match
eligible or not yet match eligible were most influenced by the receipt of the flyer, although for
older workers it was a discouragement rather than encouragement. When consider the
interaction of salary and age, we observe that among employees aged 18-44, 8.3% earn $60,000
or more per year compared to 21.1% of those 45 and older. Among the subset of older workers,
the average marginal effect of the treatment is statistically significant only for the higher earning
group. And, conversely, among the younger group, there is a positive effect only for the lower
earners. The implications of the results presented in Tables 7 and 8 are discussed in section 6.
6. Discussion and Conclusions
Although these results do show that a low cost intervention can be effective in increasing
401(k) participation among some groups, the effectiveness of the informational nudge varied by
employee characteristics. Women were far less responsive to the intervention than men, and
only the most recently hired workers behaved significantly differently than the control group.

27

We find that among workers ages 18-44 that were initially not participating in the 401(k) plan,
those that were sent a flyer were 2.5 percentage points (roughly 40% of the mean of 6.6%) more
likely to initiate participation in the 401(k) plan relative to the control group. However for the
workers ages 45 and older, receiving the intervention actually led to a lower initiation rate.
Our intervention was designed based on materials already distributed to workers at
orientation. The flyer emphasized the value of compounding using a standard 40 year time
horizon. Older workers in our sample may have been put off by the framing of this information,
an unintended consequence of the design of our flyer. Older workers in the control group had a
sign-up rate that was over twice as large as younger workers in the control group, suggesting that
older workers already had an appreciation of the value of participating and that the framing of
the flyer may have been discouraging to those in the treatment group. Prior literature has
highlighted an important role for anchoring and framing in retirement savings (e.g., Choi et al.
2012). Future work should further explore whether materials currently distributed to employees
could be improved by better highlighting the benefits to the particular demographic group of
interest. At a minimum, our results suggest that information distributed to workers might be
more effective if it is tailored to the circumstances of the individual. Perhaps current differences
in participation rates by broad demographic category are partially a reflection of framing and the
design of employer-provided educational materials.
As the design of the study allowed only two months between the intervention date and
the outcome evaluation, it is possible that some groups respond more slowly and a follow-up
study allowing for more time to enroll would find different patterns or larger effects. For
example, it may be that that receipt of the nudge causes workers in the treatment group to move
up their planned date of participation, but this group would have participated at some later date

28

in the absence of the intervention. If this were the case, the nudge could be viewed as a tool to
influence the timing of plan sign up, but not long term participation rates. It is also important to
note that the sample used included only individuals who had not already enrolled in the plan,
perhaps due to inertia or a lack of understanding of the employer match and compounding.
Viewed in this light, the increases in participation from the nudge are even more impressive. In
addition, we should emphasize that the nudge was extremely low cost. It was developed using
information already provided by the plan provider and sent through company e-mail or
interoffice mail. Thus, even modest increases in participation rates are impressive from a costbenefit perspective.
There are several potential reasons why workers might fail to participate in an employersponsored 401(k) plan. On one hand, employees might not fully appreciate the value of
participation or might suffer from inertia. On the other hand, it might be that employees are
choosing not to participate in order to spend money on paying down debt or to save for a large
purchase. In order to understand the importance of these factors, we present results from a short
survey of newly hired workers. Results confirm the importance of the employer match in
participation and contribution decisions. We find an important role of financial education in
retirement savings, since not all benefits of participating in an employer sponsored 401(k) plan
are well understood.
Employers seeking to raise participation rates in a 401(k) plan may choose to modify plan
design through manipulation of such features as employer matching contributions, defaults and
automatic enrollment, or eligibility and vesting periods. However, if workers either suffer from
inertia or fail to fully appreciate the value of participating, a simple informational nudge might
be an attractive alternative.

29

References
Bassett, William, Michael Fleming, and Anthony Rodriguez. 1998. How workers use 401(k)
plans: The participation, contribution, and withdrawal decisions. National Tax Journal, 51(2):
263-289.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler. 2007. Heuristics and biases in retirement savings
behavior. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3): 81-104.
Besedeš, Tibor, Cary Deck, Sudipta Sarangi, and Mikhael Shor (2012a), Age effects and
heuristics in decision making, Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(2):580‐595.
Besedeš, Tibor, Cary Deck, Sudipta Sarangi, and Mikhael Shor (2012b), Strategies and
performance among seniors, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 81(2):524‐533.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigette C. Madrian, and Katherine L. Milkman.
2011. The effect of providing peer information on retirement savings decisions. NBER Working
Paper #17345.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Anne M. Farrell, and Scott J. Weisbenner. 2011. The downside of defaults.
Unpublished working paper, September 16, 2011.
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick.
2009. Optimal defaults and active decisions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 16391674.
Choi, James J., Emily Haisley, Jennifer Kurkoski, and Cade Massey. 2012. Small cues change
savings choices. NBER Working Paper #17843.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian. 2004. Plan design and 401(k) savings
outcomes. National Tax Journal, 57(2): 275-298.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigette Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004. For better or for
worse: Default effects and 401(k) savings behavior, in Perspectives on the Economics of Aging,
David A. Wise, (ed), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 81-121.

30

Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. Participation and investment decisions in a retirement
plan: The influence of colleagues' choices. Journal of Public Economics, 85(1): 121-148.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. The role of information and social interactions in
retirement plan decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(3): 815-842.
Gale, William G., Benjamin H. Harris, and Ruth Levine. 2012. Raising household saving:
Does financial education work? Social Security Bulletin, 72(2): 39-48.
Goda, Gopi Shah, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, and Aaron Sojourner. 2012. What will my
account really be worth? An experiment on exponential growth bias and retirement saving,
NBER Working Paper #17927.
Hanoch, Yaniv, Stacey Wood, Andrew Barnes, Pi‐Ju Liu, and Thomas Rice (2011), Choosing
the right Medicare prescription drug plan: The effect of age, strategy selection and choice set
size, Health Psychology, 30(6): 719–727.
Holden, Sarah, and Jack VanDerhei. 2001. Contribution behavior of 401(k) plan participants.
EBRI Issue Brief, 7(4): 1-20.
Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. Getting
to the top of mind: How reminders increase saving. NBER Working Paper #16205.
Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2011. Would people behave differently if they better
understood social security? Evidence from a field experiment. NBER Working Paper #17287.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell, 2011. Financial literacy and planning: Implications for
retirement wellbeing. NBER Working Paper #17078
Madrian, Brigette C. and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
participation and savings behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1149-1187.
Mitchell, Olivia S., Stephen P. Utkus, and Tongxuan (Stella) Yang. 2007. Turning workers into
savers? Incentives, liquidity, and choice in 401(k) plan design. National Tax Journal, 60(3): 469489.
Munnell, Alicia, Annika Sunden, and Catherine Taylor. 2002. What determines 401(k)
participation and contributions? Social Security Bulletin, 2001/2002, 64(3): 64-75.

31

Munnell, Alicia H., Richard W. Kopcke, Francesca N. Golub-Sass, and Dan Muldoon. 2009. An
update on 401(k) plans: Insights from the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finance. Center for
Retirement Research Working Paper WP#2009-26.
O'Neill, Barbara. 2007. Overcoming inertia: Do automated saving and investing strategies
work? Journal of Family Economic Issues, 28(2007): 321-335.
Papke, Leslie E. 1995. Participation in and contributions to 401(k) pension plans: Evidence from
plan data. Journal of Human Resources, 30(2): 311-25.
Papke, Leslie E., and James M. Poterba, 1995. Survey evidence on employer match rates and
employee saving behavior in 401(k) plans. Economics Letters, 49(3): 313-7.
Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun. 2006. Are Americans saving
‘optimally’ for retirement?” Journal of Political Economy, 114(4): 607– 643.
Schram, Arthur, and Joep Sonnemans (2011), How individuals choose health insurance: An
experimental analysis, European Economic Review, 55(6): 799–819.
Sethi-Iyengar, Sheena, Gur Huberman, and Wei Jiang. 2004. How much choice is too much?, in
Mitchell, O.S., and S. Utkus (eds) Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral
Finance, Oxford University Press.

32

Table 1: Participation Rates Prior to Intervention for Employees Hired in 2008-2010

Percent of Sample

Percent
Participating in
401(k) Plan

Groups
All New Hires

(1)
100%

(2)
49.0%

(3)
6.6%

Percent
Contributing 6% of
Salary or More
(Participants Only)
(4)
68.2%

Match

Match-Eligible

58.1

59.6

6.4

69.3%

Match-Ineligible

41.9

34.2

6.8

65.5%

Female

65.8

43.2

5.8

61.0%

Male

34.2

60.0

7.6

78.1%

<29,999

42.7

29.2

5.0

53.6%

30,000-59,999

34.2

55.4

5.8

64.9%

60,000+

23.1

75.9

8.5

82.0%

<25

25.5

39.2

5.4

64.5%

25-34

32.0

49.8

5.8

62.0%

35-44

21.1

50.9

6.5

66.3%

Gender
Salary

Age

Average
Contribution Rate
(Participants Only)

45+
21.5
57.4
8.5
80.7%
Notes: The data consist of all 7,218 workers who were hired between 2008 and 2010 and were still actively employed as of June 20,
2011. Participation, contribution rates, match eligibility and age are measured as of February 28, 2011. Column (3) is the average
contribution rate among those participating in the 401(k) plan, expressed as a percent of annual salary.

33

Table 2: Regression Analysis of Participation Choice and Contribution Rate
Participation

Contribution Rate
(Participants Only)

Contributing 6% of
Salary or More
(Participants Only)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Tenure (Months)
0.006***
0.010
-0.0005
(0.001)
(0.011)
(0.001)
Match Eligible
0.122***
-0.398
0.063*
(0.019)
(0.279)
(0.028)
*
***
Female
-0.030
-0.784
-0.096***
(0.013)
(0.177)
(0.017)
***
***
Salary (in Thousands)
0.004
0.022
0.002***
(0.0002)
(0.002)
(0.0003)
*
Age 18-24
-0.036
0.119
0.060**
(0.014)
(0.229)
(0.019)
**
Age 35-44
-0.043
0.327
0.007
(0.015)
(0.225)
(0.021)
Age 45 and above
-0.004
1.966***
0.140***
(0.015)
(0.220)
(0.019)
Observations
7,218
3,390
3,390
Notes: See Table 1 for a description of the sample and the relevant means. Column (1) presents
average marginal effects derived from a logit model where the dependent variable is the choice
to participate. Column (2) presents coefficients from an OLS regression on the contribution rate
for participants. Column (3) presents average marginal effects derived from a logit model where
the dependent variable is the choice to contribute 6% or more of salary among plan participants.
Participation, contribution rates, and age are measured as of February 28, 2011. The omitted age
group is ages 25-34. A constant is also included in each specification. Standard errors are in
parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

34

Table 3: Plan Participants’ Evaluation of Employer-Provided Financial Education
Participants
Ages 45+
Ages 18-44
(2)
(1)
Q: How would you rate the info you received?
The information I received was very comprehensive.
I would have benefited from more information.
I received information regarding my employer's 401(k) plan but did not
read it.
I did not receive any information regarding my employer's 401(k) plan.
Blank
Q: Did the information you received influence your participation
decision?
Yes, the information I received influenced my decision to participate.
Yes, the information I received influenced my decision to NOT
participate.
No, the information did not influence my participation decision.
Blank
Q: What sources of information influenced your participation decision?
(Respondents could select all that apply)
Family and relatives
Colleagues and friends
Benefit office, website, other employer resources
Internet
Newspapers, books, magazines
Financial advisor

Non-Participants
Ages 45+
Ages 18-44
(3)
(4)

66.3%
32.0%

75.0%
19.1%

62.7%
24.2%

52.2%
26.1%

2.0%
2.6%
0.7%

4.4%
1.5%
0.0%

6.3%
3.2%
0.0%

13.0%
4.3%
4.3%

44.0%

41.2%

33.7%

17.4%

0.6%
55.3%
0.0%

0.0%
58.8%
0.0%

7.4%
57.9%
0.1%

4.3%
78.3%
0.0%

61.3%
27.9%
63.2%
47.8%
30.0%
10.3%
21.1%
4.3%
40.7%
32.4%
31.6%
30.4%
12.0%
4.4%
7.4%
0.0%
18.7%
25.0%
10.5%
0.0%
21.3%
25.0%
16.8%
13.0%
150
68
95
23
Number of Respondents
Notes: Sample is survey respondents hired between December 2010 and May 2011. Age is approximated from year of birth.

35

Table 4: Reasons for Non- or Limited Participation in 401(k) Plans, By Age Group
Panel 1: Participants
What factors limit the amount you contribute to the 401(k) plan?
I plan to increase my contribution amount once I am eligible for the employer 401(k) match.
I am concerned about the volatility of the stock market.
Taking into account SS, pensions, and spouse's retirement, I expect that I will have sufficient
retirement income with the amount I am currently contributing.
Instead of saving more for retirement, I am paying off credit card debt.
Instead of saving more for retirement, I am paying of student loans, mortgages, or other debt.
I am primarily concerned with saving for a large purchase such as a car or a home.
I plan to start saving more in the future when I am closer to retirement.
My salary covers my monthly living expenses with little extra room for retirement savings.
Other (write-in)
Number of Respondents
Panel 2: Non-Participants
Why are you not currently contributing to the plan?
I was not aware my employer provided this saving option.
I plan to start once I am eligible for the employer 401(k) match.
I am concerned about the volatility of the stock market.
Taking into account social security, employer pensions and spouse's retirement benefits, I
expect that I will have sufficient retirement income.
Instead of saving for retirement, I am paying off credit card debt.
Instead of saving more for retirement, I am paying of student loans, mortgages, or other debt.
I am primarily concerned with saving for a large purchase such as a car or a home.
I plan to start saving more in the future when I am closer to retirement.
My salary covers my monthly living expenses with no extra room for retirement savings.
I am unsure of whom to contact with questions or how to learn more about the 401(k).
The enrollment procedures were unclear or cumbersome.
Other (write-in)
Number of Respondents

Ages 18-44
29.3%
6.0%

Ages 45+
19.1%
5.9%

Difference
10.2*
0.1

6.0%

14.7%

-8.7*

16.0%
22.7%
13.3%
7.3%
32.0%
12.0%
150

7.4%
10.3%
1.5%
7.4%
13.2%
26.4%
68

8.6**
12.4**
11.8***
0.1
18.8***
-14.4

Ages 18-44
1.0%
54.7%
4.2%

Ages 45+
0.0
52.2%
0.0%

Difference
1.0
2.5
4.2

0.0%

4.3%

-4.3

11.6%
16.8%
10.5%
2.1%
27.4%
5.3%
5.3%
13.7%
95

8.7%
4.4%
0.0%
0.0%
17.4%
0.0%
8.7%
13.0%
23

2.9
12.4**
10.5***
2.1
10.0
5.3**
-3.4
0.7

Notes: See Table 3 for a description of the sample. Respondents could select more than one response for each question.

1

Table 5: Financial Knowledge by Participation Status, Ages 18-44
Participants
Ages 18-44 Ages 45+

Non-Participants
Ages 18-44 Ages 45+

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

83.3%

89.7%

84.2%

73.9%

Inflation

75.3%

89.7%

60.0%

73.9%

Investment

81.3%

89.7%

69.5%

82.6%

401(k) Tax Advantage
401(k) Employer Match
Knowledge Score out of 5

40.7%
59.3%
3.4

52.9%
63.2%
3.9

33.7%
62.1%
3.1

34.8%
60.9%
3.3

Financial Literacy
Questions
Interest Rates

150
68
95
23
Number of Respondents
Notes: See Table 3 for a description of the sample. The percentages in each column show the
percent correctly answering each type of question, with missing or blank responses classified as
“incorrect”. The knowledge score is calculated for only those respondents that left no more than
2 of the knowledge questions blank. See Appendix 2 for specific wording for each of the
knowledge questions.

2

Table 6: Percent Initiating Participation during the Study Period

Percent Initiating Participation Among:
Groups

N

Intervention Group

Control Group

Difference

All New Hires

3,684

6.9%

5.9%

1.0

Match

Eligible before

1,691

5.4%

4.7%

0.7

Newly eligible

547

14.6%

13.2%

1.4

Not yet eligible

1,446

5.9%

4.4%

1.5

Females

2,698

6.3%

5.5%

0.8

986

8.6%

7.1%

1.5

Less than $29,999

2,181

5.4%

5.4%

0.0

$30,000-59,999

1,101

9.1%

4.7%

4.4***

$60+

402

8.7%

12.6%

-3.9

Age 18-24

852

7.8%

3.3%

4.5***

Age 25-34

1,295

7.8%

7.4%

0.4

Age 35-44

794

6.4%

3.4%

3.0*

Age 45+

743

5.0%

9.4%

-4.4*

Gender

Males
Salary

Age

Notes: The data includes all workers hired in 2008, 2009, and 2010 who were not participating in
the 401(k) plan as of February 28, 2011 and excludes employees terminated during intervention
period and 45 treated employees for which the delivery method is unknown. Age refers to
worker’s age as of April 2011, the date of the intervention. The ‘match eligible before’ group
consists of workers that were eligible for the match as of February 2011. ‘newly eligible’ refers
to the group that became eligible for the match over the study period, and ‘not yet eligible’ are
workers that were not eligible for the match as of June 2011. The mean values for the treatment
and control group were tested to determine if they are statistically significantly different, * p <
0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

3

Table 7: Choice to Initiate Participation between February and June 2011
Full
Sample

Ages 18-44

Ages 1844

Ages
45+

(5)

(6)

0.031*
(0.015)

0.025**
(0.009)

-0.048*
(0.021)

-0.003*
(0.001)
0.064
(0.040)
0.085*
(0.040)
-0.020
(0.021)
0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.020
(0.020)
0.094***
(0.022)
-0.014
(0.011)
0.002
(0.001)

-0.0001
(0.002)
-0.006
(0.035)
0.096*
(0.045)
-0.006
(0.022)
0.002
(0.002)

(1)

Ages
18-24
(2)

Ages
25-34
(3)

Ages 3544
(4)

Intervention

0.011
(0.008)

0.048**
(0.015)

0.006
(0.015)

Tenure (Months)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.014
(0.017)
0.092***
(0.020)
-0.010
(0.010)
0.002*
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.002)
0.068
(0.045)
0.153**
(0.049)
-0.039
(0.022)
0.010
(0.007)

0.001
(0.001)
-0.047
(0.034)
0.058*
(0.028)
0.011
(0.016)
0.005
(0.003)

Match-Eligible Before
Newly Match-Eligible
Female
Salary (10K)
Age at intervention:
Age 18-24

-0.009
(0.010)
Age 35-44
-0.023*
(0.010)
Age 45+
-0.012
(0.010)
Observations
3,684
852
1,295
794
2,941
743
Mean Participation
0.066
0.062
0.077
0.054
0.066
0.065
Notes: See Table 6 for a description of the sample. Coefficients are average marginal effects
derived from a logit model of participation initiation. The ‘match-eligible before’ group consists
of workers that were eligible for the match as of February 2011, while ‘newly match-eligible’
refers to the group that became eligible for the match over the study period (the base category is
‘not yet eligible’ for the match). All specifications include a constant, and the omitted age group
is ages 25-34. Standard errors are in parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

4

Table 8: Heterogeneity in the Effect of Treatment on the Probability of Initiating
Participation between February and June 2011
Ages 18-44
Group

N

Percent Initiating
Participation

Average
Marginal Effect
of Treatment

2,941

6.63%

0.025 (0.009)***

Eligible before

1,322

5.30%

0.016 (0.012)

Newly eligible

449

13.8%

0.031 (0.033)

Not yet eligible

1,170

5.38%

0.032 (0.013)**

Females

2,149

6.05%

0.018 (0.010)*

Males

792

8.21%

0.042 (0.019)**

Salary <$60K

2,696

6.34%

0.026 (0.009)***

Salary $60K+

245

9.8%

0.012 (0.039)

Sub-Group

All New Hires
Match Eligibility

Gender
Salary

Ages 45 and Older
Group

N

Percent Initiating
Participation

743

6.46%

Average
Marginal Effect
of Treatment
-0.044 (0.021)**

Eligible before

369

4.88%

-0.024 (0.025)

Newly eligible

98

15.3%

-0.090 (0.089)

Not yet eligible

276

5.43%

-0.068 (0.034) **

Females

549

6.01%

-0.029 (0.022)

Males

194

7.73%

-0.086 (0.048)*

Salary <$60K

586

5.46%

-0.027 (0.021)

Sub-Group

All New Hires
Match Eligibility

Gender
Salary

Salary $60K+
157
10.2%
-0.103 (0.058)*
Notes: See Table 6 for a description of the sample. Each row presents results from a separate
regression of initiating participation on a dummy variable for receiving the intervention. The
regression specification is identical to that in Table 7, columns (5) and (6). Under match
eligibility, “eligible before” indicates all workers who achieved the requirements for match
eligibility by February 2011, before the intervention began. “Newly eligible” includes all
workers who became match-eligible during the study period (between February 2011 and June
2011). All other workers were not yet eligible for the employer match. Coefficients presented
are average marginal effects from a logit model, with standard errors in parentheses, * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

5

Percent of New Hires

Figure 1: 401(k) Plan Contribution Rates among Participating Newly Hired Workers

0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

45.2%

8.9%
6.1%
6.7%
4.4%
5.7%
0

2

4

8.6%
2.6%
2.1% 0.7%
6

8

10

3.0%
1.4%
0.2% 2.3%
0.7%
0.4% 0.4% 0.2% 0.0%
0.3%
12

14

16

18

20+

Percent of Salary Contributed to the 401(k) Plan

Notes: This figure illustrates the distribution of contribution rates as of February 28, 2011 among workers
hired at LFI between 2008 and 2010. Forty-nine percent of newly hired workers were participating in the
401(k) plan.

6

Appendix 1. Representativeness of Survey Respondents
Appendix Table 1.1 demonstrates that the survey is not necessarily representative of all newly
hired workers. Respondents are significantly more likely to be participating in the 401(k) plan,
are more likely to be male, are slightly older, and tend to have higher salaries. Note that the
employees given the survey are not the same as those represented in the administrative data with
the exception of the workers hired in December 2010. Therefore, a direct comparison is not
possible.
Appendix Table 1.1: Representativeness of Survey Respondents

Dec 2010 –
May 2011

Administrative
Data on all New
Hires
Jan 2008 –
Dec 2010

Administrative
Data on New Hires
within 60 Days
Nov 2010 –
Dec 2010

Participant

64.9%

49.0%

28.4%

Female

58.3%

65.8%

67.2%

36.5

34.7

34.2

Less than $25,000

21.0%

28.1%

45.1%

$25,000-49,999

38.9%

42.8%

33.4%

$50,000-74,999

14.6%

12.7%

10.1%

$75,000-99,999

12.6%

7.5%

4.8%

$100,000+

12.9%

8.9%

6.6%

Observations

336

7,218

557

Survey
Respondents
Date of Hire

Age
Salary:

Notes: The first column presents the means and sample percentages for those individuals who
responded to the survey. The second column presents statistics from administrative on all new
hires from 2008-2010. The third column presents statistics from administrative data for those
that were hired within the last 60 days of 2010.

7

Appendix 2. Knowledge Questions
Below is a list of the knowledge questions and potential answers, with the correct answer in bold.
The first three questions were developed by Lusardi and Mitchell (2011).

Interest Rate: If you have savings in the amount of $100 in the bank and the interest rate is 2%,
how much will you have in your savings account after 5 years?
Answers: (a) More than $102 (b) $102 (c) Less than $102 (d) Do not know
Inflation: If the current interest rate on your bank deposit is 1% per year and the inflation rate is
2% per year, how much do you think you will be able to buy with your money a year from now?
Answers: (a) A larger amount than you can buy now (b) Exactly the same as you can buy now
(c) A smaller amount than you can buy now (d) Do not know
Investment: Do you think the following statement is true or false? “Buying a single company
stock usually provides a safer return than a diversified portfolio.”
Answers: (a) True (b) False (c) Do not know
Tax Advantage: Assume you are in the 25 percent tax bracket (you pay $0.25 in tax for each
dollar earned) and you contribute $100 pretax to the 401(k) plan. Your take home pay (what is in
your pay check after all taxes and other payments are taken out) will:
Answers: (a) Decline by $100 (b) Decline by $75 (c) Decline by $50 (d) Remain the same (e)
Do not know
401(k) Employer Match: Assume that your employer matches your contribution one dollar for
each dollar you contribute to the 401(k) plan. If you contribute $100 to the 401(k) plan, your
account balance in the plan, including your contribution, will:
Answers: (a) Increase by $50 (b) Increase by $100 (c) Increase by $200 (d) Remain the same
(e) Do not know

8

Appendix 3: Randomization in Intervention Group Assignments
Employees that were hired during 2008- 2010 that were not participating in the 401(k) plan
as of February 28, 2011 were randomly assigned to three groups:
(1) Intervention Version 1 (flyer including peer participation statement)
(2) Intervention Version 2 (basic flyer, no peer information)
(3) Control (group 3).
To verify that the randomization was done properly, the group means for age, gender, year of
hire, and salary are evaluated to ensure that each group is representative of the entire sample of
non-participants. Due to limited access to computers at work, a small subset of workers in the
“intervention” samples were sent the flyer via interoffice mail instead of via email. The delivery
method was not randomized, since it was only those without regular access to computers for
work that received the hard copy version.
Appendix Table 3.1 shows the means are nearly identical across the randomized
treatment and control groups, as intended by study design. We also see that those terminated
during the sample period were more likely to be lower paid employees and those that were more
recently hired. Appendix Table 3.2 demonstrates that there was little difference between the
effects of the two versions of the flyer. Therefore, we do not find any evidence of a differential
“peer effect” from providing information about peer behavior.

9

Appendix Table 3.1: Randomization in Intervention Group Assignments
Randomization (Full Data)
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
(Intervention)
(Intervention)
(Control
Group)
Age
34.7
34.7
34.5
Age 18-44
80.0%
80.5%
80.7%
Age 45+
20.0%
19.5%
19.3%
Female
72.3%
72.9%
75.1%
Tenure (in Months)
16.9
16.9
16.7
Salary
$34,556
$34,149
$33,941
Observations
1,370
1,371
1,370
Randomization (Final Sample)
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
(Intervention)
(Intervention)
(Control
Group)
Age
35.1
34.9
34.6
Age 18-44
79.2%
80.0%
80.3%
Age 45+
20.8%
20.0%
19.7%
Female
71.6%
72.8%
75.3%
Tenure (in Months)
16.9
17.1
16.6
Salary
$36,048
$35,567
$34,837
Observations
1,216
1,223
1,245
Delivery Method (not randomized)
Email
Interoffice
Mail
Age
36.1
32.0
Age 18-44
77.4%
85.7%
Age 45+
22.6%
14.3%
Female
67.7%
84.6%
Tenure (in Months)
17.7
15.0
Salary
$42,971
$21,594
Observations
1,789
650
Notes: The full data includes all employees hired in 2008-2010 that were not participating in the
401(k) plan as of February 2011. The “final sample” excludes those that left employment and
individuals in the treatment group for which the delivery method is unknown. Age refers to age
at April 2011, the date of intervention. Forty-five observations had missing information on
delivery method, so were excluded.

10

Appendix Table 3.2: LFI Intervention Effects by Version of Flyer
Full
Ages
Ages
Full
Ages
Ages
Sample
18-44
45+
Sample
18-44
45+
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Intervention Version 1
0.012
0.030*
-0.042*
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.018)
Intervention Version 2
0.011
0.027*
-0.038*
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.018)
Intervention Email
0.011
0.027*
-0.048*
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.020)
Intervention Interoffice
0.013
0.028
-0.027
Mail
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.022)
Tenure (in Months)
-0.001
-0.001
-0.00004
-0.001
-0.001
-0.00001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
Newly Match-Eligible
0.092***
0.094***
0.096*
0.092*** 0.094***
0.096*
(0.020)
(0.022)
(0.045)
(0.020)
(0.022)
(0.045)
Match-Eligible Before
0.014
0.019
-0.006
0.014
0.020
-0.007
(0.017)
(0.020)
(0.035)
(0.017)
(0.020)
(0.035)
Female
-0.010
-0.014
-0.006
-0.010
-0.014
-0.007
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.022)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.022)
Salary (10K)
0.002*
0.002
0.002
0.002*
0.002
0.002
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
Age 18-24
-0.009
-0.010
(0.010)
(0.010)
Age 35-44
-0.023*
-0.023*
(0.010)
(0.010)
Age 45 and Above
-0.012
-0.012
(0.010)
(0.010)
Observations
3,684
2,941
743
3,684
2,941
743
Notes: Specification and sample is identical to that presented in Table 7, except here we
distinguish between the types of flyer or the delivery method. In columns (1) - (3) we include
two variables indicating the type of intervention sent. In columns (4) - (6) we include two
variables indicating the delivery method of the intervention. The ‘match-eligible before’ group
consists of workers that were eligible for the match as of February 2011, while ‘newly matcheligible’ refers to the group that became eligible for the match over the study period (the base
category is ‘not yet eligible’ for the match). Age refers to age at April 2011, the date of
intervention. Age refers to age at April 2011, the date of intervention. Standard errors are in
parentheses, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

11

Appendix 4: Flyer Sent to LFI Non-Participants

Are you leaving money on the table?
Join the 68% of LFI employees who are
already contributing to their 401(k) plan
A LITTLE MONEY SAVED TODAY GOES A LONG WAY IN
RETIREMENT

LFI offers a 100% match on the first 6% of income saved in your 401(k) account, plus
you get all the tax savings!1 Even a simple change – such as bringing a bagged lunch to
work a few times a month – can make a big difference.
The following examples show how small sacrifices today can have a big impact on your
retirement income.
Unit
Price

1 specialty coffee per day
1 movie per week
1 candy bar per day

$2.50
$8.50
$0.55

Per
Year

Amount per year plus
100% Employer Match2

Total If Invested in
Plan for 40 Years3

$912.50
$443.25
$200.75

$1,825.00
$886.50
$401.50

$863,158
$419,248
$189,895

To Enroll: The Learning Center at eBenefitsNow.com contains the LFI 401(k) Savings
Plan Participant Guide. The LFI 401(k) Savings Plan Participant Guide provides Plan
Highlights, Investment Information, and Enrollment Instructions. You can also enroll by
accessing the Plan’s website directly at: http://www.-.com/plantrac.

1

Employees are eligible for the employer match after 1 year of service. Contributions to 401(k) plans
come from pre-tax income and the interest on 401(k) balances is exempt from taxes.
2
3

Assumes 100% employer match.

Assumes 4% annual price inflation, deposits to plan at the end of each month and 8% average annual
returns, no taxes apply.

