NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF PHYSICIAN-DIRECTED PHARMACEUTICAL PROMOTION ON PRESCRIPTION BEHAVIORS:
LONGITUDINAL EVIDENCE
Anusua Datta
Dhaval M. Dave
Working Paper 19592
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19592

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

The authors are very grateful to Michael Fitzmaurice, Robert Kaestner, LeighAnn Leung, Yang Wang,
and Samuel Zuvekas for helpful comments. We are especially grateful to Sumit Agarwal for the data
and his helpful advice. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Anusua Datta and Dhaval M. Dave. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Effects of Physician-Directed Pharmaceutical Promotion on Prescription Behaviors: Longitudinal
Evidence
Anusua Datta and Dhaval M. Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 19592
October 2013, Revised January 2014
JEL No. D22,I0,M3
ABSTRACT
Spending on prescription drugs (Rx) represents one of the fastest growing components of U.S. healthcare
spending, and has coincided with an expansion of pharmaceutical promotional spending. Most (83%)
of Rx promotion is directed at physicians in the form of visits by pharmaceutical representatives (known
as detailing) and drug samples provided to physicians’ offices. Such promotion has come under increased
public scrutiny, with critics contending that physician-directed promotion may play a role in raising
healthcare costs and may unduly affect physicians’ prescribing habits towards more expensive, and
possibly less cost-effective, drugs. In this study, we bring longitudinal evidence to bear upon the question
of how detailing impacts physicians’ prescribing behaviors. Specifically, we examine prescriptions
and promotion for a particular drug class based on a nationally-representative sample of 150,000 physicians
spanning 24 months. The use of longitudinal physician-level data allows us to tackle some of the empirical
concerns in the extant literature, virtually all of which has relied on aggregate national data. We estimate
fixed-effects specifications that bypass stable unobserved physician-specific heterogeneity and address
potential targeting bias. In addition, we also assess differential effects at both the extensive and intensive
margins of prescribing behaviors, and differential effects across physician- and market-level characteristics,
questions which have not been explored in prior work. The estimates suggest that detailing has a significant
and positive effect on the number of new scripts written for the detailed drug, with an elasticity magnitude
of 0.06. This effect is substantially smaller than those in the literature based on aggregate information,
suggesting that most of the observed relationship between physician-directed promotion and drug
sales is driven by selection bias. Qualitatively consistent with the literature, we find that detailing
impacts selective brand-specific demand but does not have any substantial effects on class-level demand.
Results also indicate that most of the detailing response may operate at the extensive margin; detailing
affects the probability of prescribing the drug more than it affects the number of prescriptions conditional
on any prescribing. We draw some implications from these estimates with respect to effects on healthcare
costs and public health.
Anusua Datta
Philadelphia University
School of Business Administration
Philadelphia, PA 19144
DattaA@philau.edu
Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

I.

Introduction
Spending on prescription drugs in the U.S. increased from $40.3 billion in 1990 to $259.1

billion in 2010 (Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services - CMS 2012), representing an
increase of over 540%. Although prescription drug spending is a much smaller proportion of
national health expenditures, about 10% in 2010 compared to 31% for hospital care and 21%
for physician services, it has been one of the fastest growing components of health care
spending. The rising prescription drug expenditures cannot be fully explained by higher
prescription (Rx) drug prices, which increased 124% between 1990 and 2010, based on the BLS
(Bureau of Labor Statistics 2012) prescription drug price index. Utilization accounts for a large
part of the increase.
The growth in the share of prescription drug expenditures has coincided with the
growth in pharmaceutical promotion, which increased from $11.4 billion in 1996 to $29.9
billion in 2005 (Donohue et al. 2007) and $32.3 billion in 2008 (SK&A 2011).1 Promotion of
prescription drugs is generally limited to drugs on patent. Such promotion includes direct-toconsumer advertising (DTCA) on broadcast and print media, and direct-to-physician promotion
(DTPP) through visits by company representatives to physician offices (known as detailing),
product sampling provided to physicians and hospitals, and advertising in professional journals.
There are currently about 81,000 pharmaceutical sales representatives in the U.S., and the
typical representative “details” about 5-10 physicians a day (www.ZSassociates.com; Weiss

1

Since 2008, promotional spending has declined by about 13% to $28.1 billion in 2010 (SK&A 2011), in
part due to patent expiration on major drugs such as Advair, Prevacid, and Lipitor. Spending in 2011
increased to $29.3 billion (SK&A 2012)

3

2010).2 On average, pharmaceutical companies expend over $20,000 annually per physician on
marketing efforts that include contact visits, gifts, samples, meals, travel, consultancy fees, and
related spending (Weiss 2010). Hence, product detailing and free sampling, which are both
complementary direct marketing efforts to providers, constitute the bulk of the pharmaceutical
promotional budget, comprising about 83% in 2011 (SK&A 2012).
As pharmaceutical spending continues to escalate and drug safety issues have become
more common, such physician-directed outreach efforts have come under mounting public
scrutiny.3 The debate surrounds the conflict of interest between marketing and patient care,
that is whether interactions between pharmaceutical representatives and healthcare providers
compromise physicians’ integrity, encourage rent-seeking behavior, and impact their
prescribing choices. Specifically from the standpoint of public welfare, the issue also centers
around whether such practices induce physicians to prescribe more expensive (and/or possibly
less effective) drugs in the presence of cheaper and equally-effective alternatives. The
pharmaceutical industry acknowledges that detailing practices likely impact physicians’
prescribing behaviors, but also contends that such marketing is welfare-enhancing and remains
an important source of physician learning. The industry notes that detailers provide valuable
information concerning the drug’s indications and counterindications, which in turn allows
physicians to make better-informed choices.

2

The pharmaceutical sales force has shrunk since 2008 partly due to layoffs and cost-cutting measures
and partly due to a shift towards electronic detailing (“e-detailing”).
3
Vioxx spent $208 million on physician detailing (and $256 million on consumer-directed advertising) in
2003, prior to its withdrawal in 2004, which may have played a role in expanding utilization to a point
beyond what was necessary based on patient need (Pew Prescription Project 2009). David et al. (2010)
find some evidence that increased consumer-directed advertising is associated with an increased
reporting of adverse medical events for certain conditions. This suggests that consumer promotion may
worsen the average safety profile for the drug.

4

These concerns have prompted legislative activity and responses at both the state and
federal levels, which are aimed at limiting the influence of provider-aimed pharmaceutical
marketing. An increasing number of states have undertaken academic or counter-detailing in
an effort to balance sales-focused information.4 Such programs utilize clinicians, pharmacists,
and nurses to provide objective non-commercial information to physicians anchored on
evidence-based research (Pew Prescription Project 2009). The National Resource Center for
Academic Detailing, which is funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ), was created in 2010 to promote counter-detailing measures by adapting AHRQ’s
evidence-based research for such programs and providing training and logistical support to
organizations who are establishing new academic detailing programs.5 In 1990, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) enacted regulations that banned “gifts of substantial value” from
drug companies to providers (Pomper 2000), though this only shifted the composition of such
gifts. The American Medical Association (AMA) has also debated policies relating to detailing
and industry “freebies”, and has issued ethics guidelines addressing such marketing practices
and industry gifts (Weiss 2010). New voluntary pharmaceutical industry guidelines on
interactions with providers also went into effect in 2009, partly in an attempt to preempt
further state and federal legislative actions. Some states such as Vermont, Massachusetts, and
Minnesota have enacted “sunshine laws” that mandate public disclosures of payments to

4

Currently, DC, MA, ME, NH, NY OR, PA, SC, and VT have some form of academic detailing programs
(Hilltop Institute 2009; Pew Prescription Project 2009).
5
The Independent Drug Education and Outreach Act of 2009 was also introduced in the House and the
Senate, proposing to offer federal grants for the development of academic detailing programs.

5

physicians beyond a certain amount (Grande 2010).6 Similar provisions were debated as part of
a federal disclosure bill in 2009 (Physician Payments Sunshine Act). These provisions eventually
became part of the Affordable Care Act and now require pharmaceutical companies to report
to the Secretary of Health and Human Services any payment or transfer of value to providers
(with limited exceptions) or any financial conflict of interest.
Given that the pharmaceutical industry invests most of its promotional budget towards
marketing efforts aimed at physicians, and the debate centers on the influence of such
outreach, a critical question relates to how physician-directed promotion affects prescribing
behavior. Virtually all of the empirical studies that have investigated the effects of
pharmaceutical promotion have done so based on aggregate data for a subset of drugs, which
inherently limits the prior analyses in a number of ways. Estimates from these studies, most of
which rely on national data, are subject to potential bias from unobserved trends and other
confounding factors. For instance, addressing targeting bias is a vital issue in identifying
plausibly causal effects of advertising. Identification based on national or market-level data
cannot bypass the concern that physicians who already have a history of prescribing a particular
drug or who have a higher unobserved likelihood of prescribing the drug (for instance due to
their patient population or practice type) are more likely to be targeted by detailers. This
would impart an upward bias to the estimated effects. While most of these studies have found
positive effects of detailing on drug sales, at the very least the magnitude of these effects
therefore comes into question. Furthermore, even if detailing plays a causal role in raising drug
sales, key gaps remain in this literature with respect to understanding the margin at which
6

Minnesota and Vermont actually ban all gifts, and Vermont requires that all free samples of drugs be
reported to the State Attorney General’s Office. Starting in 2006, New Hampshire has banned the sale of
prescription data to commercial entities.

6

detailing exerts its influence. For instance, it remains unclear whether detailing impacts
physician prescribing habits at the intensive margin, by influencing the number of prescriptions
among physicians who were already prescribing the drug, or at the extensive margin, by
influencing physicians who had never prescribed the drug. It is also unclear how these effects
vary across physician and market-level characteristics. As prior studies mainly use aggregate
sales and promotion information, they are unable to parse out the effect across these different
margins or assess heterogeneity in the response to detailing across physician-level
characteristics.
We address these gaps and also add to the weight of the evidence bearing on the
impact of direct-to-physician promotion (DTPP) by utilizing a unique nationally-representative
longitudinal panel of 149,000 physicians comprising almost 3.6 million physician-month records
over 24 months. Specifically, we analyze the impact of detailing and sampling related to
Famvir, a branded drug indicated for the treatment of various Herpes infections, on the
prescribing behavior of individual physicians. The use of longitudinal physician-level data
represents a significant departure from the bulk of the literature, as does the precise drug-level
detailing matched with the same drug’s prescriptions, allowing us to estimate physician fixedeffects models to account for targeting bias and other unobserved time-invariant physician
heterogeneity, and in the process derive plausibly causal effects of DTPP. In addition, the use
of longitudinal physician-level information allows us to study effects at various relevant margins
and assess heterogeneity in these effects, which have heretofore remained unexplored.
2.

Prior Studies

7

While pharmaceutical direct-to-consumer advertising (DTCA) has expanded significantly
since 1999, when the FDA clarified and relaxed the risk information requirements associated
with pharmaceutical promotion, direct-to-physician promotion (DTPP) has historically been and
remains the primary form of promotion used by the pharmaceutical industry.7 Several
econometric studies have examined the impact of such promotion.8 Berndt et al. (1995),
consider the role of detailing and medical journal advertisements as well as DTCA in the market
for anti-ulcer drugs. They study the period prior to the shift in FDA guidelines, from September
1977 through December 1994. Based on an IV methodology to account for the simultaneity
between marketing, pricing, and demand, they find the strongest demand effect for the stocks
of detailing (market share elasticity=0.649) followed by medical journal advertising (0.198).
They find the smallest impact for print consumer advertising.
Other studies have also confirmed that the marginal impact of detailing on market share
is significantly larger relative to that for consumer-directed advertising.9 Kalyanaram (2009,
2008), for instance, reports market share elasticities of 0.62-0.81 with respect to DTPP
compared to 0.12-0.21 with respect to DTCA. Dave and Saffer (2012) also find significantly
larger sales-DTPP elasticities (0.51 for detailing and 0.34 for sampling) compared to the salesDTCA elasticity (0.13).
Rizzo (1999) studies pooled annual data for 46 anti-hypertensive drugs from 1988-1993,
and, based on drug-specific fixed effects models, finds that increased current and past detailing
efforts reduce the price elasticity and increase sales. He concludes that pharmaceutical
7

See Iizuka (2004) and Dave (2012) for expanded accounts on the historical background, trends, and
controversies surrounding pharmaceutical promotion.
8
See Dave (2013) for a more comprehensive survey of the literature on the effects of pharmaceutical
promotion aimed at consumers and healthcare providers, in the U.S. and internationally.
9
See also Ling, Berndt and Kyle (2002), Wosińska (2002), and Iizuka and Jin (2007).

8

promotion differentiates products, increases brand loyalty, and inhibits price competition in the
pharmaceutical industry.
Mizik and Jacobson (2004) estimate dynamic fixed-effects specifications based on
physician-level longitudinal data spanning 24 months for three branded drugs.10 A notable
feature of their study is that they estimate first-differenced specifications to account for
unobserved physician-specific characteristics. They find modest effects of detailing,
substantially smaller than those reported in studies based on aggregate data, at the
contemporaneous and 1-4 months lagged levels. This is consistent with estimates based on
aggregate data being potentially biased upwards due to targeting bias and unobserved
physician heterogeneity.
Engelberg, Parsons, and Tefft (2013) utilize a novel dataset matching information on
payments from 12 pharmaceutical firms to a sample of physicians and their Medicare
prescriptions. Exploiting doctor-firm pairs, they find evidence that such payments significantly
increase the number of prescriptions for drugs manufactured by the firm in question. This
study is notable for its inclusion of physician fixed effects to purge unobserved physician
heterogeneity, though the focus of the study is on payments to physicians such as consulting,
speaking, gifts, meals, research, and travel (which comprise less than 4% of provided-directed
promotional spending) rather than detailing.
Beyond estimating mean effects of DTPP, some studies further assess interactions
between the various marketing elements and also consider differential effects of DTPP across
various market, physician, and product-level characteristics. Narayanan, Desiraju, and

10

Due to conditions of anonymity, the drugs or their therapeutic class are not specified in the study.

9

Chintagunta (2004) utilize monthly data on three branded second generation anti-histamines
(and one aggregated measure of all other first-generation and other anti-histamines) spanning
April 1993 through March 2002. They find that detailing primarily and positively affects brand
share, whereas DTCA has a significant positive effect on both brand shares and class sales. The
return on investment (ROI) is much larger for detailing than for DTCA, a feature which they
attribute to the fact that detailing allows for a much more targeted promotional effort relative
to DTCA. They also find evidence of synergy between the two forms of promotion. For
instance, a sales call to a physician’s office has a higher marginal impact on brand share when
combined with DTCA.11
Gonul et al. (2001) utilize information on 1785 patient visits occurring between January
1989 and December 1994 to a panel of 157 physicians to study the effects of pricing and
promotional activities on prescription choice within a particular undisclosed therapeutic class.
Estimates from multinomial logit specifications suggest that detailing significantly raises the
probabililty of prescribing the promoted drug up to a point after which the excessive detailing
becomes counter-effective due to diminishing returns. The effect of detailing and sampling is
found to be insignificant for physicians with a higher percentage of HMO (health maintenance
organizations) patients, which the author conjecture is likely due to the restrictions imposed by
HMO drug formularies.12 They conclude in favor of detailing and sampling being mostly
informative and raising the price sensitivity of physicians. Also using a physician-level sample,
Manchanda and Chintagunta (2004) confirm the positive but diminishing returns to detailing on
11

They also find that the interaction between detailing and price is negative suggesting that higher levels
of detailing raise the price elasticity. This contrasts with the finding in Rizzo (2004) that detailing reduces
the price elasticity, albeit for a sample of anti-hypertensive drugs.
12
The effects of detailing and sampling are negative for Medicare patients, possibly due to confounding
with other ailments and drugs prescribed for the patients.

10

prescriptions, with diminishing returns setting in more frequently for detailing targeted towards
specialists. They find that sampling raises the effectiveness of detailing, and that detailing is
most effective when targeted towards specialists followed by primary care physicians. One of
the limitations of such physician-level studies is that they typically do not observe competitive
detailing efforts or other forms of drug promotion.
Uncertainty regarding the efficacy of the drug and its attributes including the safety
profile tends to be high in the early stages of the drug’s life cycle. Hence, DTPP may play an
informative role in periods immediately following a drug’s launch. After some point, DTPP
largely takes on a persuasive role by providing samples and reminders. Narayanan et al. (2005)
utilize a random coefficients discrete choice model with a Bayesian learning process to test how
marketing communication changes over a product’s life cycle for prescription anti-histamines.
They find that the physician learning effect and the informative role of DTPP generally
dominates during the early stages, up to 6-14 months following the drug’s launch, whereas the
persuasive role dominates in subsequent periods. Chintagunta, Goettler, and Kim (2012) model
a Bayesian learning framework for erectile dysfunction drugs, and show that forward-looking
physicians delay adoption of the new drug when expected detailing is high. This leads to a
negative short-run detailing elasticity, reflecting a strategic substitution between learning from
detailing versus learning from early experimentation with the drug on patients. The long-run
detailing response is positive, though still lower for forward-looking physicians who may delay
adoption in anticipation of high detailing relative to myopic physicians.
Most of the above-referenced studies (Berndt et al. 1995; Rizzo 1999; Ling, Berndt, and
Kyle 2002; Narayanan, Desiraju, and Chintangunta 2004, Narayanan et al. 2005; Kalyanaram

11

2008, 2009; Dave and Saffer 2012) utilize a national aggregated time series of sales and
promotion for varying drug brands. A few studies utilize patient-level data (Wosińska 2002;
Iizuka and Jin 2007), though these records are still matched with aggregated national drug-level
promotional information. Very little work has exploited longitudinal information on physicians.
Gonul et al. (2001) and Manchanda and Chintangunta (2004) are the exceptions, but in essence
treat their data as cross-sectional and leave unexploited one of the main advantages of
longitudinal data; they do not control for physician fixed effects. In fact, Gonul (2001) cautions
that “prescription behavior patterns might be strongly influenced by factors other than the
explanatory variables…” such as “physicians’ unobservable characteristics,” and notes that
“ignoring these factors might bias the coefficients of the included explanatory variables (p. 84).
To the best of our knowledge, Mizik and Jacobson (2004) is the sole study to have
investigated the effects of physician detailing on prescriptions based on a first-differenced
model that purges unobserved physician-specific heterogeneity. The study is notable for this
advancement, though in the process of identifying separate effects for contemporaneous and
each prior month’s promotion, estimates are limited by collinearity and power concerns.
Furthermore, standard errors are not adjusted for autocorrelation within physician practices
over time. The identification strategy, which is based on a dynamic panel estimator and utilizes
lagged levels as instruments for the first differences, is based on the assumption of no
autocorrelation.
Several questions remain unexplored in the literature, even among the very few studies
that have used physician- or patient-level data. We address these gaps and add to the weight of
the evidence bearing on how DTPP impacts physicians’ prescribing behavior, utilizing nationally-

12

representative longitudinal information on physicians. We take care to fully exploit the
advantages afforded by longitudinal information, and estimate physician fixed effects models.
In addressing concerns related to targeting bias and unobserved stable physician-specific
heterogeneity, the estimates yield plausibly causal effects of detailing. We also provide the first
estimates of the effects of detailing at both the intensive and extensive margins of physicians’
prescribing behaviors, and further investigate heterogeneity in the effects based on observed
physician characteristics.
3.

Data
The data utilized in this study are collected by IMS Health (formerly Verispan), and

pertain to monthly records on the number of new scripts written by a nationally-representative
sample of 149,247 practicing physicians spanning 24 months (June 1997 – May 1999).13
Specifically, we study the effects of DTPP for Famvir on the number of new prescriptions
written for this drug as well as for other competing drugs in the therapeutic class. Physicians
are asked to keep track of the detailing and samples that they receive from sales
representatives. Hence, for each physician-month record, we observe two primary (and
complementary) forms of DTPP: the total number of visits by pharmaceutical sales
representatives directly pertaining to Famvir, and the number of free drug samples for Famvir
received by the physician. In addition, the data also contain detailed information on the
physician’s characteristics, including age, gender, specialty, area of practice (zip code), and
practice type (for instance, solo, partnership, small/large/medium group, medical school,

13

This is approximately a 21% sample, as there were about 702,000 practicing physicians (2.6 per 1,000
population) in the U.S. in 1998 (National Center for Health Statistics).

13

hospital, clinic). We match information on the dates of FDA approval and patent expiration for
each drug from the FDA’s Orange Book.14
Famciclovir, which is marketed under the brand name Famvir, was approved by the FDA
in June 1994 to treat various herpes viral infections, including herpes zoster (shingles), herpes
simplex virus 2 (genital herpes), herpes labialis (cold sores), and also suppress recurring
episodes of herpes simplex virus 2.15 A year after the approval of Famvir, another herpes antiviral drug, Valcyclovir sold under the brand name Valtrex, was approved (June 1995).16 The
oldest anti-viral medication is Acyclovir, originally sold under the brand name Zovirax. The
topical form was approved in 1982, and the oral form was approved in 1985. Generic Acyclovir
entered the market in 1997, and was therefore available throughout our sample period.
All three anti-viral drugs are approved for the treatment of recurrent genital herpes
episodes and can also be taken in smaller daily doses for prophylactic suppression of the virus
and for reduction in the frequency and duration of future outbreaks. However, Famvir and
Valtrex are utilized and absorbed more efficiently; hence, they can be taken less frequently or
in smaller doses than Acyclovir in treating recurrent episodes and for viral suppression. Both
Famvir and Valtrex are more or less equally effective for treating and controlling outbreaks and
suppressing recurrence. Clinical research has not found any significant differences in
effectiveness between Acyclovir, Famvir, and Valtrex with respect to controlling outbreaks, and
between Famvir and Valtrex with respect to suppressing recurrence (Wald et al. 2006). In the
14

See: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/ob/default.cfm.
Famvir 500mg was approved in June 1994; Famvir 125mg was approved in December 1995; and
Famvir 250mg was approved in April 1996. In August of 2007, the first generic version of Famciclovir (all
three doses) was approved. In the physician-level data, these doses are separately observed. We
combine all doses into a single measure of Famvir prescriptions and Famvir-related detailing and
sampling (any dose).
16
Famvir was originally made by SmithKline Beecham, and Valtrex was made by Glaxo Wellcome. When
the firms merged in 2000 to form GlaxoSmithKline, U.S. regulators forced them to sell Famvir to Novartis.
15

14

case of an initial episode, however, oral Acyclovir or Valtrex may be preferable to Famvir since
the efficacy of Famvir for initial episode genital herpes infection has not been firmly
established. In 2003, Valtrex also became the only drug to gain FDA approval for reducing the
risk of transmission of genital herpes with the use of suppressive therapy and safer sex
practices.
In terms of costs associated with episodic use, the retail cost of treating an outbreak is
lowest with generic Acyclovir ($30.33), followed by Valtrex ($40.66), and then Famvir ($50.21).
In terms of costs associated with daily suppressive use, the retail cost is again lowest for generic
Acyclovir ($1624.24), followed by Valtrex ($2313.52 - $4350.60, depending on dose17), and then
Famvir ($4200.24).18
Table 1 presents means for our key variables across various analyses samples. Over the
sample period, about 48.3% of new herpes anti-viral prescriptions were written for the generic
Acyclovir. The remainder of the new prescriptions were for the branded drugs: 18.7% for
Famvir, 26.4% for Valtrex, and 6.7% for Zovirax. Approximately 43% of physicians were detailed
at some point in relation to Famvir. Among those who were detailed during the sample period,
the average physician received at least one visit from a pharmaceutical representative every 3
months.
4.

Framework

Analytical Framework

17

A one-gram daily suppressive dose of Valtrex costs $4350.60, indicated for patients with normal
immune function. For most patients, who have 9 or fewer recurrences per year, an alternative
suppressive daily dose of 500mg is indicated, with a cost or $2313.52 annually.
18
See http://www.herpes-coldsores.com/compare-herpes-drugs.htm.

15

The market for prescription drugs is differentiated from other markets both on the
demand side and on the supply side due to the involvement of multiple agents. On the demand
side, even though the patient is the end-user, the physicians are the primary decision-makers
and gatekeepers since the patient cannot legally consume the drug without a prescription from
their physician. The physician is also a provider of information on the drug’s indications and
contraindications to the patient. Furthermore, on the demand side, the insured consumer pays
only a fixed copayment or fraction of the full retail price, with the pharmacies reimbursed for
the residual cost by the insurance company. On the supply side, the pharmaceutical firm has a
time-limited monopoly for the sale of its patented drugs. The firm can use promotion to
physicians, promotion to consumers and pricing as tools for maximizing profits during the
monopoly period and subsequent to patent expiration.
It is often presumed that the average consumer is responsive to advertising and
promotion.19 In the context of DTPP, the physician is the “consumer” and it is their behaviors
that detailing seeks to impact. Under the persuasive view, advertising can impact demand by
altering consumers’ tastes and preferences. The informative view of advertising points to the
transfer of information to consumers as another explanation for why they respond to
advertising messages. Nelson (1970) distinguishes between search goods, wherein the
consumer can determine quality prior to purchase though perhaps after incurring some search
costs, and experience goods, wherein the consumer can assess quality or attributes only after
consumption. Advertising addresses an informational imbalance for experience goods by
providing indirect information content regarding attributes, and advertising intensity is thus
19

See Bagwell (2007) for a comprehensive review of the economics of advertising, and Dave (2012) for a
review specifically relating to the pharmaceutical market.

16

predicted to be higher for experience goods. A third view of advertising provides a framework
under which advertising is complementary to the advertised product, and also bridges back to
the informative view. If advertising, for instance, enables consumers to produce information at
lower cost, then they can more efficiently convert market goods into valued final commodities
(Stigler and Becker 1977). And, even if advertising in uninformative, consumers may value it
directly, as assumed in Becker and Murphy (1993).
The upshot of this discussion is that there are elements of each view of advertising that
apply to physician-directed promotion of Rx drugs, and the frameworks are not necessarily
mutually exclusive. Prescription drugs, especially new entrants, have some predominant
experience attributes, and information provided by pharmaceutical representatives may
address some of the uncertainty regarding the mean efficacy and/or counterindications
concerning the drug.20 Thus, detailing plays a role in educating providers about newer drugs
and their attributes and may have information value early in a product’s life cycle, whereas
later in the life cycle its role can be predominantly persuasive and chiefly relegated to delivering
samples and reminders.21
One of the key questions with respect to advertising by firms in markets for healthcare
inputs also relates to whether advertising raises “selective” or brand-specific demand versus
“primary” or industry-wide demand (Dave and Kelly 2012). In the context of DTPP, market
expansion may be welfare-enhancing if it encourages greater contact between the patient and
20

Hence, advertising and other promotion intensity for the pharmaceutical industry tends to be
substantially higher relative to the average sector. For instance, the promotion-to-sales ratio for the U.S.
pharmaceutical industry is about 15-20%, compared to an all-industry average of 4-5% (Dave 2012).
21
Physician learning in the presence of uncertainty regarding drug attributes can also occur from
feedback received from patients and from peers, and from other forms of pharmaceutical promotion and
interactions (for instance, consumer directed ads, seminars/meetings, medical journal articles and
advertising, etc.).

17

the physician, expanding treatment to undertreated populations, and, specifically in the case of
anti-viral herpes drugs, if it plays a role in reducing transmission and new infections. Selective
demand effects, on the other hand, may be welfare-enhancing only if the detailed drug is also
the most effective and/or cost-effective treatment available. On the other hand, if detailing
raises demand for a drug at the expense of other more cost-effective drugs, then such selective
demand effects may be welfare-reducing. Since detailing can affect both selective (brandcentric) as well as primary (market) demand under these views (Dave and Kelly 2012), the
question cannot be resolved based on theory alone and empirical evidence needs to bear upon
the question.
Methodology
Drawing from this framework, the following demand function relates prescriptions for
Famvir to physician-directed promotional efforts for the drug:
NRXimt = exp(α0 + λ1DETimt + λ2SAMPimt + μiB + ωmΩ + νtΨ + εimt)

(1)

Equation (1) denotes that the number of new prescriptions written for Famvir by the ith
physician, in month m of year t, is a function of the number of Famvir-related visits by
pharmaceutical representatives to the ith physician’s office during that month and year
(detailing denoted by DET) and the number of Famvir samples provided to the physician
(SAMP). The parameter of interest is λ1, which captures the reduced-form impact of physician
detailing on prescribing habits operating through all (persuasive and/or learning) channels.
Prescribing habits also depend on observed and unobserved physician attributes (μ)
such as age, gender, specialty, type of practice, patient mix, and preferences. All models
further include a set of month (ω) and year (ν) indicators in order to capture unobserved

18

seasonal trends and unobserved national trends, for instance relating to shifts in prescription
drug coverage, general trends in herpes infections, and other national trends in pharmaceutical
promotion directed at consumers.22 The vector of time-varying variables also includes linear
and quadratic effects of the time until patent expiration, which account for the impact of
Famvir’s life cycle on prescription patterns. The disturbance term is represented by ε.
We estimate this specification using a Poisson regression model for two reasons. First,
the discrete nature of the outcome variable as a count of the number of new prescriptions
makes the Poisson probability distribution especially suitable. Second, the Poisson framework
does not suffer from the ‘incidental parameters’ problem and can accommodate fixed effects
well (Cameron and Trivedi 1998). All standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation
within physician cells over time.23
Empirical Concerns
We extend the baseline model to address a number of specific issues. One potential
concern with identifying the impact of physician-directed advertising relates to the possibility of
targeting bias and unobserved physician heterogeneity. Certain physicians, for instance, those
who are high prescribers of the drug in question or other competitive drugs or those who have
a higher unobserved (to the researcher) likelihood of prescribing the drug, are more likely to be
detailed, as are physicians from larger practices, specialties, or market areas with higher
potential demand (Fugh-Berman and Ahari 2007; Mizik and Jacobson 2004). On the other hand,
if physicians strategically substitute between sources of information such as detailing versus
22

Initial visits to physicians, related to genital herpes, was generally trending upwards between 19662006, but since then has trended downwards (see http://www.cdc.gov/std/Herpes/stats.htm). Over our
sample period spanning 1997-1999, such initial visits increased by about 27%.
23
Since the Poisson framework implicitly assumes that the mean of each count (for state s and year t) is
equal to its variance, this also adjusts the standard errors for over-dispersion (Wooldridge 2001).

19

early adoption of the drug to gauge its side effects and benefits, then an increase in expected
detailing can delay adoption by physicians who were initially planning to obtain information via
experimentation (Chintagunta, Goettler, and Kim 2012). Furthermore, the link between DTPP
and prescribing habits may be confounded by other unobserved physician-specific
characteristics such as inertia in prescribing patterns, brand loyalty, patient mix, tolerance for
risk, and preferences towards tradeoffs between efficacy, counterindications, and long-term
use for prophylactic purposes.
As shown in Table 1, there are significant differences across physicians who are everdetailed by Famvir reps (approximately 43% of the physicians in the analysis sample) versus
those who are never-detailed (57% of physicians), with respect to the number of new
prescriptions written for the competing drugs (Valtrex, Zovirax, and generic Acyclovir), age,
gender, specialty, and practice type (not reported). In addition, physicians who have not yet
been detailed, but will be visited by pharmaceutical representatives at some point in the future
(final column in Table 1), also tend to write more scripts for Famvir and other herpes anti-viral
medications. This suggests that these physicians, who are targets for detailing, may have a
patient population with a relatively higher demand for such drugs to begin with; they also differ
from those who are never-detailed with respect to other observable characteristics. This
suggests that physicians who see pharmaceutical reps for Famvir are not a random subgroup of
healthcare providers; they differ in terms of observable characteristics (selection on
observables) that are correlated with Famvir prescriptions, and by extension are also likely to
differ in terms of unobservable characteristics (selection on unobservables).

20

We address this selection by controlling for an extended set of physician-specific
attributes, including demographics, specialty and practice type, and the market area in which
the physician practices. The latter is accounted for by zip-code level fixed effects, which would
also capture any unobserved time-invariant area-specific factors such as stable disease
prevalence, area demographics and economic conditions, and provider availability. Comparison
of the detailing effects from parsimonious specifications with those that include these extended
physician- and area-specific controls can inform the importance of selection on observables,
and, by corollary, selection on unobservables. Our next set of specifications fully exploits the
longitudinal information and controls for physician-level fixed effects. These account for all
observed and unobserved time-invariant physician heterogeneity, for instance factors that may
be correlated with non-random targeting of physicians and other unobservable characteristics
such as preferences, time discounting, and stickiness in prescribing habits.
According to prior advertising studies, the impact of advertising messages can linger
beyond the time of its presentation (Dave and Kelly 2012). This may be particularly true with
respect to physician detailing due to the potential for learning and inertial prescribing patterns.
Hence, we construct an alternate detailing measure that includes the current month’s detailing
plus a decay-weighted sum of detailing over the past six months. Thus, the detailing (and
sampling) stock for month t is defined as:
Detailing Stock = Σi=0 to 6(DETt-i)(1-d)i.

(2)

21

The decay rate, d, is assumed to be 0.2, under which 74% of the impact of detailing would have
depreciated by the 6th month.24 In general, the current month’s detailing represents about 2022% of the detailing stock with the remainder representing decay-weighted promotion from
prior months. The detailing stock is also therefore less likely to be a function of the current
month’s drug sales, ceteris paribus. In addition, we also include quadratic terms for all
promotional measures to capture diminishing returns. While detailing and sampling are
complementary physician-directed promotional activities and go hand-in-hand, alternate
specifications attempt to disentangle their effects – which we are able to do given that the data
contain separate information on the visits by the pharmaceutical representatives and the
number of Famvir samples which were provided to the physicians’ offices.
Another potential concern stems from the unique situation of a time limited monopoly.
In the multi-period optimization framework considered by Bhattacharya and Vogt (2003), the
firm simultaneously manages drug price and promotion to determine sales and maximize
profits over the life cycle. The dynamic profit maximizing strategy for a firm is to initially
employ a relatively high level of promotion and set a relatively low price to increase current
demand by raising consumers’ and physicians’ stock of knowledge regarding the drug. Since
knowledge is costly to acquire, physicians’ prescribing patterns can be sticky. In subsequent
periods, promotion can therefore be decreased to lower costs and price can be raised to
increase revenue. This is not structural but rather correlational or statistical endogeneity since

24

Results and conclusions are not materially affected with alternate measures of the DTPP stock based
on decay rates of 0.1, 0.3 and 0.4 respectively. Prior research on consumer behavior suggests that
advertising effects fully depreciate within 6 months to a year, consistent with decay rates of 0.1-0.2
(Bagwell 2007), which have been found to apply to pharmaceutical advertising (Iizuka and Jin 2005; Ling
et al. 2002).

22

changes in sales and promotion are partly governed by the drug’s life cycle. Such bias is
bypassed since all models control for life-cycle effects through time-to-patent expiration.
We further extend the analyses to assess effects at the extensive margin, that is
whether detailing impacts whether or not the physician prescribes Famvir in any given month,
and at the intensive margin, that is whether there are effects on the number of prescriptions
conditional on positive prescriptions. We also assess heterogeneity in the detailing effects
across several measures of observable physician characteristics.
One limitation in the analyses is that other Famvir-related promotional efforts and
competitors’ promotional efforts are not observed in the data. This is less of a concern for
direct-to-consumer advertising for Famvir and other herpes anti-viral drugs since virtually all
DTCA is national in scope and will be captured by the time indicators. DTCA was also very
limited in scope over our sample period (June 1997 – May 1999), and did not significantly take
off until after the FDA’s clarification of its risk requirements in 1999 (Dave and Saffer 2012).
The more relevant concern relates to unobserved detailing efforts undertaken by competing
herpes drugs, specifically Valtrex. Since Zovirax had already lost its patent prior to our sample
period, it is unlikely to be promoted heavily to consumers or to physicians (Dave 2012). If we
assume that detailing across similar drugs in the therapeutic class is competitive and hence
positively correlated, then our estimates of the own-detailing effects for Famvir are likely
understated. We attempt to indirectly gauge the extent of such bias by investigating crosseffects, that is how detailing related to Famvir impacts prescriptions for Valtrex, Zovirax, and
generic Acyclovir.
5.

Results

23

Table 2 presents Poisson regression estimates for the effects of detailing and sampling
on new prescriptions for Famvir. All specifications suggest that DTPP significantly and positively
impacts physicians’ prescribing habits. Furthermore, the effects diminish at higher levels of
DTPP as evidenced by the negative quadratic terms and the concavity of the detailing response
function. Specification (1) assesses the impact of the current month’s detailing efforts and
suggests an elasticity magnitude of 0.16. Specification (2) finds that the impact roughly doubles
in size (elasticity of 0.33) when the cumulative and persistent effects of past detailing efforts
are accounted through the detailing stock. This elasticity magnitude is somewhat lower than
prior estimates based on aggregate national data (elasticity estimates ranging from 0.5 to 0.8;
see Dave 2013), suggesting that failure to appropriately account for unobserved trends and
relying on cross-drug variation in detailing may be imparting a positive bias. The estimates in
specification (2), in contrast, are based on cross-physician variation in detailing efforts.
However, even this variation is potentially endogenous due to non-random selection and
targeting of physicians.
Specification (3) therefore controls for a set of observed physician-specific
characteristics, including age, gender, specialty, and practice type. This further reduces the
magnitude of the detailing elasticity by about a third to 0.22, suggesting that there is
considerable selection on observables that needs to be addressed when identifying effects of
physician promotion. The reduction in the elasticity magnitude is consistent with positive
selection, that is observable physician-specific factors which are positively correlated with
detailing efforts and which tend to raise the number of scripts written for Famvir. This is also
reflective of potential targeting bias, which is predicted to overstate the effects of detailing in

24

naïve regression models. Comparing the elasticity estimates from the basic (model 2) and the
extended models (model 3) allows us to evaluate how much of the association between
detailing and prescriptions is potentially driven by selection on unobservables. Since the
detailing effect is sensitive to the inclusion of the additional physician-specific covariates, which
remain unobserved in aggregate studies, it is likely that factors which remain unobserved also
play some role in this relationship. Indeed, Altonji et al. (2005) suggest that information on
selection on observables can be exploited to assess the extent of selection on unobservables. If
we assume that there is at least as much residual positive selection on unobservables as
suggested by the inclusion of the physician characteristics, then the causal elasticity of detailing
is likely to be substantially lower than 0.22, in the range of 0.11, and possibly even lower than
this if there is greater positive selection on unobservables.
Specification (4) further controls for area (zip-code) fixed effects, which in turn does not
substantially diminish the elasticity magnitude (0.20). This indicates that any potential
targeting is likely driven by physician-specific heterogeneity rather than area-specific
heterogeneity. Hence, the next model (specification 5) fully exploits the longitudinal
information and controls for physician-level fixed effects to bypass all observed and unobserved
stable physician attributes. The positive impact of detailing (evaluated at the observed mean
level of detailing) remains statistically significant, though the elasticity is substantially smaller at
0.05.
Detailing is most often complemented with sampling; about 50% of all detailing visits in
our sample involve some sampling, Hence, the estimates above should be interpreted as the
joint effects of detailing and sampling, which together account for virtually all of the physician-

25

directed promotion efforts. Alternately, it can also be presumed that one of the mechanisms
underlying the impact of detailing on prescribing habits is through the provided samples, which
may allow doctors to readily prescribe and try out the drug in question for patients. Beyond
the first few years of the drug’s life cycle, detailing and associated sampling are often utilized to
provide reminders to physicians regarding the drug. In specification (6), we separately control
for detailing and sampling efforts in order to disentangle the relative importance of each. The
detailing elasticity is estimated at 0.04, and the sampling elasticity is estimated at 0.02. Given
the complementarity between detailing and the presence of sampling, we interpret the
sampling elasticity as mostly reflective of the intensive sampling margin, that is the effects of
the quantity of sampling given that some detailing and sampling has occurred.
Prior studies have suggested that consumer-directed advertising has class-level effects
and can expand the size of the market (for instance, Dave and Saffer 2012; Iizuka and Jin 2005).
However, the effects of detailing have generally been confined to brand-switching or marketshare effects, with little or no effects on overall market demand (Dave 2013). Specifications (7)
and (8) confirm these prior findings with our micro-level data. In specification (7), we control
for total new herpes anti-viral prescriptions as a proxy for class demand. The detailing elasticity
is virtually unchanged (0.051), which suggests that the impact on Famvir prescriptions is not
capturing an overall impact on market demand; it represents a shift in brand share from other
competitor drugs to Famvir. Specification (8) shows more directly that Famvir-related detailing
has no substantial impact on overall market demand; the elasticity of all new herpes anti-viral
prescriptions with respect to Famvir detailing is 0.004. This is consistent with DTPP shifting
treatment away from the non-promoted drug towards the promoted drug. However, unlike

26

consumer-directed ads, DTPP cannot induce untreated consumers to visit the doctor, and
hence its impact on class-level demand is inherently limited.
Table 3 presents cross-effects in order to assess how detailing of Famvir affects
prescriptions for other drugs in the therapeutic class. Models (1), (4), and (7) present estimates
for the full sample of physicians across all specialties. The remaining specifications restrict the
analyses to those specialties that have relatively high levels of detailing, specifically those
specialties where the detailing levels exceed the sample mean (models 2, 5, and 8) and
specifically only primary care physicians (models 3, 6, and 9). These latter sample restrictions
aim to exclude those specialties which inherently have little or no contact with herpes patients.
These estimates suggest that most of the increase in Famvir prescriptions is occurring mostly at
the expense of prescriptions for Valtrex, the newest entry in the class of herpes drugs. There is
no significant cross-effect of Famvir detailing on new prescriptions for the generic Acyclovir.25
This suggests that detailing mostly shifts demand within patented branded drugs – deemed
close substitutes – and does not appear to crowd-out the demand for older generics. Estimates
also do not suggest any consistent or strong effects for the branded Zovirax (for which the
generic version of Acyclovir is available in the market). The latter effect is presumably because
the market share for Zovirax over the sample period had declined significantly (approximately
standing at 6% of all new prescriptions in the drug class) due to the availability of the generic
substitute Acyclovir. Hence, there was not a substantial margin with respect to Zovirax, which
could be impacted by a competitor’s detailing.
25

Engelberg, Parsons, and Tefft (2013), in contrast, do find physician payments and gifts (though they do
not study detailing) matter for branded cholesterol drugs at the expense of the generic alternative
simvastatin. Thus, such extra-detailing payments and gifts are more likely to be associated with physician
rent-seeking behavior that may in particular raise drug expenditures by substituting branded prescriptions
in lieu of generic alternatives.

27

The above results indicate that, though smaller than previously estimated, detailing
does have a positive and significant impact on physicians’ prescribing habits. In Table 4, we
assess whether this effect is being driven by shifts in prescribing habits at the extensive or
intensive margins. Specification (1) suggests that the effect on the extensive margin, whether
or not to write any Famvir prescriptions in the given month, is relatively large and statistically
significant; the “participation” elasticity is estimated at 0.065. Specifications (2) and (3)
examine effects on the number of prescriptions, conditional on a positive number of
prescriptions. They are estimated using OLS and Poisson, respectively, to assess robustness.
The elasticity estimates at this intensive margin are generally similar (0.015-0.019) and
substantially smaller than that at the extensive margin. This suggests that detailing is
particularly effective in raising the probability that a physician will prescribe Famvir when (s)he
had not done so previously. Among physicians who are already prescribing Famvir, the effect of
detailing on additional prescriptions, while significantly positive, is substantially smaller.
Tables 5 and 6 assess whether, and the extent to which, the detailing response is
heterogeneous across physician characteristics and across quintiles of market volume,
respectively. In Table 5, we find somewhat larger detailing elasticity estimates among
metropolitan statistical areas (MSA) which had a larger penetration of managed care insurance
plans relative to those that had a smaller share of managed care plans (0.063 versus 0.048).
Physicians in such areas tend to operate in larger practices. Furthermore, managed care plans
tend to focus on treatment through prescription drugs and early interventions in an effort to
reduce costs down the line; hence, use of all anti-viral drugs (possibly for suppressive efforts) is
higher in such areas, and this may afford detailing a greater opportunity to impact selective

28

brand-specific demand. Effects are also slightly larger among male physicians (model 3)
relative to female physicians (model 4).
Effects are also higher for those physicians whose patients are privately insured (model
5). The latter effect is validating in that, if physicians are mindful of the cost to the consumer
then they are likely to prescribe a more expensive, branded drug if the consumer has
prescription drug insurance. Hence, one would expect detailing to have stronger effects among
physicians who cater to patients with prescription drug insurance.
In the final three specifications, we discount some of the physician specialties that may
be unrelated to the use of herpes drug in order to check for a stronger association, in the spirit
of a dose-response check. Specification (6) restricts the sample to those physicians who were
ever-detailed, for whom the detailing response is expectedly relatively larger (elasticity of
0.075). This sample may be excluding specialties which may have limited contact with herpes
patients or this may also potentially reflect another sort of non-random targeting; these
physicians may have been targeted since their expected response is greater. On the other
hand, omitting the never-detailed physicians from the analysis may be ignoring an important
source of variation that was helpful in controlling for unobserved trends conditional on no
detailing; hence, the effect among those who are ever-detailed could be potentially overstated.
In model (7), we limit the analyses to primary care physicians since they are most likely
to have first provider contact with herpes patients and hence treat and prescribe herpes
medications, and in model (8) we limit the analyses to all specialties where the mean level of
detailing within specialty exceeds the mean level of detailing over all specialties. Note that in

29

this latter sample restriction, we are not selecting on physicians (as was done in model 6, with
respect to ever-detailed physicians) but rather bypassing entire specialties (such as
cardiologists, gastroenterologists, pediatricians, etc.) that are not likely to treat/prescribe
herpes medications and are not being detailed to. It is validating that the detailing elasticity is
larger (0.06 and 0.07, respectively) for these groups as expected.
Table 6 estimates models across quintiles based on the market volume of all
prescriptions written for herpes anti-viral drugs. The effects of detailing are expectedly and
monotonically largest across the higher quintiles of market volume. That is, the impact of
detailing on new prescriptions for Famvir is higher in markets that have a higher demand for
such medications and which present a potential opportunity for pharmaceutical
representatives to effectively shift prescribing habits from competitor drugs to Famvir.
We assess the robustness of these estimates to further checks.26 The estimates are not
sensitive if negative binomial specifications are utilized in lieu of the Poisson models. The
above estimates aggregate the two doses of Famvir (125mg and 500mg) and their respective
detailing. We also assessed the effects of dose-specific Famvir detailing on new prescriptions
for each specific dose. While the effects of detailing are significant and positive for both doses,
the estimated detailing elasticity for Famvir 125mg was significantly higher (0.07) relative to
that for Famvir 500mg (0.05).27 Famvir 125mg entered the market about 18 months after
Famvir 500mg; thus, the differences in the response magnitudes across these two doses may be
related to the differential role that detailing plays over the drug’s life cycle. For the newer
entrant Famvir 125mg, detailing is primarily aimed at educating providers about the new dosing
26

Results are available upon request.
These estimates are derived from the fully-specified model (similar to model 5 in Table 2) with
physician fixed effects. Full results are available upon request.
27

30

and its attributes, whereas for the older drug Famvir 500mg, detailing may be chiefly concerned
with delivering samples and reminders.28
6.

Discussion
Pharmaceutical efforts aimed at physicians remain a controversial issue, as it is often

contended that such promotion may play a role in raising healthcare costs and unduly affect
physicians’ prescribing habits towards more expensive, and possibly less cost-effective, drugs.
A key input necessary for assessing these contentions concerns whether, and the extent to
which, direct-to-physician promotion such as detailing and sampling impacts physicians’
prescribing behaviors. Heretofore, this question has been mostly addressed based on
aggregate national data, which substantially hinders the interpretation of these prior estimates
as credibly causal due to potential bias from non-random targeting and unobserved physician
heterogeneity. Furthermore, several questions regarding variation in the detailing response
across various margins and physician characteristics remain unexplored.
We address these gaps and provide virtually the first longitudinal study bearing on the
effects of detailing and sampling, fully exploiting the longitudinal physician-level records to
bypass time-invariant physician-level heterogeneity and targeting. These estimates suggest
that detailing (and to a lesser extent, the quantity of sampling) imparts a significant and positive
effect on the number of new prescriptions written for the detailed drug. However, the
elasticity estimate of around 0.05 to 0.07 is substantially lower than that reported in prior
studies based on aggregate data, suggesting that most of the observed association between

28

The larger positive detailing response for Famvir 125mg is also partly due to the substitution effect as
detailing of the newer dose may crowd out prescriptions for the older dose.

31

detailing and drug sales reflects unobserved selection.29 We also provide the first evidence in
terms of disentangling this effect between the extensive and intensive margins, and in doing so
find that the detailing response is substantially higher at the extensive margin (elasticity of
0.07) than at the intensive margin (0.02). These effects are not uniformly distributed across
physicians and markets, and tend to differ based on certain observable physician characteristics
(such as gender, specialty, and insurance status of patients) and market-level characteristics
(such as prevalence of managed care plans and market volume of class-level prescriptions).
Our estimates based on micro-level evidence are qualitatively consistent with prior
studies in that we also do not uncover substantial effects of detailing on class-level demand.
This suggestively limits any welfare-enhancing effects of detailing since if detailing were to raise
class-level demand then this may be indicative of expanding treatment to untreated or
undertreated patients.30 We find that Famvir-related detailing raises new prescriptions for
Famvir, mostly at the expense of prescriptions for Valtrex. We do not find any evidence that
such detailing reduces new prescriptions for generic Acyclovir.
Famvir is generally more costly relative to Valtrex, with respect to both episodic use as
well as suppressive use. There is also little evidence to suggest that Famvir is any more
effective than Valtrex in treating outbreaks or suppressing outbreaks; furthermore, Valtrex is
generally superior to Famvir in treating the initial herpes episode, and Valtrex is the only drug

29

Even at these low elasticity magnitudes, detailing is potentially profitable. The average cost of a
detailing visit is about $150
(http://www.marketingpower.com/ResourceLibrary/Publications/MarketingHealthServices/2004/24/1/MHS
Spr04Davidson.pdf) and the retail cost of daily Famvir use for suppression is about $4200. A back-of-theenvelope calculation, based on a detailing elasticity estimate of 0.06, suggests that a $1 increase in
detailing can potentially generate additional revenues of $2.14 (assuming a new Famvir prescription for
suppressive use for a year).
30
Consumer ads for prescription drugs, in contrast, have been found to positively affect class-level
demand, and this is sometimes interpreted as welfare-improving (Dave 2012; Iizuka and Jin 2005).

32

indicated for reducing transmission to non-infected partners. Hence, Famvir appears to be less
cost-effective relative to the other drugs, and at least for the average patient, detailing-induced
shift in prescriptions towards Famvir and away from alternate drugs may not be welfareenhancing. While there is no crowd-out of the generic alternative, such shifts within patented
drugs may nevertheless contribute to somewhat higher costs, ceteris paribus.
Between 1996 and 2010, promotional spending on detailing and sampling increased
from $9.8 billion (Donohue et al. 2007) to $21.3 billion (SK&A 2011). Our estimates suggest
that this would increase the demand for the promoted drugs by between 6-7%. Since virtually
all of this represents selective demand effects, there would be no substantial increase on total
utilization of prescription drugs. However, if the detailed drug costs more (as was the case with
Famvir), then the detailing-induced increase in selective demand may contribute to higher
overall prescription drug spending. To place the potential increase in spending in perspective,
we extrapolate the effects of Famvir. The 6-7% increase in demand for Famvir, driven by the
observed 113% increase in detailing and sampling overall between 1996-2010, would raise
spending by about 5.0-5.5%.31
We note the caveat that the case of herpes anti-viral drugs may not generalize to the
overall prescription drug market. However, it should also be noted that the herpes anti-viral
drug class is typical of many other drug classes in many respects: 1) it contains branded and
generic alternatives; 2) there are no clear efficacy advantages of one drug over the others; 3)
the condition is highly prevalent with 1 out of 4 adults being afflicted; 4) most adults remain
untreated. Mindful of external validity limitations, the estimates for Famvir-related detailing
31

As noted earlier, costs for Famvir therapy are about 25% higher in relation to Valtrex, and about 67159% higher in relation to generic Acyclovir (depending on episodic or ongoing suppressive use). Most
(about 70%) of the shift towards Famvir comes from a reduction in Valtrex prescriptions.

33

underscore the possibility that such detailing of more expensive drugs may shift prescribing
habits towards such drugs with little clinical improvements, though with effect magnitudes
considerably smaller than previously estimated.

34

References
Accela Communications website,
http://www.accelacommunications.com/PDFs/ACI_eDetail_BestPractices.pdf, Accessed
October 29, 2012.
Altonji, J.G., Elder, T.E., and Taber, C.R., “Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 151-184,
2005.
Bagwell, K., “The Economic Analysis of Advertising,” in M. Armstrong and R. Porter, eds.,
Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume III (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2007).
Becker, G.S. and Murphy, K.M., “A simple theory of advertising as a good or bad,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108:941–964, 1993.
Berndt, E., Bui, L., Reiley, D., and Urban, G., “Information, Marketing and Pricing in the US
Antiulcer Drug Market,” American Economic Review, 85(2):100-105, 1995.
Bhattacharya, J. and Vogt, G., “A Simple Model of Pharmaceutical Price Dynamics,” The Journal
of Law and Economics, 46(2):599–626, 2003.
Bureau of Labor Statistics website, http://www.bls.gov/cpi/data.htm, Accessed October 7,
2012.
Cameron, C., Trivedi, P., Regression Analysis of Count Data. Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, 1998.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services website, http://www.cms.gov/Research-StatisticsData-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/index.html,
Accessed October 7, 2012.
Chintagunta, P., Goettler, R., and Kim, M., “New Drug Diffusion When Forward-Looking
Physicians Learn from Patient Feedback and Detailing,” Journal of Marketing Research, 49(6):
807-821, 2012.
Dave, D., and Kelly, I., “Advertising,” in: Anthony Culyer (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Health
Economics, Elsevier Inc., Amsterdam, 2012, Forthcoming.
Dave, D., “Effects of Pharmaceutical Promotion: A Review and Assessment,” NBER Working
Paper Series No. 18830, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, February
2013.

35

Dave, D. and Saffer, D., “Impact of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising on Pharmaceutical Prices
and Demand,” Southern Economic Journal, 79(1): 97-126, 2012.
David, G., Markowitz, S., and Richards-Shubik, S., “The Effects of Pharmaceutical Marketing and
Promotion on Adverse Drug Events and Regulation,” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 2(4):1-25, 2010.
Donohue, J.M., Cevasco, M., and Rosenthal, M.B., “A Decade of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising
of Prescription Drugs,” The New England Journal of Medicine, 357(7):673-668, 2007.
Engelberg, J., Parsons, C., and Tefft, N., “First, Do No Harm: Financial Conflicts in Medicine,”
Working Paper, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfn?abstract_id=2297094, 2013.
Fugh-Berman, A., and Ahari, S., “Following the Script: How Drug Reps Make Friends and
Influence Doctors,” PLoS Medicine, 4(4):621-625, 2007.
Gonul, F., Carter, F., Petrova, E., and Srinivasan, K. “Promotion of prescription drugs and its
impact on physicians’ choice behavior,” Journal of Marketing, 65(3): 79-90, 2001.
Grande, D., “Limiting the Influence of Pharmaceutical Industry Gifts on Physicians: SelfRegulation or Government Intervention,” Journal of General Internal Medicine, 25(1): 79:83,
2010.
Hilltop Institute, “Academic Detailing: A Review of the Literature and States’ Approaches,”
University of Maryland-Baltimore County, 2009.
Iizuka, T, “What explains the use of direct to consumer advertising of prescription drugs?,”
Journal of Industrial Economics, 52(3):349-379, 2004.
Iizuka, T., and Jin, G.Z, “The Effect of Prescription Drug Advertising on Doctor Visits,” Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy, 14 (3):701-727, 2005.
Iizuka, T., and Jin, G.Z., “Direct to Consumer Advertising and Prescription Choice,” Journal of
Industrial Economics, 55 (4):771, 2007.
Kalyanaram, G. “The Order of Entry Effect in Prescription (Rx) and Over-the-counter (OTC)
Pharmaceutical Drugs,” International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Healthcare Marketing,
2(1):35-46, 2008.
Kalyanaram, G. “The Endogenous Modeling of the Effect of Direct Advertising to Consumers
(DTCA) in Prescription Drugs,” International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Healthcare
Marketing, 3(2): 137-148, 2009.

36

Ling, D.C., Berndt, E.R., and Kyle, M.K. “Deregulating Direct-to-Consumer marketing of
prescription drugs: Effects on prescription and over-the-counter product sales,” Journal of Law
and Economics, 45:691-723, 2002.
Manchanda and Chintagunta. “Responsiveness of Physician Prescription Behavior to Salesforce
Effort: An Individual Level Analysis,” Marketing Letters, 15(2/3):129-145, 2004.
McLachlan, G. and Peel, D., Finite Mixture Models, John Wiley and Sons:New York, 2000.
Mizik, N., and Jacobson, R., “Are Physicians ‘Easy Marks’? Quantifying the Effects of Detailing
and Sampling on New Prescriptions,” Management Science, 50(12): 1704-1715, 2004.
Narayanan, S., Desiraju, R., and Chintagunta, P. “Return on investment implications for
pharmaceutical promotional expenditures: the role of marketing-mix interactions,” Journal of
Marketing, 68(4): 90-105, 2004.
Narayanan, S., Manchanda, P., and Chintagunta, P. “Temporal differences in the role of
marketing communication in new product categories,” Journal of Marketing Research, 42: 278290, 2005.
Nelson, P., “Information and consumer behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 78:311–329,
1970.
Pew Prescription Project, “Academic Detailing: Evidence-Based Prescribing Information,” Pew
Prescription Project Fact Sheet, April 2 2009.
Pomper, S., “Drug Rush,” Washington Monthly, May 2000.
Rizzo, J., “Advertising and Competition in the Ethical Pharmaceutical Industry: The case of
Hypertensive Drugs,” Journal of Law and Economics, 42(1),89-116, 1999.
SK&A. “2010 U.S. Pharma Company Promotion Spending,” Cegedim Strategic Data Report,
http://www.skainfo.com/, January 2011.
SK&A. “2011 U.S. Pharma Company Promotion Spending,” Cegedim Strategic Data Report,
http://www.skainfo.com/, February 2012.
Stigler, G.J. and Becker, G.S. “De gustibus non est disputandum,” American Economic Review,
67:76–90, 1977.
Wald, A., Selke, S., Warren, T. et al. “Comparative efficacy of famciclovir and valacyclovir for
suppression of recurrent genital herpes and viral shedding,” Sexually Transmitted Diseases,
33(9): 529-533, 2006.

37

Weiss, J., “Medical Marketing in the United States: A Prescription for Reform,” The George
Washington Law Review, 79(1): 260-292, 2010.
Wooldridge J. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press: Cambridge,
2001.
Wosińska, M. “Just what the patient ordered? Direct-to-consumer advertising and the demand
for pharmaceutical products,” Harvard Business School Marketing Research Papers No. 02-04,
2002.

38

Table 1
Sample Means
Sample

All

Ever Detailed

Never Detailed

0.1828
(0.7880)
0.2579
(1.1310)
0.0651
(0.3967)
0.4718
(1.3816)

0.3640
(1.1173)
0.4671
(1.5603)
0.1127
(0.5294)
0.7762
(1.8080)

0.0463
(0.3242)
0.1004
(0.5929)
0.0292
(0.2486)
0.2427
(0.8732)

Ever Detailed
Periods prior to
Positive Detailing
0.1571
(0.6561)
0.2924
(1.1244)
0.1054
(0.5197)
0.5396
(1.4578)

Ever Detailed: Dichotomous indicator for
whether the physician had ever received
Famvir-related detailing
Any Detailing: Dichotomous indicator for
whether the physician had received any
Famvir-related detailing over sample period
Number of Famvir-related detailing visits by
pharmaceutical sales representatives
Number of Famvir samples received by
physician

0.4295
(0.4950)

_

_

_

0.4055
(0.4910)

0.9442
(0.2296)

_

0.7837
(0.4118)

0.1436
(0.5528)
0.8991
(5.0907)

0.3343
(0.8047)
2.0710
(7.5590)

_

_

0.0168
(0.7709)

0.3423
(3.2795)

Physician age

47.8
(13.2)
0.7858
(0.4103)
0.0281
(0.1652)
0.0506
(0.2191)
0.0846
(0.2782)
0.4527
(0.4978)
0.3841
(0.4864)
3,563,448

46.5
(13.1)
0.7744
(0.4180)
0.0496
(0.2171)
0.0245
(0.1547)
0.0906
(0.2871)
0.2330
(0.4227)
0.6023
(0.4894)
1,530,600

48.9
(13.1)
0.7943
(0.4042)
0.0119
(0.1084)
0.0702
(0.2555)
0.0800
(0.2713)
0.6182
(0.4858)
0.2197
(0.4141)
2,032,848

45.0
(14.1)
0.7399
(0.4387)
0.0352
(0.1843)
0.0368
(0.1883)
0.1255
(0.3313)
0.3474
(0.4762)
0.4550
(0.4980)
395,040

New prescriptions of Famvir
New prescriptions of Valtrex
New prescriptions of Zovirax
New prescriptions of generic Acyclovir

Physician gender: Male
Specialty: Dermatology
Specialty: Emergency medicine
Specialty: Obstetrician-Gynecology
Specialty: Other
Specialty: Primary Care
Observations

Notes: Means are reported for the sample period spanning 6/1997 - 5/1999, with standard deviations
reported in parentheses. Number of observations listed is the maximum observations. For some
variations, number of observations is slightly lower due to missing information. All differences are
statistically significant at the 5% level.

39

Table 2
Effects of DTPP on Prescriptions
Poisson Regression
Model
Outcome

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8
New
Prescriptions
for Drug Class

0.05177***
(0.00305)
-0.00181***
(0.00023)
[0.05030]

0.04121***
(0.00327)
-0.00143***
(0.00023)
[0.04006]

0.05350***
(0.00316)
-0.00210***
(0.00031)
[0.05146]

0.00793***
(0.00135)
-0.00038***
(0.00011)
[0.00432]

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

New Prescriptions for Famvir
Current Detailing
Current Detailing Square
Current Detailing Elasticity

1.16804***
(0.01046)
-0.14670***
(0.00326)
[0.16166]

Detailing Stock

0.64331***
(0.00852)
-0.03729***
(0.00115)
[0.32607]

Detailing Stock Square
Detailing Stock Elasticity

0.44126***
(0.00738)
-0.02378***
(0.00088)
[0.21902]

0.38376***
(0.00861)
-0.01840***
(0.00091)
[0.20266]

Sampling Stock

0.00250***
(0.00033)
-0.00001***
(0.00000)
[0.01714]

Sampling Stock Square
Sampling Stock Elasticity
Month & Year Indicators
Physician Characteristics
Zip-code Indicators
Physician Indicators
Class Demand

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

Yes
No
No
Yes
No

Observations
3563448
2672586
2498490
2313396
977202
977202
977202
2060442
Notes: Coefficient estimates from Poisson regression models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the physician-level, and reported in parentheses.
Elasticity estimates, evaluated at the sample means, are reported in brackets. Physician characteristics include: age, age-squared, male, indicators for specialty,
and indicators for practice type. Class Demand represents total new prescriptions for all herpes anti-viral drugs. Asterisks denote statistical significance as
follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; ***0.05<p-value≤0.10.

40

Table 3
Cross-Effects of Famvir Detailing on Prescriptions
Poisson Regression
Model
Outcome

Sample

1

2

3

New Prescriptions for Valtrex

Primary Care
Physicians

All
Specialities

-0.01231***
(0.00275)

-0.00907**
(0.00392)

Detailing Stock Square

0.00033
(0.00024)

0.000332
(0.000252)

Detailing Stock Elasticity

[-0.01061]
Yes
Yes
Yes

Month Indicators
Year Indicators
Physician Indicators

5

6

New Prescriptions for Generic Acyclovir

Specialties
with detailing
levels > Mean
-0.0129***
(0.00307)

Detailing Stock

All
Specialties

4

7

8

9

New Prescriptions for Branded Acyclovir
(Zovirax)

Primary Care
Physicians

All
Specialities

-0.00001
(0.00197)

Specialties
with detailing
levels > Mean
0.000534
(0.00212)

Primary Care
Physicians

0.01042**
(0.00525)

Specialties
with detailing
levels > Mean
.0064529
(0.0058328)

0.00242
(0.00228)

0.00028
(0.00033)

-0.00017
(0.00015)

-0.000189
(0.000160)

-0.00025
(0.00017)

-0.00069
(0.00044)

-.0005419
(0.0004612)

-0.00043
(0.00053)

[-0.01718]

[-0.01119]

[-0.00015]

[0.00010]

[0.00209]

[0.01002]

[0.00783]

[-0.00283]

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.00045
(0.00671)

Observations
1091124
589968
528534
1767024
806886
734436
557010
322308
279450
Notes: Coefficient estimates from Poisson regression models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the physician-level, and reported in parentheses.
Elasticity estimates, evaluated at the sample means, are reported in brackets. Physician characteristics include: age, age-squared, male, indicators for specialty,
and indicators for practice type. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; ***0.05<p-value≤0.10.

41

Table 4
Effects of Detailing Stock on Prescriptions
Intensive vs. Extensive Margin
Model
Outcome
Estimation
Detailing Stock
Detailing Stock Square
Detailing Stock Elasticity

1
Any New Famvir
Prescriptions (NRX)
OLS
0.01118***
(0.00054)
-0.00035***
(0.00005)
[0.06495]

2
3
Number of New Famvir Prescriptions conditional
on NRX>0
OLS
Poisson
0.01851***
(0.00537)
0.00008
(0.00046)
[0.01881]

0.00774***
(0.00206)
-0.00006
(0.00016)
[0.01461]

Month Indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year Indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

Physician Indicators

Yes

Yes

Yes

2498490

218702

200520

Observations
Notes: See Table 2

42

Table 5
Effects of Detailing Stock on Prescriptions – Poisson Regression
Assessing Heterogeneous Effects
Model
Sample

Detailing Stock
Detailing Stock Square
Detailing Stock
Elasticity
Month Indicators
Year Indicators
Physician Indicators
Observations
Notes: See Table 2

1
Non-Managed
Care MSA

2
Managed Care
MSA

3
Males

4
Females

5
Private Insured
Patients

6
Ever-Detailed
Physicians

7
Primary Care
Physicians

8
Specialties with
Detailing
Levels > Mean

0.04927***
(0.00333)
-0.00162***
(0.00025)
[0.04829]

0.06730***
(0.00771)
-0.00291***
(0.00063)
[0.06291]

0.05053***
(0.00332)
-0.00168***
(0.00025)
[0.05098]

0.05662***
(0.00759)
-0.00253***
(0.00057)
[0.04578]

0.06785***
(0.00675)
-0.00241***
(0.00059)
[0.05561]

0.05047***
(0.00306)
-0.00176***
(0.00023)
[0.07523]

0.04422***
(0.00367)
-0.00163***
(0.00028)
[0.05784]

0.0491***
(0.00330)
-0.00165***
(0.000241)
[0.06810]

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

803484

173718

794304

182898

309186

606492

511002

581850

43

Table 6
Effects of Detailing Stock on Prescriptions – Poisson Regression
Effects based on Market Volume
Model
Sample

Detailing Stock
Detailing Stock Square
Detailing Stock Elasticity
Month &
Year Fixed Effects
Physician Fixed Effects
Observations
Notes: See Table 2

1
Market Volume
Quintile 1

2
Market Volume
Quintile 2

3
Market Volume
Quintile 3

4
Market Volume
Quintile 4

5
Market Volume
Quintile 5

0.10428***
(0.00931)
-0.00441***
(0.00105)
[0.05193]

0.04645***
(0.00683)
-0.00138**
(0.00062)
[0.05380]

0.04298***
(0.00606)
-0.00159***
(0.00045)
[0.06318]

0.04413***
(0.00626)
-0.00124***
(0.00040)
[0.08244]

0.04122***
(0.00783)
-0.00109**
(0.00055)
[0.09926]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

493794

195606

129078

82494

43704

44

