                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WHAT IS THE CASE FOR PAID MATERNITY LEAVE?

                                           Gordon B. Dahl
                                          Katrine V. Løken
                                           Magne Mogstad
                                          Kari Vea Salvanes

                                        Working Paper 19595
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19595


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We thank the Norwegian Research Council for providing generous financial support for this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Gordon B. Dahl, Katrine V. Løken, Magne Mogstad, and Kari Vea Salvanes. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Is the Case for Paid Maternity Leave?
Gordon B. Dahl, Katrine V. Løken, Magne Mogstad, and Kari Vea Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 19595
October 2013
JEL No. H42,J13,J18

                                                ABSTRACT

Paid maternity leave has gained greater salience in the past few decades as mothers have increasingly
entered the workforce. Indeed, the median number of weeks of paid leave to mothers among OECD
countries was 14 in 1980, but had risen to 42 by 2011. We assess the case for paid maternity leave,
focusing on parents' responses to a series of policy reforms in Norway which expanded paid leave
from 18 to 35 weeks (without changing the length of job protection). Our first empirical result is that
none of the reforms seem to crowd out unpaid leave. Each reform increases the amount of time spent
at home versus work by roughly the increased number of weeks allowed. Since income replacement
was 100% for most women, the reforms caused an increase in mother's time spent at home after birth,
without a reduction in family income. Our second set of empirical results reveals the expansions had
little effect on a wide variety of outcomes, including children's school outcomes, parental earnings
and participation in the labor market in the short or long run, completed fertility, marriage or divorce.
Not only is there no evidence that each expansion in isolation had economically significant effects,
but this null result holds even if we cumulate our estimates across all expansions from 18 to 35 weeks.
Our third finding is that paid maternity leave is regressive in the sense that eligible mothers have higher
family incomes compared to ineligible mothers or childless individuals. Within the group of eligibles,
the program also pays higher amounts to mothers in wealthier families. Since there was no crowd out
of unpaid leave, the extra leave benefits amounted to a pure leisure transfer, primarily to middle and
upper income families. Finally, we investigate the financial costs of the extensions in paid maternity
leave. We find these reforms had little impact on parents' future tax payments and benefit receipt. As
a result, the large increases in public spending on maternity leave imply a considerable increase in
taxes, at a cost to economic efficiency. Taken together, our findings suggest the generous extensions
to paid leave were costly, had no measurable effect on outcomes and regressive redistribution properties.
In a time of harsh budget realities, our findings have important implications for countries that are considering
future expansions or contractions in the duration of paid leave.


Gordon B. Dahl                                         Magne Mogstad
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego                    University College London
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                                Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                                United Kingdom
and NBER                                               magne.mogstad@gmail.com
gdahl@ucsd.edu
                                                       Kari Vea Salvanes
Katrine V. Løken                                       Department of Economics
Department of Economics                                University of Oslo
University of Bergen                                   P.O. Box 1095
Postboks 5802                                          Blindern
5020 Bergen, Norway                                    0317 Oslo, Norway
katrine.loken@econ.uib.no                              karivea@gmail.com
1 Introduction
The past 50 years has seen a steady increase in the number of countries oering government funded


parental leave.
                  1   By 2013, all OECD countries except for the United States had federally funded


programs, which generally oer high earnings replacement and employment protection to mothers


who were working prior to giving birth. But the even more striking trend has been the substantial


increase in the duration of paid leave. As illustrated in Figure 1, the median number of weeks of


paid leave to mothers among OECD countries was 14 in 1980, but had risen to 42 weeks by 2011.


From a policy perspective, it is important to distinguish between the introduction of paid leave (and


job protection) versus continual expansions to a program. Government-mandated leave programs


involve large transfer payments to a sizable population, and the key question is whether benets


outweigh costs, both on the extensive and intensive margins.


   The main argument for paid leave is that there are important social goals or market failures


addressed by the program.        In the policy arena, proponents claim that paid leave could enhance


child development by increasing parental time investment, promote gender equality through higher


maternal employment, and encourage fertility and marriage by facilitating family and career com-


patibility. Paid leave could also serve as a transfer program with desirable redistribution eects. If


there are no public benets, however, paid leave can only be justied if it alleviates market failures.


In particular, binding credit constraints could limit the intertemporal substitution of maternal labor


supply after birth or prevent families from investing optimally in children.


   A comprehensive evaluation of the case for paid parental leave requires answers to at least four


key questions. First, does paid leave increase available parental time with children, or does it simply


crowd out unpaid leave? Second, what eect does paid leave have on a broad range of child, parent


and family outcomes? Third, how do any benets compare relative to costs? And nally, are there


progressive or regressive distributional eects?


   We answer these questions in the context of Norway's parental leave program, focusing on parents'

  1 Austria, the Czech Republic, Italy and Poland introduced paid parental leave in the 1960s or earlier; Hungary,
Spain, Sweden, Finland, France, and Norway in the 1970s; Iceland, Denmark Portugal, Turkey, Greece, Germany
and New Zealand in the 1980s; Canada, the Netherlands, Japan, the Slovak Republic, Australia, Belgium, Ireland,
Luxembourg in the 1990s; and the United Kingdom in the 2000s.


                                                        1
responses to the evolution of leave benets over time. There have been seven major reforms in leave


policy which expanded the amount of leave taken by mothers without having a signicant eect on


fathers.
          2   In 1977, Norway introduced 18 weeks of paid parental leave and extended job protection


from 12 weeks to one year. In the ensuing years, from 1987 to 1992, there were a series of policy


reforms which expanded paid leave from 18 weeks to 35 weeks (without changing the length of job


protection). While prior work has documented an impact on childrens' high school graduation rates


and future wages from the initial 1977 reform (Carneiro, Løken and Salvanes, 2011), we investigate


whether the subsequent generous expansions had any added eect on outcomes which could justify


their additional costs. In a time when most countries are facing harsh budget realities, it is important


to critically evaluate whether these scally expensive parental leave extensions had the desired policy


eects.


    Each of the reforms specied a birth cuto date to determine eligibility for benets.                   Parents


of children born after the cuto date were eligible for extra weeks of paid leave relative to those


parents with children born before the cuto. We use a regression discontinuity (RD) estimator to


obtain causal estimates of the eect of extra weeks of paid leave on a variety of outcomes. The idea


is to compare families to the left and right of this cuto, since they should be similar on average


except for the extra allotment of paid leave from the government. By estimating the eect for all


expansionary reforms, we can assess whether child, family or social benets continue to accrue as


the generosity of the program increases, or whether additional weeks of paid parental leave simply


represent transfer payments without measurable dierences in outcomes.


    Our rst empirical result is that none of the reforms crowd out unpaid leave.                     Each reform


increases the amount of time spent at home versus work by roughly the increased number of weeks


allowed. Since income replacement was 100% for most women, the reforms caused an increase in


mother's time spent at home after birth, without a reduction in family income. This allows for a


clean estimate of the eect of parental time on child and family outcomes, as there are no income


eects to worry about. The same is not true in other settings where income is only partially replaced

  2 With the exception of a few weeks specically reserved for mothers, these leave reforms allowed couples to divide
up the weeks of leave as they saw t. In practice, however, the entire amount of leave was taken by mothers.
Throughout this paper, we therefore refer to parental leave and maternity leave interchangeably.


                                                         2
or where there is crowd out of unpaid leave.


   Our second set of empirical results reveals the expansions had little eect on a wide variety of


outcomes other than mothers' time spent at home after birth. Not only is there no evidence that


each expansion in isolation had economically signicant eects, but this null result holds even if we


cumulate our estimates across all expansions from 18 to 35 weeks. We nd no eect of paid leave


on children's academic achievement or graduation from high school.                We also nd no evidence of


systematic changes in parental earnings or participation in the labor market in the short or long run,


which means the leave expansions did nothing to gender equality on these dimensions. Finally, there


is little evidence the expansions to parental leave aected completed fertility, marriage or divorce.


   Our third nding is that paid parental leave has regressive redistribution properties. The program


makes regressive transfers both from ineligibles to eligibles and within the group of eligible mothers.


Since there is no crowd out of unpaid leave, the extra leave benets amount to a pure leisure


transfer. Around 74 percent of all mothers were eligible for paid leave during our time period, since


a requirement is that the mother works a certain amount prior to the child's birth. Mothers who


are eligible and receive parental leave benets are higher educated, are married to higher educated


men, and have substantially higher family income compared to ineligible mothers. The dierences


in income between ineligibles and eligibles are even larger when comparing eligible mothers to the


relatively poor men and women who never have children. Within the group of eligible mothers, the


transfer payments were larger to women with higher prior earnings (since the program gave 100%


income replacement up to a high threshold); not surprisingly, this type of women also resides in a


family with higher total family income.


   Finally, we investigate the nancial costs of the extensions in paid parental leave. We nd these


reforms had little, if any, impact on parents' future tax payments and benet receipt. As a result,


the large increases in public spending on parental leave imply a considerable increase in taxes, at


a cost to economic eciency. We estimate a one week increase in paid leave costs taxpayers $687


dollars (in 2010 dollars) on average per birth, based on all the reforms we study.
                                                                                                  3   These costs

   3 Leave benets are taxable at the individual level, but tax revenue is also lost due to the foregone income of
mothers on leave. In our setting where there is no crowd out of unpaid leave and 100% income replacement, these two
tax eects roughly cancel each other out, so the after tax costs of the program are approximately equal to program


                                                        3
add up:    the initial 18 week reform costs an estimated total of $12,354 per eligible birth, while


the subsequent expansions from 18 to 35 weeks costs taxpayers $11,668 per eligible birth. Stated


dierently, payments in 1992 when leave benets totaled 35 weeks cost a total of over $1 billion (in


2010 dollars), or approximately 0.5% of GDP.


    Taken together, our nding suggest the case for extensions to paid maternity leave cannot rely


on observable dimensions of public benets or redistribution.             Nor do paid leave extensions seem


to alleviate binding credit constraints which would limit intertemporal substitution of labor supply


or prevent optimal investment in children: there is no evidence of changes in labor supply in the


short or long run; there is no measurable eect on child development; and most transfer payments


are received by middle or upper class families, who are less likely to face binding credit constraints.


In light of previous studies, one can argue whether a baseline level of paid parental leave or job


protection is worth the cost. But the case for extended paid leave periods, which are prevalent in


OECD countries, is weak. One would have to argue there are benets not captured in the relatively


rich set of outcome variables we look at. We discuss this possibility in more detail in the conclusion


of the paper.


    Our ndings are related to a growing literature on paid parental leave introductions and exten-


sions.   Researchers have examined the eect of paid leave on parental employment and earnings,


child outcomes, and fertility and marriage.
                                                  4   While these papers make important contributions to


our understanding of parental leave, there is no consensus across studies.                Consider the research


most closely related to our study. In a series of papers, Baker and Milligan (2008a, 2008b, 2010)


evaluate the extension of leave from 25 weeks to 50 weeks in Canada, with an earnings replacement


rate of 55%. They nd that while it increased breastfeeding, it had little eect on child health and


development up to age 3 and negative eects on verbal and self-awareness scores at ages 4 and 5.


Rasmussen (2010) nds that a single expansion of leave in Denmark did not aect later educational


outcomes, while Liu and Skans (2011) nd that a single leave expansion in Sweden resulted in in-

expenditures.
   4 See, for example, Baker and Milligan, 2008a, 2008b, 2010; Carneiro, Løken and Salvanes, 2011; Dustmann and
Schönberg, 2012; Lalive et al., forthcoming; Lalive and Zweimuller, 2009; Liu et al., 2010; Rasmussen, 2010; Rossin,
2011; Ruhm, 2000; Schönberg and Ludsteck, forthcoming; and Waldfogel et al., 1999.



                                                         4
creased academic test scores for children of highly-educated mothers but otherwise had no eect.


Finally, Dustmann and Schönberg (2012) examine two paid leave and job protection expansions


(from 2 to 6 months and from 6 to 10 months), as well as an increase in job protection from 18


months to 36 months. These expansions provided a low level of earning replacement (a at amount


equal to about 20 to 30 percent of average pre-earnings, plus a means tested amount after 7 months).


They nd little eect of the rst two expansions, but some negative eects for the increase in job


protection without a corresponding increase in payments.


    Our paper expands and claries this prior literature in several important ways.                    First, we are


able to look at a broad range of outcomes in the same setting over time. Second, we provide direct


evidence on the cost side of these policies and their distributional eects. Third, we examine a series


of six expansions.      Not only does this give us multiple quasi-experiments, it also helps determine


whether modest expansions are worthwhile, even if further, larger expansions are not. A comparison


between benets and costs of marginal expansions is key to determine the optimal duration of paid


parental leave. Fourth, the reforms we study each extended paid leave without any changes in job


protection, which helps isolate the eect of paid leave from employment protection. Fifth, take up


is essentially 100%, in contrast to other countries with less generous leave programs.                   Finally, we


are able to hone in on the counterfactual to paid leave because there is no evidence of crowd out


of unpaid leave and there was 100% income replacement. This helps us interpret the expansions to


paid parental leave as increases in the amount of time spent at home versus work, holding family


income constant.
                    5


    Our paper is also related to a large literature on maternal employment and child outcomes (see


Blau and Currie (2006) for a review). That literature is largely inconclusive, with much of the work


suering from endogeneity issues related to which women choose to work (Gregg and Waldfogel


(2005), Tanaka (2005), Gregg et al. (2005)). Our setting is ideal to study the eect of maternal


employment for two reasons: (i) paid leave did not change the family's income, but only mother's


weeks of work and (ii) there are no concerns with sample selection as take up is 100%; our estimates

   5 There was almost no governmentally provided child care coverage for children under the age of 2 during this
period (Mogstad and Havnes, 2011). As a result, the counterfactual to parental care is usually informal care, including
relatives and nannies.


                                                          5
are internally valid for working women. Our ndings suggest that maternal employment between


the ages of roughly 4 to 9 months has little eect on a child's later outcomes (as well as no eect on


couple's labor market participation, fertility, or family stability), even when family income remains


constant.


    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides background on paid


parental leave in Norway and our data. Section 3 briey discusses our regression discontinuity design


and threats to identication. In Section 4, we present our main results, followed by a comparison of


costs versus benets and distributional eects in Sections 5 and 6. Section 7 concludes.




2 Background and Data

2.1 Background

Governmental paid parental leave has a long history in Norway.
                                                                             6   In 1977, parents were granted


18 weeks of paid leave and job protection for paid and unpaid leave up to one year.
                                                                                                     7   During the


late 1980s and early 1990s, the paid leave period gradually expanded, so that by 1992 there was a


maximum of 35 weeks of paid leave, but no increase in job protection. Figure 2 gives an overview


of the introduction of paid parental leave in 1977 and the yearly expansions from 1987-1992.


    The parental leave mandates provide 100% income replacement up to a generous earnings thresh-


old. The earnings thresholds are non-binding for most mothers, and when they are exceeded, most


public and private employers top up benets so that foregone earnings are fully replaced.
                                                                                                         8   The rm


is not allowed to dismiss the worker for taking leave, and the parent has the right to return to a


comparable job.      Apart from a few weeks reserved for the mother, parents could share 35 weeks


between them as desired before 1993. Up to that point, the program was de facto a maternity leave


program, as very few fathers took any amount of leave.
                                                                 9

   6 Our discussion of parental leave in Norway builds on Carneiro, Løken and Salvanes (2011), Dahl, Løken and
Mogstad (forthcoming), and Rege and Solli (2010).
   7 Prior to this, parents had 12 weeks of job protection due to legislation passed in 1956, but no paid leave.
   8 In 2010, benets were capped at earnings of approximately $75,000. Only 7% of mothers earned more than this
threshold.
   9 Starting in 1993, father quotas have been added in subsequent reforms, mostly on top of existing parental leave.
See Dahl, Løken and Mogstad (forthcoming) for an analysis of the 1993 paternity leave quota.



                                                         6
    In our analysis, we focus on the six expansions in paid leave between 1987 and 1992.                      There


are several reasons for this choice.       First, this allows us to analyze long term outcomes, such as


children's high school graduation rates and parent's long-term labor force attachment. Second, this


period gives us a total increase of 17 weeks of paid leave, providing a natural comparison to the


initial 18 weeks introduced in 1977. Finally, this is the period before the reforms started to set aside


specic quotas for fathers, which would add a new layer of complexity. While virtually all eligible


mothers take leave, not all eligible fathers do, even after the introduction of the father quotas.


    The various reforms determined benets based on the birthdate of the child. For the 1987 reform,


parents with children born after May 1st 1987 were eligible for 20 weeks of paid parental leave while


parents whose children were born before were eligible for just 18 weeks. Subsequent expansions were


introduced with the following date cutos: July 1st 1988: 2 additional weeks, April 1st 1989: 2


additional weeks, May 1st 1990: 4 additional weeks, July 1st 1991: 4 additional weeks, and April


1st 1992: 3 additional weeks.
                                  10


    In addition to the birth cutos, paid parental leave benets were contingent on the mother


working at least 6 of the last 10 months before birth. Earnings in the prior 10 months needed to


exceed the substantial gainful activity threshold (approximately $12,500 in the year 2010).


    The parental leave system is universal, simple, and well-known (including details about eligibility,


benet amounts, and the application process). To apply for parental leave benets, parents must


inform their employers and submit a joint application to a Social Security Administration eld oce


at least six weeks before the pregnancy due date.




2.2 Data

Our analysis employs several data sources that we can link through unique identiers for each


individual. This gives us a rich longitudinal database that covers every resident starting in 1967.


For each year, it contains individual demographic information and unique identiers that allow us to


match spouses and parents to their children. The data on parental leave comes from social security

  10 Starting with the 1989 reform, parents were given the option of taking 80% earnings replacement and 20% more
weeks of paid leave. Since job protection extends for a year, at the margin it should be the same to take extra weeks
at 80 % coverage or 100 % coverage and additional weeks as unpaid leave.


                                                         7
registers that contain complete records for all individuals from 1992 onwards. One advantage of our


data is that we can study a wide variety of parents, child and family outcomes.


   For mothers and fathers we focus on outcomes related to annual earnings and transfers, as the


Norwegian data does not include a measure of hours. Income is measured as total pension-qualifying


earnings and transfers reported in the tax registry. This individual-specic measure includes labor


earnings and all taxable transfers including sickness benets, unemployment benets and parental


leave payments. We construct a measure of whether mothers work after birth based on whether they


have positive labor earnings. We also look directly at earnings after the reforms. For both mothers


and fathers we construct two long term outcomes: total years of employment up to 14 years after


the reform and the annuity of income up to 14 years after each reform.


   The outcomes we study for children are the written exam taken at the end of junior high school


and dropout rates from high school. The written exam is important for determining placement into


high school, and must be taken by all students. The exam subject rotates and can be in either math,


Norwegian or English. High school dropouts are dened as children not obtaining a three year high


school diploma by age 20. Due to age and survey restrictions, we do not have dropout status for the


1992 reform.


   For family outcomes we examine combined family income, marriage patterns and fertility. We


measure long-term marital stability by observing whether a couple is divorced 14 years after the


reform, conditional on being married the year before the reform. We also look at whether a couple


is married 14 years later, given that they were not married the year before the reform. Lastly, we


look at completed fertility, dened as the cumulative number of children born to a mother 14 years


after the reform.


   One of the key advantages of our dataset is that we can address the cost side of parental leave, as


well as its distributional eects. We can measure the amount of taxes a couple pays in the 14 years


after the program to see if the program is self-funding in the long run due to increased female labor


force participation or earnings. We can likewise measure the future benets from other programs a


family receives in the long run, including the universal child allowance, the family allowance which




                                                  8
is targeted to single parents, and disability insurance. With these variables, we can compare the


annuity of costs to the annuity of benets.
                                                   11


    Since we do not observe hours, we cannot directly observe which parents are eligible for paid


leave according to the rules described in the previous section. We therefore predict eligibility using


labor earnings the year before birth.          We dene eligibility for mothers as having earnings above


the substantial gainful activity level, described in the previous section, in the year prior to birth.


Eligibility increases over time as more women enter the labor market. For example in 1987 about


70% of women are eligible, but by 1992, 76% of women are eligible. We limit our estimation sample


to those mothers who are predicted to be eligible.


    There is a tradeo between using too strict of an earnings requirement and excluding parents


from our sample who were in fact eligible, and using a less strict earnings requirement and including


parents who actually were ineligible. While including ineligible parents may increase the residual


variation and thus the standard errors in the RD estimation, excluding eligible parents may aect


the external validity of our results.
                                         12   By using a fairly weak earnings requirement in the prediction


of eligibility, we assign more weight to the generalizability of our results.


    The nal variable needed for our analysis is take up of parental leave. The exact amount of paid


leave taken by each parent and the amount of the benet is directly observed from 1992 onwards.


For prior years, we assume that paid leave has a take up rate of 100% for mothers (with no take up


for fathers). This assumption is supported both by survey evidence (Carneiro, Løken and Salvanes


2011) and the fact that observed take up for the 1992 reform is close to universal for mothers and


close to zero for fathers. To calculate the amount of unpaid leave, we follow Carneiro, Løken and


Salvanes (2011) and impute days of unpaid leave using information on yearly earnings.
                                                                                                         13   Later in


the paper, we verify this method by comparing the imputed estimates for 1992 to the actual data

  11 See Blundell, Graber and Mogstad (2012) for a description of the Norwegian tax-transfer system. For all annuities,
we use an annual discount rate of 2.3%.
  12 As long as eligibility cannot be manipulated, the internal validity of the RD estimates are unaected by the
exclusion of ineligibles.
  13 Specically, we impute pre-birth monthly income by dividing earnings the year before the reform by 12. Then we
calculate total earnings in the year of the reform and the following three years after, and divide this by pre-reform
monthly income. This yields a measure of the number of days of unpaid leave during the rst 36 months after birth.
For this imputation to work, the assumption is that pre-reform earnings are a good approximation for maternal
potential post-birth earnings (the earnings she would have received had she not gone on unpaid leave), adjusted for
ination.


                                                          9
on leave taking.


   Appendix Table A1 provides summary statistics for the variables dened in this section, sepa-


rately for each of the six reform years.




3 Identication

3.1 Regression Discontinuity Design

While we analyze six dierent expansions in paid leave, in each case we use a similar identication


strategy. To make things concrete, we focus the discussion on the 1992 reform. The discontinuity


we exploit arises from the reform being contingent on the birthdate of the child. Parents of children


born after April 1, 1992 were entitled to 35 weeks of parental leave while those with a child born


before this cuto could only receive 32 weeks. The reduced form model for our RD design can be


implemented by the following equation:
                                                 14



                                y = α + 1[t ≥ c](gl (t − c) + λ) + 1[t < c]gr (c − t) + e                                 (1)




where   y   is the relevant outcome variable,         t   is the birthdate of the child,   c   is the cut-o date,   e   is an


error term, and    gl ,   and   gr   are unknown functions. The coecient         λ   is the intention to treat (ITT)


eect of the reform on outcomes. To get the average eect of the extra weeks of paid leave,                      λ   needs


to be scaled by the jump in the take up of parental leave at around the cuto from a rst-stage RD


regression. For 1992, when actual take up is observed, we can estimate this rst stage. For earlier


years, this is not possible.          However, since take up of parental leave benets for mothers is close


to 100% in 1992 and survey data suggests the same holds true from the beginning of the program


(Carneiro, Løken and Salvanes, 2011), the ITT estimate should be close to the average eect. For


the remainder of the paper, therefore, we focus on the ITT estimates.

  14 See Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and Lee and Lemieux (2010) for details on the implementation and assessment
of RD designs.




                                                               10
3.2 Threats to Identication

3.2.1    Strategic timing of births



The validity of our RD design requires that individuals cannot manipulate the assignment variable,


which is the child's birthdate.      If date of birth cannot be timed in response to the reform, the


aggregate distribution of the assignment variable should be continuous around the cuto date.


   There is little opportunity to strategically time conception, as the implementation dates for


the reforms have been announced less than nine months in advance. The national budgets which


propose the parental leave reforms are generally introduced in the fall and passed by parliament in


December of the same year. Therefore, mothers giving birth close to the cutos, which occurred in


the spring and summer, were already pregnant before the announcement of the reform. Furthermore,


as discussed in Section 2.1, the month of implementation varied from reform to reform, so the exact


timing would be hard to predict.


   While strategic timing of conception is unlikely, it is still possible that mothers with due dates


close to the cuto date could postpone induced births and planned cesarean sections. In contrast


to current births practices in the U.S., the vast majority of births in Norway during the time of our


reforms were spontaneous vaginal deliveries. In 1993, the c-section rate was 12% (with 59% of these


being emergency operations) and only 12% of vaginal deliveries were induced (Folkehelseinstituttet,


http://mfr-nesstar.uib.no/mfr).
                                   15   Therefore, this type of manipulation is less likely than it would


be in the U.S. setting (Dickert-Conlin and Chandra, 1999).


   Figure 3 and Appendix Figure A1 graphically conrm there is no systematic eect from the


reforms on the distribution of fertility around the cutos. While there are some seasonal patterns


in the number of births, and a small jump in 1992, the reforms in general show no systematic evi-


dence that births are strategically delayed. Nonetheless, to avoid the possibility that some births in


our sample are strategically delayed, we report robustness results which exclude the week immedi-


ately before and the week immediately following the cuto date. As we will show, excluding these


observations does not materially aect our ndings.

  15 This contrasts with a c-section rate of 33% and an induction rate of 23% in the U.S. in 2011 (National Vital
Statistics Reports, Births: Final Data for 2011, Vol. 62, no. 1, June 28, 2013).


                                                       11
3.2.2   Eligibility



Another threat to our identication strategy is that the announcement of the reform could cause a


change in eligibility around the cuto date. If it did, then restricting the sample to eligibles could


bias the estimates. As explained above, we predict eligibility based on annual earnings in the year


prior to childbirth.   It is possible that mothers' earnings could respond to the announcement of


the reform. Recall, however, that predicted eligibility of mothers who have a child in the window


surrounding the reform is based on annual earnings in the prior year. As the reforms were usually


announced in December, it leaves the mother with only one month in which to increase her earnings


enough to become eligible by our denition. Given this short time frame, there is limited scope for


mothers to manipulate predicted eligibility status.


   Figure 4 graphically illustrates there is no measurable change in predicted eligibility of mothers


around the cut-o date. While there is some seasonal variation in earnings and thus in predicted


eligibility, there is no jump in the fraction of predicted eligible mothers around the discontinuity,


a nding which is conrmed with an RD regression in Table 1.        Appendix Figure A2 and Table


1 show no signicant eligibility changes for the other reform years, except for 1991. But in 1991,


the estimate is actually negative, which is the opposite direction from what would be expected if


mothers were manipulating their eligibility.




3.2.3   Covariate balance



If families time date of birth or change eligibility status in response to the reform, then we would


expect to see changes in the distribution of pre-determined characteristics of the parents around the


reform dates. Table 1 shows that there is little evidence to support this, both for the 1992 reform


as well as for other reforms. Out of of the 24 estimates, 3 are signicant at the 10% level or less,


which is not much more than would be expected by chance. More importantly, the point estimates


are small in magnitude and our RD estimates barely move when we include the characteristics in


the regressions.




                                                 12
4 Results
A key advantage of RD is that results can be presented graphically, which make identication of the


estimates more transparent. However, given the large number of outcomes we analyze, we cannot


feasibly show graphs for every reform. Therefore, we rst present results graphically for the 1992


reform in the paper. Results for the other expansions in parental leave are presented in table form,


with graphs relegated to the Online Appendix.




4.1 First stage

The 1992 reform increased the number of paid weeks of parental leave by three, changing the


entitlement from 32 weeks to 35 weeks. Figure 5a displays the number of days of paid leave taken


by mothers in a window surrounding the reform.        The graph includes births three months before


and three months after the reform. In the graph, the birth date of the child has been normalized


with the cuto date of April 1, 1992 being labeled as zero. Each point on the graph is the average


number of paid leave days taken by mothers over a one week birth interval. There is a sharp jump


in the number of days of paid leave at the birth cuto date.


   To obtain a RD estimate, we adopt the following specication for this rst stage regression and


for subsequent reduced form regressions.    We use daily data, include linear trends in birth day


on each side of the discontinuity and employ triangular weights. To gain precision, we also include


(pre-determined) control variables for mother's and father's years of education, mother's and father's


age and age squared, parent's county of residence, marital status prior to birth and gender of the


child. The estimated jump in this rst stage regression is 22.7 days (s.e. = 2.7), which corresponds


closely to the 3 week increase stipulated by the 1992 reform. This estimate conrms survey evidence


suggesting 100% take up by mothers of the entire amount of paid leave benets.


   As mentioned previously, we only observe actual days of paid leave starting in 1992.        In the


results which follow, we therefore focus on reduced form estimates since we lack a rst stage for


earlier reforms. However, since take up is likely to have been close to 100%, these ITT estimates


should be very close to the average treatment eects in magnitude.




                                                 13
4.1.1     Crowd out of unpaid leave



An important question is whether an increase in the number of paid leave days reduces the number


of unpaid leave days. If so, then the intention of the reforms to increase the amount of time parents


spend with children would only be partially achieved. Moreover, if the unpaid leave decreases as


paid leave increases, there would be important income eects associated with the introduction of


the reforms, as total income (labor earnings plus leave benets) would rise after the reform.


   Figure 5b graphs the fraction of mothers taking unpaid leave based on the birth date of their


child. There is no evidence of any change in unpaid leave as a result of the reform. Table 2 presents


RD estimates for the 1992 reform as well as the other expansion. All of the estimates are close to


zero and statistically insignicant. Unlike much of the previous research, we are able to hone in on


the counterfactual to paid leave because there is no evidence of crowd out of unpaid leave and there


was 100% income replacement.     This helps us interpret the expansions to paid parental leave as


increases in the amount of time spent at home versus work, holding family income constant. Since


there was almost no child care coverage for children under the age of 2 during this period (Mogstad


and Havnes, 2011), the counterfactual to parental care is usually informal care, including relatives


and nannies.


   The fact that there is no crowd out of unpaid leave makes our results easier to interpret compared


to prior research in other countries. Indeed, one possible explanation for why much of the previous


literature either nds no eect or a negative eect of paid leave on child development is that there


could be osetting eects from a mother's increased time at home versus a reduction in family


income.




4.1.2     Child achievement and schooling



One of the main arguments made for paid parental leave, and maternity leave in particular, is that


it will have a positive impact on child development. The logic is that by reducing the amount of


time spent at work, parents will have more time to invest in their children. However, whether this is


true is controversial. The existing research on how maternal employment aects children's outcomes




                                                 14
is inconclusive, in part because it is dicult to control for the self-selection of mothers who choose


to work and in part because shocks to employment usually coincide with large changes to income


which could also aect child development.


   The Norwegian parental leave setting is ideal to study how maternal employment in the rst year


of life aects later child outcomes, as it does not suer from the same deciencies as most of the


prior studies. First, since take up is essentially 100% and the RD design generates variation which


is as good as random around the cuto, there is no self selection into which eligible mothers take


more versus less paid leave after a reform. Of course, the estimates are only internally valid for the


group of eligible mothers, but this is an important and sizable group (approximately three-fourths of


all mothers). Second, the previous subsection revealed there is no crowd out of unpaid leave, which


means the reforms changed the amount of time mothers spent working, but did not aect family


resources in the short run.   As we show in the next subsection, the reforms did not signicantly


change family resources (including income from all sources, and not just the mother's labor income)


in the long run either. In short, this means that we have an exogenous change to maternal labor


supply during the rst year after birth, holding family income xed.


   We test for eects on two long-term outcomes related to a child's long-term development: written


exams taken at the end of middle school (9th grade) and whether the child graduates from high


school. The exam taken at the end of middle school is important for placement into high school.


The scores range from 1 to 6, with a standard deviation approximately equal to 1. Figure 6a plots


the average exam grade based on a child's birth date in a window surrounding the 1992 reform.


Although exam scores are somewhat higher for children born earlier in the year, there is no jump in


average scores at the reform cuto date. Looking at Table 3, there is similarly little evidence that


expansions in paid leave aects exam scores for the other reforms. The eect sizes are close to zero


and only for the 1990 reform is the estimate signicant. But the sign is negative, which if taken


literally, suggests that increased parental leave harms a child academically.


   Our next child outcome is whether a child drops out of high school. Because children born in


1992 have not yet had a chance to graduate from high school by the end of our data sample, we




                                                 15
cannot show a graph for this year. But we can report results for the other ve reforms, which we


do in column 2 of Table 3. The RD estimates are close to zero, indicating no eect of paid leave


on high school graduation. These last results stand in stark contrast to those of Carneiro, Løken


and Salvanes (2011), who nd that the 1977 introduction of 18 weeks of paid leave and extension


of job protection from 12 weeks to one year decreased high school dropout rates by a statistically


signicant 2.7 percentage points.




4.1.3   Labor market outcomes



Another primary motivation for government leave programs is the claim that it will ease the tran-


sition of mothers back to work after the birth of a child and thereby promote increased attachment


to the labor market over the long run.    We graphically examine these claims for the 1992 reform


in Figure 6, panels (b) - (d). There is no visual evidence that mothers have an increased rate of


returning to work two years after the birth of their child.   There is also little visual evidence of


increased labor market attachment in the long run.      Total years of employment and the annuity


of income over the next 14 years are unaected by the 3 week increase in paid leave. The results


shown graphically for 1992 are not unique to that reform. Table 4 looks at the same outcomes for


all 6 reforms. While a few of the 24 coecients are signicant at the 10% level, the magnitudes are


relatively small.


   When we look at father's long term labor market attachment, we similarly nd little evidence of


an eect, either graphically for 1992 in Figure 6, panels (e) and (f ), or for any of the other reform


years in Table 4. None of the 12 coecient estimates are statistically signicant.


   The hope of many proponents of paid leave expansions is that they would promote more within


family gender equality in terms of labor force attachment. Panels (g) and (h) in Figure 6 and Table


5 reveal that the ratio of male to female employment and the ratio of male and female income


annuities in the long run (14 years after) did not generally change in response to the reforms. One


coecient is signicant at the ten percent level, but there is no obvious pattern for the remaining 11


insignicant coecients. Since these extensions in paid leave increased the amount of time women




                                                 16
spent at home with newborn children, but did not aect men's leave taking, the reforms had the


likely eect of widening the male-female childcare gap, at least in the rst year of a child's life.




4.1.4   Family structure



We nally turn to outcomes related to family structure.       An additional benet often claimed for


parental leave is that it supports and strengthens families. In panels (i) - (k) of Figure 6 we look at


a variety of family outcomes for the 1992 reform. The 1992 reform had a small eect on completed


fertility over the next 14 years. What about marital outcomes? Many Norwegians are not married at


the birth of their child. Therefore, we can examine whether the reform increased entry into marriage


or decreased exits out of marriage. We nd a small eect for increased entry into marriage, but no


eect for divorce in 1992.


   Table 5 reveals that the two marginally signicant eects (at the 10% signicance level) found


for the 1992 reform appear to be due to sampling variability. None of the family structure estimates


for the other reform years are signicant, and the signs of the coecients do not follow a consistent


pattern, with a mixture of positive and negative coecients. Our reading of the evidence as a whole


is that the extensions to paid leave did little to encourage fertility or stabilize marriage.




4.2 Robustness

Before moving on, we rst present robustness results.        Since there are many reforms, we show


robustness for the 1992 reform; the results for other reform years are similarly robust. We begin


with a series of specication checks in Appendix Table A2, re-estimating the full set of outcomes


(i) omitting control variables, (ii) using separate quadratic trends on each side of the discontinuity


instead of linear trends, (iii) and with a 1 week donut around the discontinuity. In each case, the


results are remarkably robust, and continue to point towards little eect of the reforms on our long


list of outcomes.


   We next examine whether our results are sensitive to dierent window widths.            Our baseline


estimates use a window of 90 days on either side of the birth cuto date. In Appendix Table A3 we




                                                   17
try a wider window of 120 days and a narrower window of 60 days. The results are similar regardless


of window width, although as expected, the standard errors increase when the window is smaller.


   An alternative to using a global estimator for RD is to use local linear regression. This has the


advantage of being less inuenced by outliers far away from the discontinuity. We report on this


nal robustness check in Appendix Table A4. Whether we use a bandwidth of 30 or 60 days, the


results are similar to our baseline estimates.




5 Costs versus Benets
To evaluate the argument for paid parental leave, costs and benets must be compared on a per


dollar basis. We begin by discussing the costs of the program, and then translate the benet per


reform estimates from the prior section into benets per dollar spent.




5.1 Costs

The long-run costs of paid maternity leave depend not only on direct program expenditures, but also


on any changes in future tax payments or social benet receipt. Starting with the 1992 reform as an


example, Figure 7 plots the RD graphs associated with expenditures, taxes and benet payments


per participant. As expected due to the strong take up of the extra weeks allowed by the reform,


program expenditures jump discontinuously around the reform cuto in panel (a). Table 6 estimates


that expenditures rise by over $2,100 per mother. Since this was a three week reform, expenditures


amount to an average transfer of roughly $140 for each workday taken o by mothers.


   However, there could be indirect revenue eects from paid leave. For example, if paid leave causes


mothers to work more in the future, this increase in revenues could help nance the leave program.


Panel (b) in Figure 7 graphs the annuity of taxes paid for 15 years, starting with the year of the


birth (year 0). Parental leave benets are fully taxable at the individual level, so a portion of the


leave payments is returned to the government in the form of higher tax payments in the year of the


birth. However, there is also a reduction in taxes collected by the government due to the foregone


earnings of the mother while on leave. Since there is 100% earnings replacement and empirically no



                                                 18
evidence of crowd out in unpaid leave, these two tax eects largely cancel each other out in the year


of the birth. There is also little evidence of a sizable increase in tax receipt over the next 14 years.


   Similarly, there could be future indirect costs if paid leave changes participation in other social


welfare programs.   We nd no evidence that transfer payments increase over the 15 year period


starting with the year of the birth.    This null eect is visually shown in panel (c) and veried


numerically in column 3 of Table 7. Hence, the total cost of the program per participant is close


to the program expenditure amount, as future taxes and transfers are largely unaected. Appendix


Figures A15 to A17 reveal similar expenditure, tax and transfer patterns for the other reform years,


which is perhaps not surprising given the results on family labor supply found in the previous section.


   The total cost of the program depends on the number of participating mothers.           In 1992, for


example, 45,682 eligible women gave birth and participated in the program, at an estimated average


cost of roughly $2,100 per mother. If a similar number of mothers continue to take paid leave in the


future, this implies the yearly cost of the leave program rose by almost $100 million per year due to


the 3 week expansion in paid benets.


   To put the magnitude of the program in perspective, consider the cumulative costs of the initial


reform and all of the leave expansions. Based on all the reforms we study, we estimate a one week


increase in paid leave costs taxpayers $687 dollars (in 2010 dollars) on average per birth.         The


initial 1977 reform gave mothers 18 weeks of paid leave and 1 year of job protection. The series of


expansions in paid leave we study in this paper expanded paid leave by 17 weeks.          Based on the


number of births to eligible mothers in 1992, the annual cost of providing 35 weeks of paid leave is


over $1 billion per year (in 2010 dollars). This represents almost 0.5% of GDP. Whether the initial


18 weeks is worth the roughly $565 million in annual costs can be debated, since Carneiro, Løken


and Salvanes (2011) nd some benets associated with the initial reform. But the expansions nearly


doubled this annual cost, without any corresponding changes in a broad range of child, family and


gender equality outcomes.    These expansionary costs imply a considerable increase in taxes, at a


cost to economic eciency.




                                                  19
5.2 Benets per $1,000 spent

In the previous section, the potential benets of paid parental leave were measured per reform. Some


of the leave extensions were 2 weeks, while others were 3 or 4 weeks. In this section, we present the


results for each reform in term of benets per $1,000 of program expenditure. These comparisons


are presented graphically in Figure 8.


    As an example, consider Figure 8a which plots the eect on academic achievement at the end


of 9th grade for each reform, standardized per $1,000 of expenditures. The x-axis measures weeks


of paid leave, with the vertical red lines indicating each of the 6 extensions in paid leave.                   The


horizontal black lines visually present the standardized estimates, while the dashed lines represent


95% condence intervals.        The graph makes clear that the reforms had little eect on children's


academic achievement.


    The other graphs in Figure 8 present similar illustrations of eect sizes per $1,000 spent for


other outcomes. One advantage of presenting results in this manner is that it is easy to compare


the eect of earlier reforms to later reforms. Modest expansions when a child is still young could


be worthwhile, even if later, larger expansions are not. For example, one might think the benets


of breastfeeding are more important when an infant is less than 6 months old but that this benet


fades out over time. Similarly, one might think the longer a mother stays out of the labor force, the


less will be her future attachment to the labor market. However, even modest expansions, from 18


to 20 weeks or from 20 to 22 weeks, have no signicant eect on outcomes. The estimates are all


close to zero and generally insignicant.


    The rst column of Table 7 presents the eect per $1,000 spent, averaged over all six reforms.


None of the estimated average eects are large or statistically signicant, even though the averaging


generally results in smaller standard errors. Even if the average eect is statistically insignicant, one


could imagine that the cumulative eect of all the reforms adds up to something which is signicant.


This is not the case. Column 2 in Table 7 shows that none of the cumulative eects are signicant


at the 5 percent signicance level.
                                        16

  16 There have been small changes in the composition of which mothers take leave over our sample period. Reweighting
the results by observable characteristics to adjust for this does not materially aect our ndings.


                                                         20
6 Redistribution
Since there are no measurable benets associated with extensions to paid leave, but large costs to


taxpayers, it is important to consider the distributional eects of the program. Somewhat surpris-


ingly, little attention has been paid in the previous literature to the redistributional eects of this


social program.


   As discussed previously, not all mothers are eligible for paid leave, since a requirement is that


mothers have a minimum level of labor market earnings prior to the child's birth. Table 8 compares


eligible versus ineligible mothers on a variety of dimensions. Mothers who are eligible for parental


leave benets are more educated, are married to higher educated men, and are more likely to


be natives compared to ineligibles. Eligible mothers also have substantially higher family income


compared to ineligible mothers, with disposable income being 60% higher in the year prior to birth.


This income gap persists over time, with family income for eligibles being almost 20% higher on


average compared to ineligible mothers in 2010.


   The distributions of family income for eligible and ineligible mothers are presented in Figure


9. The rst graph plots the distributions for family income in the year prior to the child's birth.


The graph makes clear that that paid parental leave makes transfers to relatively well-o mothers.


Not only is the mean of the eligible distribution farther to the right, but the left tail of the income


distribution has a much larger mass for ineligibles. Twenty-ve percent of the ineligible distribution


has family income below $25,000 compared to only 10% of the eligible distribution. In addition, only


16% of the ineligible distribution has family income above $60,000 compared to 58% of the eligible


distribution. These are large distributional disparities.


   Even within the group of eligible mothers, the parental leave program is regressive. Leave benets


are tied to prior earnings and women with higher earnings reside in families with higher income.


Since the program gave 100% income replacement up to a high threshold, the amount of the transfer


increases with family income on average. The black dots in Figure 10 plot the pre-tax value of the


leave transfer to mothers versus disposable income, dened as the sum of parent's labor income


plus taxes and transfers. Both eligible and ineligible mothers are included in the graph. The pre-




                                                  21
tax transfer is highly regressive, with families earning less than $25,000 receiving $10,560 in paid


leave on average compared to families earning greater than $60,000 receiving $21,349 on average. A


considerable part of this regressivity is undone by Norway's progressive tax system, as leave benets


are fully taxable at the individual level. But as the grey dots in Figure 10 show, even after taxes,


the program continues to favor middle and upper income families, with families earning more than


$60,000 receiving roughly 75% more in after-tax leave benets compared to families earning less


than $25,000.


   The dierences in income between ineligibles and eligibles are even larger when comparing eligible


mothers to the relatively poor men and women who never have children. The second panel of Table


8 documents that family income in 2010 is almost two and a half times larger in eligible families


compared to childless individuals.


   The comparisons in this section make clear that paid parental leave has regressive redistribution


properties. The program makes regressive transfers both from ineligibles to eligibles and within the


group of eligible mothers.   Since there is no crowd out of unpaid leave, the extra leave payments


amount to a pure leisure transfer to middle and upper income families at the expense of the least


well o in society.




7 Conclusion
Paid parental leave has gained greater salience in the past few decades as mothers have increasingly


entered the workforce. Indeed, the median number of weeks of paid leave among OECD countries


was 14 in 1980, but had risen to 42 by 2011. The usual arguments for paid leave are that there are


important social goals or market failures addressed by the program. However, empirical evidence on


the benets and costs of paid leave is scarce and many key questions are still unanswered. First, does


paid leave increase available parental time with children, or does it simply crowd out unpaid leave?


Second, what eect does paid leave have on a broad range of child, parent and family outcomes?


Third, how do any benets compare relative to costs? And nally, are there progressive or regressive


distributional eects?




                                                 22
   We answer these questions in the context of Norway's parental leave program, focusing on parents'


responses to a series of policy reforms which expanded paid leave from 18 to 35 weeks (without


changing the length of job protection). Our rst empirical result is that none of the reforms seem to


crowd out unpaid leave. Since income replacement was 100% for most women, the reforms caused


an increase in mother's time spent at home after birth, without a reduction in family income. This


allows for a clean estimate of the eect of parental time on child and family outcomes, as there


are no income eects to worry about.      Second, the expansions had little eect on a wide variety


of outcomes, including children's school outcomes, parental earnings and participation in the labor


market in the short or long run, completed fertility, marriage or divorce. Third, paid parental leave


makes regressive transfers both from ineligibles to eligibles and within the group of eligible mothers.


Since there was no crowd out of unpaid leave, the extra leave benets amounted to a pure leisure


transfer. Finally, the reforms extending paid leave had little impact on parents' future tax payments


and benet receipt. As a result, the large increases in public spending on parental leave imply a


considerable increase in taxes, at a cost to economic eciency.


   Taken together, our nding suggest the case for extensions to paid maternity leave must rest on


arguments other than improvements in observable dimensions of public benets, redistribution or


market failures. In a time of harsh budget realities, our ndings are particularly relevant for countries


that are considering future expansions or contractions in the duration of paid leave. One can argue


whether a baseline level of paid parental leave or job protection is worth the cost. But the case for


extended paid leave periods, which are prevalent in OECD countries, is weak. One would have to


argue there are benets not captured in the relatively rich set of outcome variables we look at. For


example, our empirical strategy only identies the responses of parents with children born around the


time of the reforms, which might not be externally valid for parents having children in later periods.


In a long-run perspective, when rms might adjust to the extensions of parental leave and women


might change their investments in human capital and fertility behavior, the eects of the program


could potentially be stronger.   Unfortunately, costs and benets of such long-run adjustments, if


they exist, are dicult to verify. By way of comparison, the opportunity costs to funding parental




                                                   23
leave are substantial and veriable: a growing body of evidence show that government subsidies


to early education can yield high returns in the short and long run, particularly for disadvantaged


children.
           17




 17 See   e.g. the recent review of this literature by Almond and Currie (2011).


                                                          24
References
Abe, M., Y. Higuchi,         and J. Waldfogel (1999):         Family Leave Policies and Women's Retention
  after Childbirth: Evidence from the United States, Britain and Japan.,             Journal of Population
  Economics, 12, 523545.
Almond, D.,       and   J. Currie (2011): Human Capital Devlopment Before Age Five,          Handbook of
  Labor Economics, 15.
Baker, M.,     and K. Milligan (2008a):          How Does Job-protected Materinty Leave Aect Mothers'
  Employment?,        Journal of Labour Economics, 26, 655692.
            (2008b):    Maternal Employment, Breastfeeding, and Health:          Evidence from Maternity
  Leave Mandates.,        Journal of Health Economics, 27, 871887.
           (2010): Evidence from Maternity Leave Expansions of the Impact of Maternal Care on
  Early Child Development.,         Journal of Human Resources, 45, 132.
Blau, D.,    and   J. Currie (2006): Pre-School, Day Care and after-School Care: Who's Minding
  the Kids?,   Handbook of the Economics of Education, 2, 11631278.
Blundell, R., M. Graber,            and    M. Mogstad (2012): Labour Income Dynamics and the Insur-
  ance from Taxes, Transfers and the Family, Discussion paper, Working Paper.

Carneiro, P., K. V. Loken,           and K. Salvanes (2011):        A Fying Start? Maternity Leave Benets
  and Long Run Outcomes of Children, Discussion paper, IZA DP No. 5793.

Dahl, G., K. V. Loken,             and   M. Mogstad (forthcoming): Peer Eects in Program Participa-
  tion,   American Economic Review.
Dickert-Conlin, S.,          and   A. Chandra (1999):        Taxes and the Timing of Births,    Journal of
  Political Economy, 107, 161177.
Dustmann, C.,        and   U. Schöneberg (2012): The Eect of Expansions in Maternity Leave Cov-
  erage on Children's Long-Term Outcomes,            American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4,
  190224.

Gregg, P.,     and    J. Waldfogel (2005): Symposium on Parental Leave, Early Maternal Employ-
  ment and Child Outcomes: Introduction,            The Economic Journal, 115, 16.
Gregg, P., E. Washbrook, C. Propper,                   and   S. Burgess (2005): The Eects of Mother's
  Return to Work Decisions on Child Development in the UK.,             The Economic Journal, 115, 4880.
Havnes, T.,     and     M. Mogstad (2011): No Child Left Behind: Subsidized Child Care and Chil-
  dren's Long-Run Outcomes.,            American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3, 97129.
Imbens, G.,     and     T. Lemieux (2008): Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to Practice,
  Journal of Econometrics, 142, 615635.
Lalive, R., A. Schlosser, A. Steinhauser,                    and   J. Zweimüller (forthcoming):    Parental
  Leave and Mothers' Careers:            the Relative Importance of Job Protection and Cash Benets,
  Review of Economics Studies.
Lalive, R.,     and     J. Zweimüller (2009):       Does Parental Leave Aect Fertility and Return-to-
  Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments.,            Quartely Journal of Economics, 24, 13631402.
Lee, D.,    and   T. Lemieux (2010):         Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics, Journal of
  Economic Literature, 48, 281355.
Liu, Q.,   and O. N. Skans (2010):          The Duration of Paid Parental Leave and Children's Scholastic
  Performance,      The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 10.
                                                        25
Rasmussen, A. W. (2010): Increasing the Length of Parents' Birth-Related Leave: The Eect on
  Children's Long-Term Educational Outcomes.,      Labour Economics, 17, 91100.
Rege, M.,   and I. Solli (2010):   The Impact of Paternity Leave on Long-term Father Involvement,
  Discussion paper.


Rossin, M. (2011): The Eects of Maternity Leave on Children's Birth and Infant Health Outcomes
                       Journal of Health Economics, 30, 221239.
  in the United States.,


Ruhm, C. (2000): Parental Leave and Child Health, Journal of Health Economics, 19, 931960.


Schöneberg, U.,    and J. Ludsteck (forthcoming):      Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and
  Mother's Labour Market Outcomes after Childbirth,    Journal of Labor Economics.
Tanaka, S. (2005):      Parental Leave and Child Health across OECD Countries., The Economic
  Journal, 115, 728.




                                                  26
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Weeks	  




                                                                                                                                                              0	  
                                                                                                                                                                      10	  
                                                                                                                                                                               20	  
                                                                                                                                                                                        30	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                 40	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                          50	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     80	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              90	  
                                                                                                                                           Aus
                                                                                                                                                 tria
                                                                                                                                                       	  
                                                                                                                                       Swe
                                                                                                                                                 den
                                                                                                                                                       	  
                                                                                                                                             Jap
                                                                                                                                                   an	  




                                                               Source:
                                                                                                                                Ger
                                                                                                                                             ma
                                                                                                                                                   ny	  
                                                                                                                                       Can
                                                                                                                                                 ada
                                                                                                                                Den                    	  
                                                                                                                                              ma
                                                                                                                                                   rk	  
                                                                                                                                                Ital
                                                                                                                                                     y	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1980	  




                                                                                                                                        Gre
                                                                                                                                                 ece
                                                                                                                                                       	  
                                                                                                                                         Fra
                                                                                                                                                 nce
                                                                                                                            Lux
                                                                                                                                  em                   	  
                                                                                                                                             bou
                                                                                                                            Net                    r g 	  
                                                                                                                                   her
                                                                                                                        Uni                   lan
                                                                                                                           ted                     ds	  




27
                                                                                                                               	  Kin
                                                                                                                                             gdo
                                                                                                                                                   m	  
                                                                                                                                       Nor
                                                                                                                                                wa
                                                                                                                                                     y	  
                                                                                                                                     Bel
                                                                                                                                               giu
                                                                                                                                                   m	  
                                                                                                                                        Icel
                                                                                                                                                 and
                                                                                                                                                       	  
                                                                                                                                        Irel
                                                                                                                                                 and
                                                                                                                                                       	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2011	  




                                                                                                                                        Fin
                                                                                                                                                lan
                                                                                                                                                     d	  
                                                                                                                                   Aus




     Figure 2: Expansions in leave coverage in Norway
                                                                                                                                              tral
                                                                                                                                                    ia	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 1: Weeks of paid parental leave across countries




                                                                                                                                   Por
                                                                                                                                              tug
                                                        OECD Family database www.oecd.org/els/social/family/database.




                                                                                                                                                    al	  
                                                                                                                                              Spa
                                                                                                                                                    in	  
                                                                                                                                         Tur
                                                                                                                                                 key
                                                                                                                             Swi                      	  
                                                                                                                                     tze
                                                                                                                                              rlan
                                                                                                                           New                       d	  
                                                                                                                                   	  Ze
                                                                                                                                              ala
                                                                                                                          Uni                      nd	  
                                                                                                                              ted
                                                                                                                                         	  Sta
                                                                                                                                                  tes
                                                                                                                                                       	  
             Figure 3: Fertility histogram, 1992 reform




Note:  The histogram uses one week bins; the bin starting at 0 includes births
in the rst week post reform.




                   Figure 4: Eligibility, 1992 reform




Notes:   Each observation is the average fraction of eligible mothers in a
one-week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical line
denotes the reform cuto date, which has been normalized to zero. The
solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual
level data using triangular weights. The scale of the y-axis is +/-.5
standard deviations of the mean outcome.




                                     28
                          Figure 5: Maternity leave


                           (a) Paid leave, 1992 reform




                             (b) Unpaid leave, 1992 reform




Notes:  Each observation is the average days of paid or unpaid leave for mothers
in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines
denote the reform cuto date, which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines
are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data using
triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes are +/- .5 standard deviations of the
mean outcome.




                                        29
                                                      Figure 6: Child, mother, father and family outcomes, 1992 reform


                          (a) Child: 9th grade exam                     (b) Mother: Returned to work (by year 2)                (c) Mother: Years employed (max 14)




30
                 (d) Mother: Annuity of income (years 1-14)               (e) Father: Years employed (max 14)                 (f) Father: Annuity of income (years 1-14)




     Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
     which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
     are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                              Figure 6: Child, mother, father and family outcomes, 1992 reform (continued)


                 (g) Gender gap: Years employed (max 14)             (h) Gender gap: Annuity of income (years 1-14)             (i) Number of children (14 years after)




31
                                              (j) Entry into Marriage (14 years after)                    (k) Divorced (14 years after)




     Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
     which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
     are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                          Figure 7: Costs, taxes and benets, 1992 reform


                   (a) Program expenditures for paid leave               (b) Family: Annuity of taxes paid (0-14 years after birth)




                                           (c) Family: Annuity of benets (0-14 years after birth)




32
     Notes:  Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed
     vertical lines denote the reform cuto date, which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear
     regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes are +/- .5 standard deviations of
     the mean outcome.
                                                                        Figure 8: Eects per $1,000 Spent


                   (a) Child: 9th grade exam                                  (b) Child: High school dropout                          (c) Mother: Returned to work (by year 2)




33
              (d) Mother: Years employed (max 14)                       (e) Mother: Annuity of income (years 1-14)                         (f) Father: Years employed (max 14)




     Notes: The estimated eects and standard errors for each of the six dierent reforms are reported per $1,000 increase in total costs. The vertical lines denote the dierent
     reforms in parental leave. The dashed lines represent 95% upper and lower bound condence intervals. The scales of the y-axes are +/- 0.5 standard deviations of the mean
     outcome.
                                                                Figure 8: Eects per $1,000 Spent (continued)


              (g) Father: Annuity of income (years 1-14)           (h) Gender gap: Years employed (max 14)                   (i) Gender gap: Annuity of income (years 1-14)




34
                (j) Number of children (14 years after)             (k) Entry into marriage (14 years after)                           (l) Divorced (14 years after)




     Notes: The estimated eects and standard errors for each of the six dierent reforms are reported per $1,000 increase in total costs. The vertical lines denote the dierent
     reforms in parental leave. The dashed lines represent 95% upper and lower bound condence intervals. The scales of the y-axes are +/- 0.5 standard deviations of the mean
     outcome.
Figure 9: Distribution of disposable family income the year prior to birth, for eligible and ineligible
mothers, 1987-1992




                           Notes:   Sample of eligible and ineligible mothers aged 25-40
                           giving birth during the period 1987-1992. Disposable income
                           is calculated as the sum of parents' combined labor income,
                           parental leave benets, non-taxable transfers, unemployment
                           benets and sick leave minus taxes paid and is measured the
                           year before birth. Disposable income has been converted into
                           year 2010 dollars. The top one percentile of disposable family
                           income is excluded from the graph. Each bin in the histogram
                           is $2,500 wide.


Figure 10: Average value of paid leave transfer by disposable family income, before and after tax,
1987-1992




                     Notes:  Sample consists of all mothers who gave birth between 1987-1992.
                     Disposable income is calculated as the sum of parents' combined labor in-
                     come, parental leave benets, non-taxable transfers, unemployment benets
                     and sick leave minus taxes paid and is measured the year prior to birth.
                     Disposable income has been converted into year 2010 dollars. The top one
                     percentile of disposable family income is excluded from the graph. Each
                     observation in the graph plots the average value of the leave transfer for a
                     $5,000 interval.



                                                         35
                     Table 1: Balance tests for parent's background characteristics


                                           RD estimates                                               Obs.

              Mother:           Father:         Mother:         Father:                        Educ.
              Years of          Years of         Age at          Age at         Mother:         and
Reform       education         education          birth           birth         Eligible        Age      Eligible

1987           -0.135*           0.035           -0.152          -0.077           0.011        17,580    25,067
               (0.082)          (0.087)         (0.151)         (0.173)          (0.012)
               [11.56]          [11.83]          [28.05]         [30.71]          [0.70]
1988           -0.039            -0.001          -0.049           0.154          -0.001        19,310    26,225
               (0.077)          (0.081)         (0.147)         (0.170)          (0.012)
               [11.54]          [11.79]          [27.99]         [30.70]          [0.74]
1989            0.054            -0.041          -0.144          -0.253           0.015        20,093    26,768
               (0.075)          (0.080)         (0.142)         (0.165)          (0.011)
               [11.63]          [11.85]          [28.39]         [31.07]          [0.75]
1990            0.025            0.031           -0.204          -0.187           0.012        21,508    28,713
               (0.073)          (0.076)         (0.138)         (0.158)          (0.011)
               [11.70]          [11.88]          [28.59]         [31.29]          [0.75]
1991          -0.158**           -0.029          -0.083          -0.059         -0.024**       21,717    28,631
               (0.075)          (0.078)         (0.140)         (0.163)          (0.011)
               [11.82]          [11.92]          [28.71]         [31.40]          [0.76]
1992            0.095            0.066           0.019           0.302*           0.013        21,838    28,441
               (0.073)          (0.076)         (0.135)         (0.156)          (0.011)
               [11.90]          [12.01]          [29.03]         [31.73]          [0.77]
Note s: All coecients are estimated using a linear RD model with triangular weights using children born 3 months
before and 3 months after the reform. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and comparison means in brackets.
*p<0.1,**p<0.05.




                                                          36
    Table 2: Crowd out of unpaid leave, all reforms


                  RD estimate

                  Unpaid leave
 Reform                                           Obs.
                      (days)

 1987                 -2.041                     17,580
                     (4.059)
                     [102.14]
 1988                 1.341                      19,310
                     (3.658)
                      [95.06]
 1989                 -3.920                     20,093
                     (3.473)
                      [80.82]
 1990                 0.039                      21,508
                     (2.991)
                      [61.82]
 1991                 -2.726                     21,717
                     (2.721)
                      [56.49]
 1992                 -1.124                     21,838
                     (2.564)
                      [59.13]
Notes:  All coecients are estimated using a linear RD model
and triangular weights using children born 3 months before and
3 months after the reform. Control variables include father and
mother's years of education and age at birth, martial status and
county of residence the year prior to birth as well as an indicator
of the child's gender. Unpaid leave measured in days. Stan-
dard errors are reported in parentheses and comparison means in
brackets. *p<0.1,**p<0.05.




                                37
                     Table 3: Child outcomes, all reforms


                         RD estimates                              Obs.

                 9th grade          High school
  Reform           exams               dropout            Exam            Dropout

  1987             -0.036               -0.003            16,650          17,580
                  (0.033)              (0.014)
                   [3.54]               [0.35]
  1988             -0.025               0.015             18,290          19,310
                  (0.031)              (0.014)
                   [3.51]               [0.35]
  1989              0.038               0.007             19,200          20,093
                  (0.030)              (0.013)
                   [3.52]               [0.33]
  1990            -0.067**              -0.005            20,056          21,508
                  (0.029)              (0.013)
                   [3.52]               [0.33]
  1991             -0.000               0.003             20,459          21,717
                  (0.029)              (0.013)
                   [3.52]               [0.33]
  1992             -0.010                  .              20,427              .
                  (0.029)
                   [3.60]
Notes:  All coecients are estimated using a linear RD model and triangular weights
using children born 3 months before and 3 months after the reform. Control variables
include father and mother's years of education and age at birth, martial status and
county of residence the year prior to birth as well as an indicator of the child's gen-
der. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and comparison means in brackets.
*p<0.1,**p<0.05.




                                          38
                                                    Table 4: Labor market outcomes of mothers and fathers, all reforms


                                                                                    RD estimates

                                   Mother:                   Mother:                   Mother:                   Father:                    Father:
                                Returned to                   Years                  Annuity of                   Years                  Annuity of
                                    work                    employed                   income                   employed                    income
         Reform                  (by year 2)                (max 14)                 (years 1-14)               (max 14)                 (years 1-14)                  Obs.

          1987                      -0.002                    -0.064                     458                      -0.016                      259                     17,580
                                   (0.013)                   (0.114)                    (309)                    (0.064)                     (563)
                                    [0.76]                    [11.54]                  [19,137]                   [13.35]                  [37,642]
          1988                      0.013                      0.011                       1                      -0.026                     -447                     19,310
                                   (0.012)                   (0.106)                    (301)                    (0.064)                     (535)
                                    [0.80]                    [11.66]                  [20,205]                   [13.32]                  [39,175]
          1989                      0.020*                     0.014                     -183                     -0.021                      953                     20,093




39
                                   (0.011)                   (0.095)                    (389)                    (0.055)                     (631)
                                    [0.84]                    [11.95]                  [22,014]                   [13.37]                  [40,892]
          1990                      0.009                     0.165*                     437                      0.017                       903                     21,508
                                   (0.010)                   (0.090)                    (346)                    (0.055)                     (633)
                                    [0.85]                    [12.14]                  [23,442]                   [13.38]                  [43,016]
          1991                      0.014                     0.169*                     493                      0.003                       55                      21,717
                                   (0.010)                   (0.088)                    (333)                    (0.055)                     (637)
                                    [0.86]                    [12.27]                  [24,680]                   [13.41]                  [45,206]
          1992                      -0.007                     0.016                     566                      0.062                       715                     21,838
                                   (0.009)                   (0.082)                    (346)                    (0.053)                     (731)
                                    [0.87]                    [12.37]                  [26,421]                   [13.44]                  [47,477]
     Notes:  All coecients are estimated using a linear RD model and triangular weights using children born 3 months before and 3 months after the reform. Control variables
     include father and mother's years of education and age at birth, martial status and county of residence the year prior to birth as well as an indicator of the child's gender.
     Annuities are measured in year 2010 dollars. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and comparison means in brackets. *p<0.1,**p<0.05.
                                              Table 5: Labor market gender gaps, fertility, marriage and divorce, all reforms


                                                                   RD estimates                                                                        Obs.

                          Gender gap:          Gender gap:           Number of            Entry into                                Gender
                              Years             Annuity of            Children             Marriage             Divorced             gaps,
                            employed               income             (14 years            (14 years            (14 years           number          Entry into
        Reform              (max 14)            (years 1-14)            after)               after)               after)            children        Marriage          Divorced

         1987                 -0.003                0.003               -0.030               -0.015               0.012              17,580            7,761            9,819
                             (0.004)               (0.005)             (0.029)              (0.023)              (0.015)
                              [0.45]                [0.34]              [2.59]               [0.60]               [0.14]
         1988                 0.002                 0.001               0.017                0.024                -0.009             19,310            9,346            9,964
                             (0.004)               (0.005)             (0.028)              (0.022)              (0.016)
                              [0.46]                [0.35]              [2.60]               [0.59]               [0.16]
         1989                 -0.001               -0.003               -0.016               0.021                0.022              20,093            9,414           10,679




40
                             (0.003)               (0.004)             (0.026)              (0.022)              (0.014)
                              [0.46]                [0.36]              [2.60]               [0.56]               [0.16]
         1990                 0.006*                0.002               -0.026               -0.011               -0.001             21,508           10,227           11,281
                             (0.003)               (0.004)             (0.026)              (0.021)              (0.015)
                              [0.47]                [0.36]              [2.62]               [0.55]               [0.17]
         1991                 0.005                 0.005               -0.024               -0.016               -0.022             21,717           11,171           10,546
                             (0.003)               (0.004)             (0.026)              (0.020)              (0.016)
                              [0.47]                [0.36]              [2.60]               [0.55]               [0.17]
         1992                 -0.002               -0.002               0.042*               0.034*               0.003              21,838           10,761           11,077
                             (0.003)               (0.004)             (0.025)              (0.020)              (0.015)
                              [0.47]                [0.37]              [2.61]               [0.53]               [0.17]
     Notes:  All coecients are estimated using a linear RD model and triangular weights using children born 3 months before and 3 months after the reform. Control variables
     include father and mother's years of education and age at birth, martial status and county of residence the year prior to birth as well as an indicator of the child's gender.
     Annuities are measured in year 2010 dollars. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and comparison means in brackets. *p<0.1,**p<0.05.
         Table 6: Taxes, benets and program expenditures, all reforms


                                       RD estimates

                                       Annuity of
                     Annuity of          benets
                     taxes paid          received           Program
 Reform             (years 0-14)       (years 0-14)       expenditures           Obs.

 1987                    786*               39              1,532***           17,580
                        (457)              (101)              (133)
                       [21,647]           [5,630]            [11,273]
 1988                    -53                77              1,257***           19,310
                        (360)              (102)              (147)
                       [22,117]           [5,811]            [12,805]
 1989                    437                82              1,236***           20,093
                        (444)              (93)               (153)
                       [22,924]           [5,869]            [14,601]
 1990                    743*               -82             2,714***           21,508
                        (427)              (93)               (168)
                       [23,936]           [5,928]            [16,354]
 1991                    274                -98             2,797***           21,717
                        (401)              (95)               (202)
                       [24,784]           [5,956]            [19,512]
 1992                    385                -33             2,132***           21,838
                        (518)              (97)               (219)
                       [25,917]           [5,998]            [22,881]
Notes:  All coecients are estimated using a linear RD model and triangular weights using
children born 3 months before and 3 months after the reform. Control variables include
father and mother's years of education and age at birth, martial status and county of res-
idence the year prior to birth as well as an indicator of the child's gender. Annuities and
expenditures are measured in year 2010 dollars. Standard errors are reported in parentheses
and comparison means in brackets. *p<0.1,**p<0.05.




                                            41
                            Table 7: Average and cumulative eects, all reforms


                                                Average eect per        Cumulative eect
 Outcomes                                          $1,000 spent            for all reforms        Comparison mean

 Child outcomes:
 9th grade exam                                        -0.007                   -0.042                    [3.4]
                                                      (0.019)                  (0.045)
 High school dropout                                   0.003                     .015                    [0.34]
                                                      (0.009)                   (.019)
 Mother's labor market outcomes:
 Returned to work (by year 2)                          0.005                    0.030*                   [0.68]
                                                      (0.007)                  (0.017)
 Years employed (max 14)                               0.018                    0.107                    [10.8]
                                                      (0.061)                  (0.149)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                         126                      755                    [19,765]
                                                       (206)                    (504)
 Father's labor market outcomes:
 Years employed ( max 14)                              -0.002                   -0.012                   [13.1]
                                                      (0.036)                  (0.088)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                         212                     1,272                   [41,016]
                                                       (365)                    (894)
 Gender gap:
 Years employed (max 14)                               0.000                    0.002                    [0.43]
                                                      (0.002)                  (0.005)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                        0.000                    0.002                    [0.33]
                                                      (0.003)                  (0.007)
 Family outcomes:
 Number of children (14 years after)                   -0.003                   -0.017                    [2.7]
                                                      (0.016)                  (0.040)
 Entry into marriage (14 years after)                  0.005                    0.032                    [0.54]
                                                      (0.013)                  (0.032)
 Divorced (14 years after)                             0.002                    0.012                    [0.17]
                                                      (0.009)                  (0.022)
Notes:  The rst column reports the average eect over all the reforms (1987-1992) per $1,000 increase in total cost. The
second column reports the cumulative eect over all the reforms (1987-1992). The dropout variable is only available
for the 1987-1991 reforms. Costs and annuities are measured in year 2010 dollars. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses and comparison means in brackets. *p<0.1.**p<0.05.




                                                         42
  Table 8: Comparing eligible mothers to ineligibles and those without kids


                                                         Sample: with kids

                                              Eligible Mothers      Ineligible Mothers

 Mother characteristics:
 Age at birth                                        30.1                   30.0
 Norwegian citizen                                   .962                   .835
 Dropout                                             .405                   .637
 High school                                         .249                   .189
 College degree                                      .346                   .174

 Father characteristics:
 Age at birth                                        32.5                   33.1
 Norwegian citizen                                   .956                   .877
 Dropout                                             .377                   .492
 High school                                         .303                   .271
 College degree                                      .320                   .238

 Family characteristics:
 Married before birth                                .581                   .686
 Sum of disposable income in 2010                  104,114                 88,335
 Sum of disposable income year                      61,215                 37,935
 prior to birth
                                                     Sample: no kids by 2010

                                                     Men                  Women

 Age                                                 51.1                   51.5
 Norwegian citizen                                   .916                   .919
 Dropout                                             .440                   .402
 High school                                         .303                   .214
 College degree                                      .257                   .384
 Married                                             .235                   .281
 Sum of disposable income in 2010                   43,570                 42,910
Notes:  The top panel uses a sample of mothers age 25-40 giving birth during the period
1987-1993. There are 220,368 eligible mothers and 61,180 ineligible mothers in this sample.
The bottom panel uses a sample of men and women age 42-63 who have not had a child
by 2010. There are 110,812 men and 69,351 women in this sample. Disposable income is
calculated as the sum of parents' labor income, paid parental leave, non-taxable transfers,
unemployment benets and sick leave minus taxes paid and is measured in year 2010 dollars.




                                            43
Online Appendix: Additional gures
                                                                            Figure A1: Fertility


                 (a) reform May 1st 1987                                      (b) reform July 1st 1988                  (c) reform April 1st 1989




                 (d) reform May 1st 1990                                      (e) reform July 1st 1991                  (f) reform April 1st 1992




Note:   The histogram uses one week bins with the bin starting at 0 includes the births in the rst week post reform.
                                                                           Figure A2: Eligibility


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                                    Figure A3: Child: 9th grade exam


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                                 Figure A4: Child: High school dropout


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                          Figure A5: Mother: Returned to work (by year 2)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                            Figure A6: Mother: Years Employed (max 14)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                         Figure A7: Mother: Annuity of income (years 1-14)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                             Figure A8: Father: Years employed (max 14)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                          Figure A9: Father: Annuity of income (years 1-14)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                         Figure A10: Gender gap: Years employed (max 14)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                      Figure A11: Gender gap: Annuity of income (years 1-14)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                           Figure A12: Number of children (14 years after)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                           Figure A13: Entry into marriage (14 years after)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                                 Figure A14: Divorced (14 years after)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                                    Figure A15: Program expenditure


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                                Figure A16: Family: Annuity of taxes paid (0-14 years after birth)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
                                             Figure A17: Family: Annuity of benets received (0-14 years after birth)


               (a) reform May 1st 1987                                        (b) reform July 1st 1988                                     (c) reform April 1st 1989




               (d) reform May 1st 1990                                        (e) reform July 1st 1991                                     (f) reform April 1st 1992




Notes: Each observation is the average of the relevant outcome in a one week bin based on the birth date of the child. The dashed vertical lines denote the reform cuto date,
which has been normalized to zero. The solid lines are estimated using a linear regression based on daily individual level data with triangular weights. The scales of the y-axes
are +/- .5 standard deviations of the mean outcome.
Online Appendix: Additional tables
                               Table A1: Summary statistics by reform year


                                                                          Reform
                                            1987       1988       1989             1990      1991       1992
Mother: Age at birth                         28.05      27.99      28.39         28.59        28.71     29.03
                                             (4.65)     (4.76)     (4.73)        (4.67)       (4.71)    (4.62)
Father: Age at birth                         30.71      30.70      31.07         31.29        31.40     31.73
                                             (5.27)     (5.42)     (5.45)        (5.39)       (5.46)    (5.40)
Mother: Years of education                   11.56      11.54      11.63         11.70        11.82     11.90
                                             (2.53)     (2.49)     (2.50)        (2.50)       (2.51)    (2.50)
Father: Years of education                   11.83      11.79      11.85         11.88        11.92     12.01
                                             (2.65)     (2.63)     (2.63)        (2.61)       (2.61)    (2.61)
Married                                       0.56       0.52       0.53          0.52         0.49      0.51
                                             (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)        (0.50)       (0.50)    (0.50)
Child is a boy                                0.51       0.51       0.52          0.50         0.52      0.52
                                             (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)        (0.50)       (0.50)    (0.50)
Eligible                                      0.70       0.74       0.75          0.75         0.76      0.77
                                             (0.46)     (0.44)     (0.43)        (0.43)       (0.43)    (0.42)
Unpaid leave (days)                         102.14      95.06      80.82         61.82        56.49     59.13
                                           (124.26)   (123.18)   (112.37)      (102.68)      (90.04)   (89.48)
Child: 9th grade exam                         3.54       3.51       3.52          3.52         3.52      3.60
                                             (1.07)     (1.04)     (1.06)        (1.02)       (1.03)    (1.04)
Child: High school dropout                    0.35       0.35       0.33          0.33         0.33        .
                                             (0.48)     (0.48)     (0.47)        (0.47)       (0.47)
Mother: Returned to work (by year 2)          0.76       0.80       0.84          0.85         0.86       0.87
                                             (0.42)     (0.40)     (0.37)        (0.35)       (0.35)     (0.33)
Mother: Years employed (max 14)              11.54      11.66      11.95         12.14        12.27      12.37
                                             (3.67)     (3.57)     (3.34)        (3.17)       (3.05)     (2.94)
Mother: Annuity of income (years 1-14)      19,137     20,205     22,014        23,442       24,680     26,421
                                           (10,645)   (11,023)   (12,121)      (12,613)     (12,683)   (13,822)
Father: Years employed (max 14)              13.35      13.32      13.37         13.38        13.41      13.44
                                             (2.02)     (2.07)     (1.97)        (1.97)       (1.94)     (1.87)
Father: Annuity of income (years 1-14)      37,642     39,175     40,891        43,015       45,206     47,477
                                           (21,142)   (21,740)   (22,317)      (23,876)     (27,789)   (25,975)
Gender gap: Years employed (max 14)           0.45       0.46       0.46          0.47         0.47       0.47
                                             (0.12)     (0.12)     (0.11)        (0.11)       (0.10)     (0.10)
Gender gap: Annuity of income (yrs 1-14)      0.34       0.35       0.36          0.36         0.36       0.37
                                             (0.16)     (0.16)     (0.15)        (0.15)       (0.15)     (0.15)
Number of children (14 years after)           2.59       2.60       2.60          2.62         2.60       2.61
                                             (0.92)     (0.91)     (0.91)        (0.91)       (0.90)     (0.90)
Entry into marriage (14 years after)          0.60       0.59       0.56          0.55         0.55       0.53
                                             (0.49)     (0.49)     (0.50)        (0.50)       (0.50)     (0.50)
Divorced (14 years after)                     0.14       0.16       0.16          0.17         0.17       0.17
                                             (0.35)     (0.36)     (0.36)        (0.37)       (0.37)     (0.37)
Annuity of taxes paid (years 0-14)          21,647     22,117     22,924        23,936       24,784     25,915
                                           (14,322)   (14,029)   (15,925)      (16,273)     (16,833)   (18,543)
Annuity of benets received (years 0-14)     5,630      5,811      5,869         5,928        5,956      5,998
                                            (3,101)    (3,317)    (3,245)       (3,307)      (3,453)    (3,405)
Program expenditure                         11,272     12,805     14,600        16,354       19,512     22,881
                                            (4,635)    (5,274)    (5,763)       (6,539)      (7,626)    (8,631)
Obs.
All                                        17, 580    19,310     20,093            21,508   21,717     21,838
Eligible                                   25,067     26,225     26,768            28,713   28,631     28,441
Exam score                                 16,650     18,290     19,200            20,056   20,459     20,427
Marital stability                           9,819     9,964      10,679            11,281   10,546     11,077
Marriage                                    7,761     9,346       9,414            10,227   11,171     10,761
                                Table A2: Specication checks, 1992 reform


                                                                                       Quadratic        Baseline with
 Outcomes                                          Baseline        No Controls          trends          1 week donut

 Unpaid leave (days)                                -1.124            -1.218             -0.221             -0.817
                                                   (2.564)            (2.594)           (3.834)            (2.936)
 9th grade exam                                     -0.010             0.012              -0.026            -0.015
                                                   (0.029)            (0.031)            (0.042)           (0.035)

 Mother's labor market outcomes:

 Returned to work (by year 2)                       -0.007             -0.006             -0.013            -0.008
                                                   (0.009)            (0.010)            (0.014)           (0.011)
 Years employed (max 14 )                            0.016              0.042              0.011             0.005
                                                   (0.082)            (0.085)            (0.122)           (0.097)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                       566              860**                428               247
                                                     (346)              (397)              (510)             (407)

 Father's labor market outcomes:

 Years employed (max 14 )                           0.062              0.061              0.016            0.125**
                                                   (0.053)            (0.054)            (0.077)           (0.064)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                      715               1,143               667              1,263
                                                    (731)              (804)             (1028)             (904)

 Gender gap:

 Years employed (max 14 )                           -0.002             -0.001             -0.001            -0.004
                                                   (0.003)            (0.003)            (0.004)           (0.003)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                     -0.002             -0.001             -0.002            -0.007
                                                   (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.006)           (0.005)

 Family outcomes:

 Divorced (14 years after)                          0.003             -0.001              0.018             -0.012
                                                   (0.015)            (0.015)           (0.022)            (0.018)
 Entry into marriage (14 years after)               0.034*            0.037*              0.026            0.058**
                                                    (0.020)           (0.021)            (0.030)           (0.024)
  Number of children (14 years after)               0.042*            0.048*              0.045             0.039
                                                    (0.025)           (0.026)            (0.036)           (0.030)
  Annuity of taxes paid (years 0-14)                  385               761                242                827
                                                     (518)             (579)              (743)             (588)
  Annuity of benets received (yrs 0-14)               -33               -25               -23                -95
                                                      (97)              (98)              (140)             (118)
  Program expenditure                              2,132***          2,274***           1,793***          2,387***
                                                     (219)             (248)              (320)             (259)
Notes: All coecients are estimated using a linear RD model and triangular weights using children born 3 months before

and 3 months after the reform. Control variables include father and mother's years of education and age at birth, martial
status and county of residence the year prior to birth as well as an indicator of the child's gender. The number of
observations for the full sample, exam score, divorce and marriages are respectively 21,838, 20,427, 11,077 and 10,761.
For the one week donut the number of observations are 20,076, 18,777, 10,169 and 9,907. Standard errors are reported
in parentheses and comparison means in brackets. *p<0.1,**p<0.05.
                           Table A3: Window robustness checks, 1992 reform


                                                      90 days
 Outcomes                                            (baseline)              120 days               60 days

 Unpaid leave (days)                                    -1.124                 -2.687                -0.759
                                                       (2.564)                (2.231)               (3.206)
 9th grade exam                                         -0.010                 -0.032                -0.021
                                                       (0.029)                (0.025)               (0.036)

 Mother's labor market outcomes:

 Returned to work (by year 2)                           -0.007                 -0.003                -0.009
                                                       (0.009)                (0.008)               (0.012)
 Years employed (max 14)                                 0.016                  0.043                 0.031
                                                       (0.082)                (0.072)               (0.102)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                           566                   553*                   493
                                                         (346)                  (302)                 (427)

 Father's labor market outcomes:

 Years employed (max 14 )                               0.062                  0.060                 0.037
                                                       (0.053)                (0.046)               (0.065)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                          715                    459                   747
                                                        (731)                  (641)                 (881)

 Gender gap:

 Years employed (max 14 )                               -0.002                 -0.001                -0.001
                                                       (0.003)                (0.002)               (0.004)
 Annuity of income (year 1-14)                          -0.002                 -0.001                -0.002
                                                       (0.004)                (0.004)               (0.005)

 Family outcomes:

 Divorced (14 years after)                               0.003                 -0.001                0.014
                                                        (0.015)               (0.013)               (0.018)
 Entry into marriage (14 years after)                   0.034*                0.043**                0.029
                                                        (0.020)               (0.018)               (0.025)
 Number of children (14 years after )                   0.042*                 0.041*                0.039
                                                        (0.025)               (0.022)               (0.030)
 Annuity of taxes paid (years 0-14)                       385                   344                   325
                                                         (518)                 (452)                 (635)
 Annuity of benets received (years 0-14)                  -33                   -38                   -48
                                                          (97)                  (85)                 (118)
 Program expenditure                                   2,132***              2,082***              1,898***
                                                         (219)                 (192)                 (270)
Notes: All coecients are estimated using a linear RD model and triangular weights using children born 3 months

before and 3 months after the reform. Control variables include father and mother's years of education and age at
birth, martial status and county of residence the year prior to birth as well as an indicator of the child's gender.
The number of observations for the full sample, exam score, divorced and marriages are respectively 21,838, 20,427,
11,077 and 10,761 for baseline, 28,346, 26,481, 14,075 and 14,271 for the 120 day window and 14,856, 13,902, 7,591
and 7,265 for the 60 day window. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and comparison means in brackets.
*p<0.1,**p<0.05.
            Table A4: Local linear regression robustness checks, 1992 reform


                                                                     Bandwidth

 Outcomes                                                 30 days                    60 days



 Unpaid leave (days)                                       -2.765                     1.510
                                                          (4.115)                    (2.982)
 9th grade exam                                            -0.038                     -0.001
                                                          (0.050)                    (0.035)
 Mother's labor market outcomes:
 Returned to work (by year 2)                              -0.002                     -0.012
                                                          (0.015)                    (0.011)
 Years employed (max 14 )                                   0.113                     -0.006
                                                          (0.135)                    (0.095)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                            1206*                       448
                                                            (634)                    (4478)


 Father's labor market outcomes:
 Years employed (max 14 )                                   0.037                     -0.006
                                                          (0.088)                    (0.061)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                              430                      1,238
                                                           (1215)                     (906)


 Gender gap:
 Years employed (max 14 )                                   0.002                     -0.000
                                                          (0.005)                    (0.003)
 Annuity of income (years 1-14)                             0.004                     -0.002
                                                          (0.007)                    (0.005)


 Family outcomes:
 Divorce (14 years after)                                   0.017                     0.006
                                                          (0.024)                    (0.017)
 Entry into marriage (14 years after)                       0.049                     0.026
                                                          (0.033)                    (0.024)
 Number of children (14 years after)                        0.048                     0.040
                                                          (0.041)                    (0.030)
 Program expenditure                                     1,922***                   2,188***
                                                            (399)                     (278)
 Annuity of taxes paid (years 0-14)                          290                       753
                                                            (903)                     (650)
 Annuity of benets received (yrs 0-14)                      14                         35
                                                            (155)                     (109)
Notes:  All coecients are estimated using a local linear RD model. Control variables include father
and mother's years of education and age at birth, martial status and county of residence the year prior
to birth as well as an indicator of the child's gender. The number of observations for the full sample,
exam score, divorce and marriages are respectively 21,838, 20,427, 11,077 and 10,761. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses and comparison means in brackets. *p<0.1,**p<0.05.
