                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE JOINT CROSS SECTION OF STOCKS AND OPTIONS

                                              Byeong-Je An
                                              Andrew Ang
                                              Turan G. Bali
                                              Nusret Cakici

                                         Working Paper 19590
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19590


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2013




We thank the editor, Cam Harvey, an associate editor, and three referees for their extremely helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank Reena Aggarwal, Allan Eberhart, Nicolae Garleanu, Larry Glosten,
Bob Hodrick, Michael Johannes, George Panayotov, Tyler Shumway, Mete Soner, David Weinbaum,
Liuren Wu, Yuhang Xing, and seminar participants at the American Finance Association meetings,
ETH-Zurich, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Georgetown University for helpful comments
and discussions. Additional results are available in an internet appendix that can be obtained by contacting
the authors. An and Ang thank Netspar and the Program for Financial Studies for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Byeong-Je An, Andrew Ang, Turan G. Bali, and Nusret Cakici. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Joint Cross Section of Stocks and Options
Byeong-Je An, Andrew Ang, Turan G. Bali, and Nusret Cakici
NBER Working Paper No. 19590
October 2013
JEL No. C13,G10,G11,G12,G13,G14

                                              ABSTRACT

Stocks with large increases in call implied volatilities over the previous month tend to have high future
returns while stocks with large increases in put implied volatilities over the previous month tend to
have low future returns. Sorting stocks ranked into decile portfolios by past call implied volatilities
produces spreads in average returns of approximately 1% per month, and the return differences persist
up to six months. The cross section of stock returns also predicts option-implied volatilities, with stocks
with high past returns tending to have call and put option contracts which exhibit increases in implied
volatility over the next month, but with decreasing realized volatility. These predictability patterns
are consistent with rational models of informed trading.


Byeong-Je An                                         Turan G. Bali
Columbia Business School                             McDonough School of Business
3022 Broadway Uris Hall                              Georgetown University
New York NY 10027                                    Between 37th and O Streets
ba2306@columbia.edu                                  Washington, D.C. 20057
                                                     tgb27@georgetown.edu
Andrew Ang
Columbia Business School                             Nusret Cakici
3022 Broadway 413 Uris                               Graduate School of Business
New York, NY 10027                                   Fordham University
and NBER                                             1790 Broadway
aa610@columbia.edu                                   New York, NY 10019
                                                     cakici@fordham.edu
Options are redundant assets only in an idealized world of complete markets with no transactions

costs, perfect information, and no restrictions on shorting. Not surprisingly, since in the real

world none of these assumptions hold, options are not simply functions of underlying stock

prices and risk-free securities. 1 We show that the cross section of option volatilities contains

information that forecasts the cross section of expected stock returns, and the cross section of

stock-level characteristics forecasts option implied volatilities.

       In the direction of option volatilities predicting stock returns, we find that stocks with call

options which have experienced increases in implied volatilities over the past month tend to have

high returns over the next month. Puts contain independent information from call options,

especially puts whose implied volatilities move opposite to the direction predicted by put-call

parity. After controlling for movements in call implied volatilities, increases in put option

volatilities predict decreases in next-month stock returns. The strength and persistence of this

predictability for stock returns from the cross section of option volatilities is remarkable for

several reasons.

       First, the innovation in implied volatilities can be considered to be a very simple measure

of news arrivals in the option market.         While strongest for the next-month horizon, the

predictability persists at least up to six months. The predictability at the standard monthly

horizon suggests the predictability is unlikely due to microstructure trading effects. In contrast,

most of the previous literature investigating lead-lag effects of options versus stock markets

focuses on intra-day or daily frequencies. These high frequency studies largely find that both the

option and stock markets quickly react to news and that at daily frequencies or higher, options

and stocks are fairly priced relative to each other.2




                                                                                                    1
        Second, the predictability is statistically very strong and economically large. Decile

portfolios formed on past changes in call option volatility have a spread of approximately 1% per

month in both raw returns and alphas computed using common systematic factor models. Stocks

sorted on past increases in their put implied volatilities after controlling for implied call

volatilities exhibit spreads in average returns of greater than 1% per month between the extreme

decile portfolios. The predictability of stock returns by option innovations is also robust in

several subsamples. Whereas many cross-sectional strategies have reversed sign or become much

weaker during the 2008-2009 financial crisis, the ability of option volatilities to predict returns is

still seen in recent data.

        The predictability from options to stock returns is consistent with economies where

informed traders choose the option market to trade first, such as those developed by Chowdhry

and Nanda (1991) and Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas (1998). This causes the option market to lead

the stock market where informed trading does not predominate. Informed investors, however,

would not always exclusively choose just one market to trade. In a noisy rational expectations

model of informed trading in both stock and option markets (detailed in Appendix A), we show

that informed trading contemporaneously moves both option and stock markets. Informed traders

who receive news about future firm cashflows can trade either stocks, options, or both, and do so

depending on the relative size of noise trading present in each market. Market makers, who are

allowed to trade both stock and option markets, ensure that stock and option prices satisfy

arbitrage bounds. The presence of noise traders in both stock and option markets allows

informed traders to disguise their trades, so the prices do not immediately adjust to fully-

revealing efficient prices which would result in the absence of noise traders. The model implies

that option volatilities can predict future stock returns. The model also indicates that the


                                                                                                     2
predictability should be highest when the underlying volumes in both stock and option markets

are largest, which we confirm in empirical tests.

       Importantly, the model shows that informed trading also gives rise to stock-level

information predicting option returns. Thus, both directions of predictability from option markets

to stock markets, and vice versa, arise simultaneously. Consistent with the model, we also

uncover evidence of reverse directional predictability from stock price variables to option

markets. Many of the variables long known to predict stock returns also predict option implied

volatilities.3 A very simple predictor is the past return of a stock: stocks with high past returns

over the previous month tend to have call options that exhibit increases in volatility over the next

month. In particular, stocks with abnormal returns of 1% relative to the CAPM tend to see call

(put) implied volatilities increase over the next month by approximately 4% (2%).

       The model also predicts that past stock returns predict future increases in option

volatilities and future decreases in realized stock returns, which we confirm in data. The intuition

is that informed trading today causes prices to partially adjust, and this resolves some of the

future uncertainty in firm cashflows. Since some information is revealed in prices, future realized

volatility of stock prices decreases. The predictability of option volatilities is stronger in stocks

which exhibit a lower degree of predictability and stocks whose options are harder to hedge,

consistent with other rational models. Behavioral over-reaction theories predict that option

implied volatilities should increase together with other measures of uncertainty such as earnings

dispersion. We find this is not the case.

       Our findings are related to a recent literature showing that option prices contain

predictive information about stock returns. Cao, Chen and Griffin (2005) find that merger

information hits the call option market prior to the stock market, but focus only on these special


                                                                                                    3
corporate events. Bali and Hovakimian (2009), Cremers and Weinbaum (2010), and Xing,

Zhang, and Zhao (2010) use information in the cross section of options including the difference

between implied and realized volatilities, put-call parity deviations, and risk-neutral skewness.

Johnson and So (2012) show that the ratio of option market volume to equity market volume

predicts stock returns. We control for all of these variables in examining the predictability of

stock returns by lagged innovations in call and put option volatilities.

       Our paper is related to Cremers and Weinbaum (2010), who examine the predictability of

stock returns from violations of put-call parity. In passing, they examine the predictability of

joint call and put volatility changes on stock returns, but do not separately examine their effects.

They interpret their findings of stock return predictability by option information as informed

investors preferring to trade first in option markets. Like Cremers and Weinbaum, our results are

consistent with informed trading stories, as we relate changes in option volatilities to

contemporaneous changes in option volume. Different to Cremers and Weinbaum, we show that

the predictability of stock returns by past changes in option implied volatilities arises in a model

of informed trading, which predicts that there should be both predictability from the cross section

of option to stock markets, and vice versa.

       Other related studies focus on predicting option returns, option trading volume, or the

option skew in the cross section. Goyal and Saretto (2009) show that delta-hedged options with a

large positive difference between realized and implied volatility have low average returns. Roll,

Schwartz and Subrahmanyam (2009) examine the contemporaneous, but not predictive, relation

between options trading activity and stock returns. Dennis and Mayhew (2002) document cross-

sectional predictability of risk-neutral skewness, but do not examine the cross section of implied

volatilities. In contrast to these studies, we focus on the strong predictive power of the lagged


                                                                                                   4
stock return in the cross section, which to our knowledge has been examined only in the context

of options on the aggregate market by Amin, Coval and Seyhun (2004). We also find many of

the “usual suspects” in the commonly used stock characteristics that predict stock returns also

predict the cross section of option-implied volatilities, like book-to-market ratios, momentum,

and illiquidity measures.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I covers the data and variable

definitions. Sections II and III examine the predictive power of option implied volatility changes

on the cross section of stock returns using stock portfolios and cross-sectional regressions,

respectively. Section IV investigates the reverse direction of predictability from stock returns to

realized and implied volatilities. Section V concludes.



                                              I. Data

A. Implied Volatilities

       The daily data on option implied volatilities are from OptionMetrics. The OptionMetrics

Volatility Surface computes the interpolated implied volatility surface separately for puts and

calls using a kernel smoothing algorithm using options with various strikes and maturities. The

underlying implied volatilities of individual options are computed using binomial trees that

account for the early exercise of individual stock options and the dividends expected to be paid

over the lives of the options. The volatility surface data contain implied volatilities for a list of

standardized options for constant maturities and deltas. A standardized option is only included if

there exists enough underlying option price data on that day to accurately compute an

interpolated value. The interpolations are done each day so that no forward-looking information

is used in computing the volatility surface. One advantage of using the Volatility Surface is that



                                                                                                   5
it avoids having to make potentially arbitrary decisions on which strikes or maturities to include

in computing an implied call or put volatility for each stock. In our empirical analyses, we use

call and put options’ implied volatilities with a delta of 0.5 and an expiration of 30 days. For

robustness we also examine other expirations, especially of 91 days, which are available in the

internet appendix. Our sample is from January 1996 to December 2011. In the internet appendix,

we also show that our results are similar using implied volatilities of actual options rather than

the Volatility Surface.



                                             Table I here



       Table I contains descriptive statistics of our sample. Panel A reports the average number

of stocks per month for each year from 1996 to 2011. There are 1261 stocks per month in 1996

rising to 2312 stocks per month in 2011. We report the average and standard deviation of the

end-of-month annualized call and put implied volatilities of at-the-money, 30-day maturities,

which we denote as CVOL and PVOL, respectively. Both call and put volatilities are highest

during 2000 and 2001 which coincides with the large decline in stock prices, particularly of

technology stocks, during this time. During the recent finance crisis in 2008-2009, we observe a

significant increase in average implied volatilities from around 40% to 60% for both CVOL and

PVOL.4


B. Predictive Variables

       We obtain underlying stock return data from CRSP and accounting and balance sheet

data from COMPUSTAT. We construct the following factor loadings and firm characteristics



                                                                                                 6
associated with underlying stock markets that are widely known to forecast the cross section of

stock returns: 5

Beta: Following Scholes and Williams (1977) and Dimson (1979), we take into account non-

synchronous trading by estimating an extended version of the market model at the daily

frequency to obtain the monthly beta of an individual stock:

         Ri ,d  r f ,d   i  1,i ( Rm ,d 1  r f ,d 1 )   2,i ( Rm ,d  r f ,d )   3,i ( Rm,d 1  r f ,d 1 )   i ,d ,   (1)


where Ri ,d is the return on stock i on day d, Rm,d is the market return on day d, and r f ,d is the

risk-free rate on day d. We take Rm,d to be the CRSP daily value-weighted index and rf,d to be the

Ibbotson risk-free rate. We estimate equation (1) for each stock using daily returns over the past

month. The sum of the estimated slope coefficients, ˆ1,i  ˆ2,i  ˆ3,i , is the market beta of stock i

in month t. The adjustment of betas to non-synchronous trading has little effect as we find very

similar results using regular betas.

Size: Firm size is measured by the natural logarithm of the market value of equity (stock price

multiplied by the number of shares outstanding in millions of dollars) at the end of the month for

each stock.

Book-to-Market Ratio (BM): Following Fama and French (1992), we compute a firm’s book-to-

market ratio in month t using the market value of its equity at the end of December of the

previous year and the book value of common equity plus balance-sheet deferred taxes for the

firm’s latest fiscal year ending in prior calendar year. To avoid issues with extreme observations

we follow Fama and French (1992) and Winsorize the book-to-market ratios at the 0.5% and

99.5% levels.




                                                                                                                                        7
Momentum (MOM): Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the momentum variable for each

stock in month t is defined as the cumulative return on the stock over the previous 11 months

starting 2 months ago to avoid the short-term reversal effect, i.e., momentum is the cumulative

return from month t–12 to month t–2.

Illiquidity (ILLIQ): We use the Amihud (2002) definition of illiquidity and for each stock in

month t define illiquidity to be the ratio of the absolute monthly stock return to its dollar trading

volume: ILLIQi ,t | Ri ,t | / VOLDi ,t , where Ri,t is the return on stock i in month t, and VOLDi,t is the

monthly trading volume of stock i in dollars.

Short-term reversal (REV): Following Jegadeesh (1990), Lehmann (1990), and others, we define

short-term reversal for each stock in month t as the return on the stock over the previous month

from t–1 to t.

Realized volatility (RVOL): Realized volatility of stock i in month t is defined as the standard

deviation of daily returns over the past month t, RVOLi ,t  var(Ri , d ) . We denote the monthly

first differences in RVOL as ΔRVOL.

        The second set of predictive variables is from option markets:

Implied volatility innovations: We define implied volatility innovations as the change in call and

put implied volatilities, which we denote as ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL, respectively:6

                                    CVOLi ,t  CVOLi ,t  CVOLi ,t 1 ,
                                                                                                        (2)
                                    PVOLi ,t  PVOLi ,t  PVOLi ,t 1 .

While the first difference of implied volatilities is a very attractive measure because it is simple,

it ignores the fact that implied volatilities are predictable in both the time series (implied

volatilities exhibit significant time-series autocorrelation) and cross section (implied volatilities

are predictable using cross-sectional stock characteristics). In the internet appendix, we consider


                                                                                                          8
two other measures accounting for these dimensions of predictability, and find that volatility

innovations constructed from both time-series and cross-sectional models also predict stock

returns.

Call/Put (C/P) volume: The relation between option volume and underlying stock returns has

been studied in the literature, with mixed findings, by Stephan and Whaley (1990), Amin and

Lee (1997), Easley, O’Hara, and Srinivas (1998), Chan, Chung, and Fong (2002), Cao, Chen,

and Griffin (2005), and Pan and Poteshman (2006), and others. Following Pan and Poteshman

(2006), our first measure of option volume is the ratio of call/put option trading volume over the

previous month.

Call/Put open interest (C/P OI): A second measure of option volume is the ratio of open

interests of call options to put options.

Realized-implied volatility spread (RVOL–IVOL): Following Bali and Hovakimian (2009) and

Goyal and Saretto (2009), we control for the difference between the monthly realized volatility

(RVOL) and the average of the at-the-money call and put implied volatilities, denoted by IVOL,

(using the Volatility Surface standardized options with a delta of 0.50 and maturity of 30 days).

Bali and Hovakimian (2009) show that stocks with high RVOL–IVOL spreads predict low future

stock returns. Goyal and Saretto (2009) find similar negative effect of the RVOL–IVOL spread

for future option returns.

Risk-neutral skewness (QSKEW): Following Conrad, Dittmar and Ghysels (2012) and Xing,

Zhang and Zhao (2010), we control for risk-neutral skewness defined as the difference between

the out-of-the-money put implied volatility (with delta of 0.20) and the average of the at-the-

money call and put implied volatilities (with deltas of 0.50), both using maturities of 30 days.

Xing, Zhang and Zhao (2010) show that stocks with high QSKEW tend to have low returns over


                                                                                                 9
the following month. On the other hand, Conrad, Dittmar and Ghysels (2012) report the opposite

relation using a more general measure of risk-neutral skewness based on Bakshi, Kapadia and

Madan (2003), which is derived using the whole cross section of options.



C. Correlations of Volatility Innovations

        Panel B of Table I presents the average firm-level cross correlations of the level and

innovations in implied and realized volatilities. The average correlation between the levels of call

and put implied volatilities (CVOL and PVOL) is 92%. This high correlation reflects a general

volatility effect, reflecting that when current stock volatility increases, implied volatilities of all

option contracts across all strikes and maturities also tend to rise. Note that if put-call parity held

exactly, then the correlation of CVOL and PVOL would be one. Put-call parity holds

approximately (but not always, as Ofek, Richardson and Whitelaw (2004) and Cremers and

Weinbaum (2010) exploit), so to examine the incremental predictive power of put volatilities, we

will control for the general level volatility effect.7 The persistence of the level volatility factor is

also reflected in the high correlation (66%) of past realized volatility with both CVOL and

PVOL.

        The first differences in implied volatilities, ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL, have a lower

correlation of 58% than the 92% correlation between the levels of CVOL and PVOL The

positive correlation between ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL also reflects the common component in both

call and put volatilities. The changes in implied volatilities are not correlated with either RVOL

or ΔRVOL, with correlations of ΔCVOL with RVOL and ΔRVOL being 0.02 and 0.08,

respectively. The correlations of ΔPVOL with RVOL and ΔRVOL are also low at 0.03 and 0.10,

respectively. This shows that the forward-looking CVOL and PVOL estimates are reacting to


                                                                                                     10
more than just past volatility captured by RVOL and that innovations in implied volatilities

represent new information not captured by backward-looking volatility measures.



            II. Returns on Portfolios Sorted by Option Implied Volatilities


A. Univariate Portfolio Sorts

                                A.1. Portfolios Sorted by ΔCVOL

       Panel A of Table II shows that stocks that have past high changes in implied call

volatilities have high future returns. We form decile portfolios ranked on ΔCVOL rebalanced

every month. Portfolio 1 (Low ΔCVOL) contains stocks with the lowest changes in call implied

volatilities in the previous month and Portfolio 10 (High ΔCVOL) includes stocks with the

highest changes in call implied volatilities in the previous month. We equal weight stocks in each

decile portfolio and rebalance monthly. Panel A of Table II shows the average raw return of

stocks in decile 1 with the lowest ΔCVOL is 0.29% per month and this monotonically increases

to 1.38% per month for stocks in decile 10. The difference in average raw returns between

deciles 1 and 10 is 1.09% per month with a highly significant Newey-West t-statistic of 3.45.

This translates to a monthly Sharpe ratio of 0.26 and an annualized Sharpe ratio of 0.90 for a

strategy going long High ΔCVOL stocks and shorting Low ΔCVOL stocks.



                                            Table II here



       The differences in returns between deciles 1 and 10 are very similar if we risk adjust

using the CAPM, at 1.04% per month, and the Fama-French (1993) model [FF3 hereafter]

including market, size and book-to-market factors, at 1.00% per month. In the final column, we


                                                                                                11
do a characteristic match similar to Daniel and Titman (1997) and Daniel et al. (1997). The

Daniel and Titman (1997) characteristic matched procedure pairs each stock with a matching

portfolio of firms that have approximately the same book-to-market ratios and size. We use 100

portfolios, formed from the intersection of 10 portfolios sorted on size and 10 portfolios sorted

on book-to-market ratios following Daniel and Titman (1997). This reduces the decile 1 and 10

difference to 0.86% per month (t-statistic of 2.87), but this is still both economically large and

statistically significant.



                                 A.2. Portfolios Sorted by ΔPVOL

        In Panel B of Table I, we form decile portfolios ranked on ΔPVOL rebalanced every

month. Portfolio 1 (Low ΔPVOL) contains stocks with the lowest changes in put implied

volatilities in the previous month and Portfolio 10 (High ΔPVOL) includes stocks with the

highest changes in put implied volatilities in the previous month. Most of the returns to the

ΔPVOL portfolios are approximately the same, with a notable difference for the stocks with the

highest changes in past implied put volatilities, portfolio 10. The average raw return difference

between High ΔPVOL and Low ΔPVOL deciles is –0.42% per month with a significant Newey-

West t-statistic of –2.03. The CAPM and FF3 alpha differences between deciles 1 and 10 are,

respectively, –0.46% and –0.50% per month with the t-statistics of –2.14 and –2.46. As shown in

the last column of Panel B, the characteristic matched portfolios of ΔPVOL also generate a

negative and significant return difference, –0.42% per month with a t-statistic of –2.61.

        The positive (negative) return spreads in the ΔCVOL (ΔPVOL) portfolios are consistent

with an informed trading story. An informed “bullish” trader who has good information that a

stock is likely to go up next period, but the market does not completely react to the trades of that


                                                                                                  12
informed investor this period, can buy a call, which increases call option volatilities this period,

and subsequently the stock price goes up the following period. A similar story holds for a

“bearish” informed investor betting a stock will decrease in value can buy a put, so increases in

put implied volatilities forecast decreases in next-month stock returns.

       Put and call options, however, are linked by put-call parity. Although put-call parity is

only approximate – as the options are American, some stocks pay dividends, and violations of

put-call parity do occur – increases in call implied volatilities are generally associated with

increases in put implied volatilities. This causes a large common component in all option

volatilities; this is confirmed in Table I which shows that ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL have a

correlation of 0.58. Thus, although an informed trader receiving positive news could buy a call

this period, which tends to increase call volatilities, or sell a put, which tends to decrease put

volatilities, call and put volatilities tend not to move in opposite directions, especially outside

arbitrage bounds.

       The large common volatility component is perhaps responsible for some of the weaker

predictability of ΔPVOL compared to the ΔCVOL portfolio sorts. To isolate the predictability of

ΔPVOL compared to ΔCVOL (and also vice versa), we should control for the overall implied

volatility level. A rough way to look at the incremental predictive power of ΔPVOL controlling

for the overall implied option level is to subtract the change in implied call volatilities, ΔCVOL.



                            A.3. Portfolios Sorted by ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL

       Panel C of Table II presents results from decile portfolios ranked on ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL

rebalanced every month. Portfolio 1 (Low ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL) contains stocks with the lowest

spread between ΔPVOL and ΔCVOL in the previous month and Portfolio 10 (High ΔPVOL–


                                                                                                  13
ΔCVOL) includes stocks with the highest spread between ΔPVOL and ΔCVOL in the previous

month. Moving from deciles 1 to 10, average raw returns on the ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL portfolios

decrease from 1.81% to 0.13% per month. The difference in average raw returns between deciles

1 and 10 is –1.68% per month with a highly significant Newey-West t-statistic of –6.77. The

differences in risk-adjusted returns between deciles 1 and 10 are very similar as well, with a

CAPM alpha difference of –1.66% per month (t-statistic = –6.67) and a FF3 alpha difference of –

1.65% per month (t-statistic = –6.49). As shown in the last column of Panel C, the characteristic

matched portfolios of ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL also generate a negative and significant return

difference, –1.44% per month with a t-statistic of –5.31, between the extreme deciles 1 and 10.

       Simply taking the difference between ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL is a crude way of controlling

for an overall volatility effect. We wish to test the predictability of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL when

jointly controlling for both effects – we expect to see stock returns increase most for those stocks

where bullish investors drive upwards call option volatilities and simultaneously drive

downwards put option volatilities. We can jointly control for ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL effects in

portfolios by constructing bivariate portfolio sorts, which we turn to now.



B. Bivariate Portfolio Sorts

                    B.1. Predictive Ability of ΔCVOL Controlling for ΔPVOL

       In order to examine the predictive power of ΔCVOL controlling for ΔPVOL, we need to

create portfolios that exhibit differences in ΔCVOL with approximately the same levels of

ΔPVOL. We do this in Panel A of Table III.



                                             Table III here


                                                                                                  14
        We first perform a sequential sort by creating decile portfolios ranked by past ΔPVOL.8

Then, within each ΔPVOL decile we form a second set of decile portfolios ranked on ΔCVOL.

This creates a set of portfolios with similar past ΔPVOL characteristics with spreads in ΔCVOL

and thus we can examine expected return differences due to ΔCVOL rankings controlling for the

effect of ΔPVOL. We hold these portfolios for one month and then rebalance at the end of the

month. Table III, Panel A reports the monthly percentage raw returns of these portfolios. As we

move across the columns in Panel A, the returns generally increase from low to high ΔCVOL.

The largest average portfolio returns are found near the top right-hand corner of Panel A,

consistent with informed investors trading in option markets today to generate large positive

ΔCVOL and large negative ΔPVOL changes which predict stock price movements next period.

Conversely, the most negative portfolio returns lie in the bottom left-hand corner where the

largest ΔPVOL changes and the most negative ΔCVOL movements predict future decreases in

stock prices.

        In a given ΔPVOL decile portfolio, we can take the differences between the last and first

ΔCVOL return deciles. We then average these return differentials across the ΔPVOL portfolios.

This procedure creates a set of ΔCVOL portfolios with nearly identical levels of ΔPVOL. Thus,

we have created portfolios ranking on ΔCVOL but controlling for ΔPVOL.             If the return

differential is entirely explained by ΔPVOL, no significant return differences will be observed

across ΔCVOL deciles. These results are reported in the column called “ΔCVOL10 – ΔCVOL1”.

All of these return differences are around 1% per month or above, and they are highly

statistically significant as well.




                                                                                               15
        Panel A of Table III shows that the average raw return difference between the High

ΔCVOL and Low ΔCVOL deciles is 1.38% per month with a t-statistic of 5.85. The average FF3

alpha difference between the first and tenth ΔCVOL deciles averaged across the ΔPVOL

portfolios is 1.36% per month with a t-statistic of 5.22.9



                    B.2. Predictive Ability of ΔPVOL Controlling for ΔCVOL

        Panel B of Table III repeats the same exercise as Panel A but performs a sequential sort

first on ΔCVOL and then on ΔPVOL. This produces portfolios with different ΔPVOL rankings

after controlling for the information contained in ΔCVOL, and allows us to examine the

predictive ability of ΔPVOL controlling for ΔCVOL. This set of sequential sorts produces

slightly lower returns in absolute value than Panel A, reflecting the smaller spreads in the raw

ΔPVOL sorts (see Table II), but they are still economically very large and highly statistically

significant.

        In Panel B, we observe the negative relation between increasing ΔPVOL and lower

average returns in every ΔCVOL decile. Within each ΔCVOL decile, the average return

differences between the High ΔPVOL and Low ΔPVOL portfolios (ΔPVOL10 – ΔPVOL1) are

in the range of –0.81% to –1.69% per month with the Newey-West t-statistics ranging from –

2.21 to –4.47, with only two exceptions. The exceptions are deciles 4 and 6 where the average

return differences between the high and low ΔPVOL deciles are still negative, but the t-statistics

are statistically insignificant. The last two rows of Panel B average the differences between the

first and tenth ΔPVOL deciles across the ΔCVOL deciles. This summarizes the returns to

ΔPVOL after controlling for ΔCVOL. The average return difference is –1.04% per month with a

t-statistic of –6.40. The average difference in FF3 alphas is very similar at –1.06% per month


                                                                                                16
with a t-statistic of –6.38. Thus, there is a strong negative relation between ΔPVOL and stock

returns in the cross section after taking out the effect of the common volatility movements due to

ΔCVOL.

       In both panels of Table III, we report the change in volume and open interest of calls and

puts. Call volume and open interest tend to increase with the change in call implied volatilities.

This is also true for put volume and open interest. This is consistent with the interpretation that

the increase in implied volatilities may be due to informed investor demand. This increased

demand, and the contemporaneous effect on option volatilities, may be due to the trading of

options by certain investors with private information, which is borne out next period. Appendix

A presents a model along these lines, and our results are consistent with this noisy rational

expectations model of informed trading in both options and stock markets.



C. Characteristics of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL Portfolios

       To highlight the firm characteristics, risk and skewness attributes of optionable stocks in

the portfolios of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL, Table IV presents descriptive statistics for the stocks in

the various deciles. The decile portfolios in Table IV are formed by sorting optionable stocks

based on ΔCVOL controlling for ΔPVOL (Panel A) and ΔPVOL controlling for ΔCVOL (Panel

B) formed as described in the previous section. In each month, we record the median values of

various characteristics within each portfolio. These characteristics are all observable at the time

the portfolios are formed. Table IV reports the average of the median characteristic values across

months of: market beta (BETA), log market capitalization (SIZE), the book-to-market ratio

(BM), the cumulative return over the 12 months prior to portfolio formation (MOM), the return

in the portfolio formation month (REV), the Amihud (2002) illiquidity ratio (ILLIQ), the


                                                                                                 17
realized skewness (SKEW), the co-skewness (COSKEW), and the risk-neutral skewness

(QSKEW).10 The second columns in each panel report the next-month average return.



                                             Table IV here



       In Panel A of Table IV, as we move from the low ΔCVOL to the high ΔCVOL decile, the

average return on ΔCVOL portfolios increases from 0.27% to 1.65%. The return spread between

the extreme decile portfolios is 1.38% per month with a t-statistic of 5.85. Controlling for

ΔPVOL has produced a larger spread between the decile 10 and 1 returns of 1.09% in Table II,

consistent with ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL representing different effects. In Panel A of Table IV, the

difference in FF3 alphas between the decile portfolios 1 and 10 is 1.36% per month with a t-

statistic of 5.22. Consistent with there being little difference in the raw return spread versus the

FF3 alpha spread, there are no discernible patterns of market BETA, size, and book-to-market

ratios across the portfolios. Illiquidity also cannot be an explanation, as the ILLIQ loadings are

U-shaped across the ΔCVOL deciles. In fact, stocks with the most negative and largest changes

in ΔCVOL tend to be the most liquid stocks.

       There is, however, a strong reversal effect, with stocks in the low ΔCVOL decile having

the highest past one-month return of 3.87% and stocks in the high ΔCVOL decile having the

lowest past one-month return of –4.06%. In the internet appendix, we construct a five-factor

model which augments the Fama-French (1993) model with a momentum factor (see Carhart,

1997) and a short-term reversal factor. The difference in average returns between the low

ΔCVOL and high ΔCVOL decile controlling for the five factors is 1.37% per month, with a t-

statistic of 5.24. Thus, the return differences to ΔCVOL are not due to short-term reversals.


                                                                                                  18
       We investigate whether the skewness attributes of optionable stocks provide an

explanation for the high returns of stocks with large past changes in ΔCVOL in the last three

columns of Table IV. Panel A shows there are no increasing or decreasing patterns across the

ΔCVOL deciles for realized skewness (SKEW) or systematic skewness (COSKEW). There is, in

contrast, a pronounced pattern of decreasing risk-neutral skewness (QSKEW) moving from 6.28

for the first ΔCVOL decile to 2.25 for the tenth ΔCVOL decile. QSKEW is computed as the

spread between the implied volatilities of out-of-the-money puts and at-the-money calls.

Decreasing QSKEW across the ΔCVOL deciles is equivalent to these stocks experiencing

simultaneous declines in past put volatilities as ΔCVOL increases. This is consistent with

informed trading where informed bullish investors with a high degree of confidence in future

price appreciation buy calls and sell puts. Below, in cross-sectional regressions we will control

for QSKEW along with other regressors in examining ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL predictability.

       In Panel B of Table IV, we report similar descriptive statistics for the portfolios sorted on

ΔPVOL after controlling for ΔCVOL. Like the ΔCVOL portfolios in Panel A, we observe no

obvious patterns in BETA, SIZE, BM, or ILLIQ which can explain the returns of the ΔPVOL

portfolios, which decrease from 1.39% for stocks with the lowest past ΔPVOL to 0.35% for

stocks with the highest past ΔPVOL. The spread between deciles 1 and 10 is –1.04% per month

with a highly significant t-statistic of –6.40. The difference in FF3 alphas between the extreme

deciles is –1.06% per month with a t-statistic of –6.38.

       Like Panel A, there is a strong pattern of increasing past returns as we move across the

ΔPVOL deciles. Past REV, however, goes in the same direction as the next-month returns,

increasing from 5.67% for the first ΔPVOL decile (with a next-month return of 1.39%) to –

6.52% for the tenth ΔPVOL decile (with a next-month return of 0.35%). REV, therefore, cannot


                                                                                                  19
simultaneously explain the opposite patterns of the high returns to past ΔCVOL stocks and the

past low returns to past ΔPVOL stocks. When we compute alphas with respect to the five-factor

model which includes a short-term reversal factor, we find the difference in alphas between the

first and tenth ΔPVOL portfolios is –1.05% per month with a t-statistic of –6.56.

       In the internet appendix, we further examine the predictability of implied volatility

innovations in different size, liquidity, and price buckets. We find that the predictability is

strongest in the smallest stocks, but the predictability of both ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL is still

economically large and highly statistically significant among big stocks. The degree of ΔCVOL

and ΔPVOL predictability is also similar among relatively liquid versus relatively illiquid stocks,

and low-priced stocks versus high priced stocks. The reduction, but not elimination, of the

anomalous returns in the larger and more liquid stocks indicates that there may be some liquidity

frictions involved in implementing a tradable strategy based on ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL predictors.

In the internet appendix, we present further results for other screens related to liquidity and

transactions costs, such as excluding the smallest, least-liquid, and lowest-priced stocks in the

formation of our portfolios. In all these cases, there remain economically and statistically

significant next-month returns from forming portfolios ranked on ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL.



D. Long-Term Predictability

       We investigate the longer-term predictive power of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL over the next

six months by constructing portfolios with overlapping holding periods following Jegadeesh and

Titman (1993). In a given month t, the strategy holds portfolios that are selected in the current

month as well as in the previous K – 1 months, where K is the holding period (K = 1 to 6

months). At the beginning of each month t, we perform dependent sorts on ΔCVOL controlling


                                                                                                 20
for ΔPVOL over the past month. Based on these rankings, 10 portfolios are formed for ΔCVOL.

In each month t, the strategy buys stocks in the High ΔCVOL decile and sells stocks in the Low

ΔCVOL decile, holding this position for K months. In addition, the strategy closes out the

position initiated in month t – K. Hence, under this trading strategy we revise the weights on 1/K

of the stocks in the entire portfolio in any given month and carry over the rest from the previous

month. Decile portfolios of ΔPVOL are formed similarly. The profits of the above strategies are

calculated for a series of portfolios that are rebalanced monthly to maintain equal weights.

       We report the long-term predictability results in Table V. The average raw and risk-

adjusted return differences between High ΔCVOL and Low ΔCVOL portfolios are statistically

significant for one- to six-month holding periods. There is a pronounced drop in the magnitude

of the average holding return, which is reduced by more than a half between months 1 and 2

from 1.38% per month to 0.63% per month, respectively. There is a further reduction to 0.34%

per month after four months. There are similar reductions in the alphas across horizons. Clearly

the predictability of ΔCVOL is not just a one-month affair, but it is concentrated within the next

three months. The predictability of ΔPVOL also persists beyond one month. The average return

difference between the extreme ΔPVOL decile portfolios controlling for ΔCVOL is –1.04% per

month at the one-month horizon, and like the long-horizon return predictability pattern for the

ΔCVOL portfolios, the predictability decreases by approximately half to –0.47% per month at

the two-month horizon. After three months, the economic and statistical significance of ΔPVOL

portfolios disappear.



                                             Table V here




                                                                                                21
        In summary, ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL predictability persists for at least three months, even

longer in the case of ΔCVOL, but the strength of the predictability is reduced by half after one

month in both cases.



E. Response of Option Markets

        The portfolio level analyses in Tables 2-5 shows the stock market reacts to option market

information. As Table III shows, the large changes in option prices occur contemporaneously

with option volume. Is all this information impounded in option prices today?11

        We investigate this issue by looking at the pattern of implied volatilities in the pre- and

post-formation months. Taking the dependent 10  10 sorts constructed in Table III, we compute

the call and put implied volatilities from month t–6 to month t+6. In Figure 1, Panel A, we plot

the level of call implied volatilities for the Low ΔCVOL and High ΔCVOL deciles from the

dependent sorts of ΔCVOL controlling for ΔPVOL portfolios formed at time t from month t–6 to

month t+6. For the Low ΔCVOL decile, call implied volatilities decrease from 66% to 56%

from month t–2 to month t, but then they increase to 58% in month t+1 and remain at about the

same level over the next six months. Similarly, for the High ΔCVOL decile, call implied

volatilities first increase from 55% to 66% from month t–2 to month t, but then they decrease to

59% in month t+1 and remain around there over the next six months. Thus, after call option

volatilities increase prior to time t, stock prices respond after time t, but there is little response of

option markets after the initial increase in ΔCVOL.



                                               Figure 1 here




                                                                                                      22
       Panel B of Figure 1 repeats the same exercise for the Low ΔPVOL and High ΔPVOL

deciles, and also shows that there is no movement in put implied volatilities in the post-formation

months. This is also consistent with the interpretation that informed traders move option prices

today and there is little further adjustment, on average, in option markets while equity returns

adjust over the next few months. While Figure 1 examines only the pre- and post-formation

movements in option markets, we show below that consistent with the model in the appendix,

informed traders contemporaneously move both stock and option markets in the pre-formation

period. Today’s information in option volatilities, however, predicts stock returns for several

months afterwards.



               III. Cross-Sectional Regressions with ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL

       While Table IV shows that it is unlikely most firm characteristics and skewness measures

play a role in the predictability of the cross section of stock returns by CVOL and PVOL, it

does not control simultaneously for multiple sources of risk. We investigate this now using Fama

and MacBeth (1973) regressions of stock returns onto implied volatility changes with other

variables. Specifically, we run the following cross-sectional regression:

                  Ri ,t 1  0t  1t  CVOLi ,t  2,t  PVOLi ,t  3,t  X i ,t   i ,t 1 ,   (3)

where Ri ,t 1 is the realized return on stock i in month t+1 and X i ,t is a collection of stock-

specific control variables observable at time t for stock i, which includes information from the

cross section of stocks and the cross section of options. We estimate the regression in equation

(3) across stocks i at time t and then report the cross-sectional coefficients averaged across the

sample. The cross-sectional regressions are run at the monthly frequency from March 1996 to

December 2011. To compute standard errors we take into account potential autocorrelation and

                                                                                                       23
heteroscedasticity in the cross-sectional coefficients and compute Newey-West (1987) t-statistics

on the time series of slope coefficients. The Newey-West standard errors are computed with six

lags.



A. Coefficients on ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL

        Table VI, Panel A presents firm-level cross-sectional regressions with call and put

implied volatility innovations first introduced individually and then simultaneously, together

with controls for firm characteristics and risk factors.12 We also include ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL

simultaneously in multivariate regressions with control variables to determine their joint effects

on stock returns. In the presence of risk loadings and firm characteristics, Regression (1) in

Panel A of Table VI shows that the average slope coefficient on ΔCVOL is 1.57, which is highly

significant with a t-statistic of 3.13. In regression (2), the average slope on ΔPVOL is –1.85 with

a t-statistic –3.78. Regression (3) includes both ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL with coefficients of 3.78

and –3.92, with t-statistics of 7.09 and –7.13, respectively. These regressions confirm the

robustness of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL to predict future stock returns, as reported in Tables 2-5,

except the regressions control for a comprehensive set of firm characteristics, risk, and skewness

attributes.



                                            Table VI here



        To provide an economic significance of the average slope coefficients in Table VI on

ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL, we construct the empirical cross-sectional distribution of implied volatility

innovations over the full sample (summarized in Table I). The difference in ΔCVOL (ΔPVOL)


                                                                                                 24
values between average stocks in the first and tenth deciles is 22.4% (19.4%) for call (put)

implied volatility innovations. If a firm were to move from the first decile to the tenth decile of

implied volatilities while its other characteristics were held constant, what would be the change

in that firm’s expected return? The ΔCVOL coefficient of 3.78 in Table VI, Panel A represents

an economically significant effect of an increase of 3.78  22.42%  0.85% per month in the

average firm’s expected return for a firm moving from the first to the tenth decile of implied

volatilities, and the ΔPVOL coefficient of –3.92 represents a similar decrease of

 3.92  19.41%  0.76% per month. These are smaller, but similar to, the 1.38% and –1.04%

differences in the first and tenth deciles in Table IV for ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL, respectively

because we control for the effects of all other firm characteristics, risk factors and loadings.



B. Other Cross-Sectional Predictors

       In Panel A of Table VI, the signs of the estimated Fama-MacBeth coefficients on the

stock characteristics are consistent with earlier studies, but some of the relations are generally

not significant. The log market capitalization (SIZE) and illiquidity (ILLIQ) coefficients are

both insignificantly different from zero. The momentum (MOM) effect is weak as well. This is

because we use optionable stocks that are generally large and liquid where the size and liquidity

effects are weaker (see, for example, Hong, Lim and Stein, 2000). We do observe a significant

book-to-market effect (see Fama and French (1992, 1993)) and a significant reversal effect (see

Jegadeesh (1990) and Lehmann (1990)).

       The most interesting predictors for our purposes, however, are the ones that are related to

volatility and the option market. In regressions (1)-(3), the coefficient on historical volatility,

RVOL, is negative but statistically insignificant.13 Panel B of Table I reports that RVOL has very


                                                                                                   25
low correlations of 0.02 and 0.03 with ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL, respectively. This indicates that the

effect of past volatility is very different from our cross-sectional predictability of ΔCVOL and

ΔPVOL. In regression (4), we drop RVOL and replace it by the RVOL–IVOL spread. We do

not include RVOL and RVOL–IVOL in the same regression because they are highly correlated.

The ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL coefficients are similar across regressions (3) and (4).

       Pan and Poteshman (2006) find that stocks with high C/P Volume outperform stocks with

low call-put volume ratios by more than 40 basis points on the next day and more than 1% over

the next week. However, our results in Table VI provide no evidence for a significant link

between C/P Volume and the cross-section of expected returns. This is consistent with Pan and

Poteshman who show that publicly available option volume information contains little predictive

power, whereas their proprietary measure of option volume emanating from private information

does predict future stock returns. As an alternative to option trading volume, we also examine

C/P OI. This variable is highly insignificant as well.

       There are stronger effects from alternative measures of implied volatility spreads. In

regression (4), RVOL–IVOL carries a negative and statistically significant coefficient, consistent

with Bali and Hovakimian (2009). In regressions (1)-(4), the coefficients on risk-neutral

skewness, QSKEW, are negative and highly significant as well. This is similar to the pattern of

QSKEW with the ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL average return patterns in Table IV, and it also confirms

the negative predictive relation between option skew and future stock returns in Xing, Zhang and

Zhao (2010).    The highly statistically significant loadings on ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL in the

presence of the negative QSKEW and RVOL–IVOL coefficients imply that the information in

option volatility innovations is different to the predictive ability of the option skew and the

variance risk premium uncovered by previous authors.


                                                                                                26
       Cremers and Weinbaum (2010) investigate how the call-put volatility spread, which is

the difference between CVOL and PVOL, predicts stock returns and they also report the relation

between ΔCVOL–ΔPVOL and stock returns in passing. 14 They do not focus on univariate

predictability of ΔCVOL or ΔPVOL or unconstrained joint predictability of these variables.15

Cremers and Weinbaum point out that the strength of predictability from call-put volatility

spreads declines during their sample period becoming insignificant over the second half of their

sample, 2001-2005. In the internet appendix, we show that the predictability from using ΔCVOL

and ΔPVOL is robust to different sample periods. Specifically, the full sample 1996-2011 is first

divided into two subsample periods (January 1996 – December 2003 and January 2004 –

December 2011), and then for additional robustness it is divided into three subsample periods

(January 1996 – December 2000, January 2001 – December 2005, and January 2006 – December

2011). After controlling for firm characteristics, risk and skewness attributes, the average slope

coefficients on ΔCVOL (ΔPVOL) are positive (negative) and highly significant for all subsample

periods including 2001-2005.16



C. Informed Trading

       The model of informed trading in Appendix A makes three predictions associated with

the predictability of past changes in option volatilities for stock returns. First, the predictability

should be greater (1) when past option volatilities have increased contemporaneously with stock

prices, (2) when large changes in option volatilities are accompanied by unusually large trading

volume in option markets, and (3) it should be especially strong when there is large trading

volume in both option and stock markets.




                                                                                                    27
                            C.1. Interactions with Past Stock Returns

       An informed investor can trade both stock and option markets, so intuitively both markets

should respond contemporaneously.17 The predictability by past CVOL for future stock returns

should be especially strong when stock markets have also moved with CVOL.

       In regressions (5)-(8) of Panel A, Table VI, we test whether there is greater predictability

by CVOL and PVOL when past increases in option volatilities are accompanied by

contemporaneous increases in stock returns. We create a variable “PastRetDecile,” which takes

values from 1 to 10 for stocks ranked into deciles based on their past one-month returns (REV).

We interact this with the CVOL and PVOL variables. A positive coefficient on the interaction

term is evidence consistent with informed trading taking place in both option and stock markets.

       We find this is indeed the case. In each regression (5)-(8), the average slope coefficients

on the CVOL  PastRetDecile interaction terms are positive with t-statistics above 2.2. Thus,

CVOL predictability is strongest in stocks that have contemporaneously experienced increases

in price over the previous period. This reflects that informed investors can also trade stocks, or

the call option prices feedback onto stock prices, or both. The coefficients on

PVOL  PastRetDecile are also positive, but the individual coefficients on PVOL and REV are

themselves negative. Hence, the positive coefficient on PVOL  PastRetDecile is also consistent

with the model’s prediction that when investors’ demand of both stocks and options is high, the

cross-market predictability of options to stocks is enhanced.



                                       C.2. Option Volume




                                                                                                 28
       We conduct a further investigation of informed trading in Panel B of Table VI by

focusing on where trading takes place. We run cross-sectional regressions with the following

regressors:18

                                                    CVOLi ,t       if Call Volume  Median
                           CVOLHighCallVol
                                i ,t        =                                               ,                 (4)
                                                    0               otherwise               


                                                    CVOLi ,t      if Call Volume  Median
                           CVOLLowCallVol
                                i ,t       =                                               ,
                                                    0              otherwise               


                                                   PVOLi ,t       if Put Volume  Median
                           PVOLHighPutVol
                                i ,t       =                                              ,
                                                   0               otherwise              


                                                   PVOLi ,t       if Put Volume  Median
                           PVOLLowPutVol
                                i ,t      =                                               .
                                                   0               otherwise              


These partition CVOL and PVOL into whether call or put volatilities occur with relatively

high or low option trading volume is determined based on the median change in option trading

volume. Stocks with higher than median changes in call option trading volume are in the High

Call Volume group, whereas stocks with lower than median changes in call option trading

volume are in the Low Call Volume group. Similarly, stocks with higher (lower) than median

changes in put option trading volume are in the High (Low) Put Volume group.

       The regressions with the variables in equation (4) nest those in the standard regression

(3). For example, since CVOLHighCallVol
                             i ,t         CVOLLowCallVol
                                                i ,t        CVOLi ,t , a regression of

                Ri ,t 1  0,t  1,HighCallVol
                                     t
                                                 CVOLHighCallVol
                                                      i ,t
                                                                   1,LowCallVol
                                                                        t
                                                                                  CVOLLowCallVol
                                                                                       i ,t
                                                                                                    i ,t 1

nests the first regression where the CVOL coefficient does not vary with option trading

volume,


                                                                                                                 29
                                      Ri ,t 1  0,t  1,t CVOLi ,t   i ,t 1 ,

where 1,t  1,HighCallVol
                t
                             1,LowCallVol
                                  t
                                            . We expect that when changes in option volatilities are

accompanied by unusually high option volume, the predictability from the option to the stock

market should be stronger, all else equal.

        We report the estimates of the asymmetric regressions in Panel B of Table VI. Regression

(4) uses the same cross-sectional control variables as Panel A, but we do not report them for

brevity. The average slope coefficients on CVOLHighCallVo
                                                i ,t
                                                          lume
                                                               and CVOLLowCallVol
                                                                        i ,t
                                                                                  ume
                                                                                      are

economically and statistically different from each other with values of 2.87 and 1.24,

respectively. We reject the hypothesis that the coefficients are equal with a t-statistic of 2.14,

suggesting the strongest predictability of call option volatility innovations is found when these

are accompanied by greater than usual call option volume. This is consistent with informed

investors buying call options, leading to increases in call volatilities which predict future stock

price appreciation.

        Similarly, we find the average slopes on PVOLHighPutVol
                                                      i ,t       and PVOLLowPutVol
                                                                          i ,t      are also

different, with values of –1.58 and –0.37, respectively. We reject that the coefficients are equal

with a t-statistic of 2.33, which is consistent that informed investors with high-quality, sizeable

information that stocks are trending down buy puts and that the price discovery is occurring in

put options with larger than usual trading volume. This causes increases in put option volatilities

to lead next-month decreases in stock prices. The effect of asymmetry is somewhat stronger on

the put side than on the call side.

        In regressions (3) and (4) in Panel B of Table VI, we estimate the joint specifications

with asymmetric responses of both call and put volatility innovations. The last regression


                                                                                                       30
specification controls for all factor risk and risk characteristics and the results are even stronger

(p-value of 0.40%) compared to testing them without all controls (p-value of 2.78%). Moreover,

the point estimates in regression (4) on CVOLHighCallVol
                                              i ,t        and CVOLLowCallVol
                                                                   i ,t       are 3.72 and 2.51,

respectively, implying a 48% higher impact of ΔCVOL when call option volatility innovations

are accompanied by greater than usual call option volume. Similarly, the average slopes on

PVOLHighPutVol
     i ,t       and PVOLLowPutVol
                         i ,t      are –3.38 and –1.27, respectively, implying more than a

double impact of ΔPVOL when put option volatility innovations are accompanied by larger than

usual put option volume. When we include both call and put volatility shocks simultaneously

along with the control variables, the effect of asymmetry is again stronger on the put side than on

the call side.



                               C.3. Joint Option and Stock Volume

        A final implication of the informed trading model in Appendix A is that we expect to see

the strongest predictability of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL for stock returns in stocks whose options

experience unusually large trading and the underlying stock volumes are large. The aggressive

trading of informed investors in both stock and option markets leads to higher volumes in both

markets, and subsequently predictable stock returns.

        We investigate this prediction in Table VII by forming bivariate portfolios of stocks

sorted by ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL controlling for each other’s effects, and condition on options

trading volume and stock volume. In Panel A, we separate stocks each month into two groups

based on the median change in call options trading volume. Stocks with higher than median

changes in call option trading volume are in the “High Call Volume” group and the other stocks

are in the “Low Call Volume” group. Similarly, stocks are independently separated into two

                                                                                                   31
groups based on the median change in trading volume of individual stocks. Stocks with higher

change in trading volume are in the “High Stock Volume” group and stocks with lower change in

trading volume are in the “Low Stock Volume” group. Then, for the two groups of stocks in

“High Call Volume and High Stock Volume” and “Low Call Volume and Low Stock Volume,”

we form bivariate decile portfolios of ΔCVOL controlling for PVOL along the lines of Section

3.2.



                                           Table VII here



       Panel A of Table VII shows that for stocks in “High Call Volume and High Stock

Volume” group, the average return and FF3 alpha differences between the lowest and highest

ΔCVOL portfolios are 1.42% and 1.35% per month, respectively, both with highly significant t-

statistics above 4.7. The return spreads are also positive and significant for stocks in “Low Call

Volume and Low Stock Volume” group, but as expected the economic magnitudes are smaller;

the average return and alpha differences between the lowest and highest ΔCVOL portfolios are

0.89% and 0.87% per month with t-statistics of 2.52 and 2.45, respectively. These results

indicate that the predictive power of ΔCVOL is stronger among firms whose options markets

have larger volume and stock volume is larger.

       In Panel B of Table VII, we do a similar exercise for separate stocks into two groups

based on the median change in put trading volume and the median change in stock volume. For

the two groups of stocks in “High Put Volume and High Stock Volume” and “Low Put Volume

and Low Stock Volume”, we form bivariate decile portfolios of ΔPVOL controlling for CVOL.

For stocks in the “High Put Volume and High Stock Volume” group, the average return and FF3


                                                                                                32
alpha differences between the lowest and highest ΔPVOL portfolios are –1.20% and –1.26% per

month, respectively, both with highly significant t-statistics of –4.82 and –5.32, respectively.

Although the return and alpha spreads are negative and significant for stocks in “Low Put

Volume and Low Stock Volume” group, the economic magnitudes are smaller in absolute value:

the average return and alpha differences between the lowest and highest ΔPVOL portfolios are –

0.73% and –0.66% per month with t-statistics above 2.1 in absolute term. These results show that

ΔPVOL predictability is also stronger among firms whose options markets have larger volume

and stock volume is larger.



D. Systematic vs. Idiosyncratic Volatility Innovations

        Implied call and put volatilities contain both systematic and idiosyncratic components.

The predictive power of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL could be due to them reflecting news in systematic

risk, idiosyncratic components, or both.

        We decompose the total implied variance into a systematic component and an

idiosyncratic component using a conditional CAPM relation:

                                          i2,t   i2,t m2 ,t   2,i ,t ,                           (5)

where  i2,t is the risk-neutral variance of stock i,  m2 ,t is the risk-neutral variance of the market

m,  i,t is the market beta of stock i, and  2,i ,t is the idiosyncratic risk-neutral variance of stock i,

all at time t. We estimate betas by using stock returns and also use beta estimates implied by

option prices.



                                        D.1. Real Measure Betas



                                                                                                         33
       We refer to betas estimated from stock returns as physical or real measure betas. These

are estimated using the past one year of daily returns on individual stocks and the market

portfolio. We define the systematic and idiosyncratic call implied volatilities as:

                                           i , t   i , t m , t
                                       CVOLsys
                                                                                                     (6)
                                           i , t    , i , t   i , t   i , t m , t ,
                                       CVOLidio

where the betas are from the physical measure. We use the corresponding expressions PVOLsys
                                                                                        i ,t



and PVOLidio
        i , t when put implied volatilities along with the corresponding betas are used to



decompose the changes in put implied volatilities. The systematic vs. idiosyncratic

decomposition is in terms of standard deviations and follows Ben-Horian and Levy (1980) and

others, and it is consistent with our previous empirical work looking at changes in option

volatilities, rather than variances.     We consider the predictive ability of first-difference

innovations ΔCVOLsys , ΔPVOLsys , ΔCVOLidio , and ΔPVOLidio on the cross section of stock

returns.   As expected, the cross-sectional correlation of the innovations in the systematic

component of volatilities, ΔCVOLsys and ΔPVOLsys , is very high at above 0.99, whereas the

correlation between the idiosyncratic terms, ΔCVOLidio and ΔPVOLidio , is much lower at 0.86.

       In Table VIII, we break up the innovations of CVOL and PVOL into systematic and

idiosyncratic components while controlling for the usual risk characteristics.                Due to the

extremely high correlation between the systematic ΔCVOLsys and ΔPVOLsys terms, we include

only one term in each regression. In the left panel of Table VIII, we decompose the systematic

and idiosyncratic components using real measure betas. The panel shows that the coefficients on

ΔCVOLidio are positive, around 3.7, and statistically significant with t-statistics above 7.0. The

coefficients on ΔPVOLidio are approximately –3.9 with t-statistics around –7.0. The positive


                                                                                                      34
coefficients on ΔCVOLidio and the negative coefficients on ΔPVOLidio are reminiscent of the

positive and negative coefficients on ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL, respectively, in Panel A of Table VI.

The coefficients on the systematic components are negative, but statistically insignificant.

Clearly it is changes in the idiosyncratic volatility components that are driving the predictability.



                                             Table VIII here



                                      D.2. Risk-Neutral Betas

        We next examine betas estimated using option prices, which we term risk-neutral betas.

Christoffersen, Jacobs and Vainberg (2008), among others, argue that betas computed from

option prices contain different information than betas estimated from stock returns. Following

Duan and Wei (2009), we compute a risk-neutral beta using the risk-neutral skewness of the

individual stock, Skewi ,t , and the risk-neutral skewness of the market, Skewm ,t , using the

following relation:

                                          Skewi ,t  i3/,t 2 Skewm ,t ,                          (7)

where the risk-neutral measures of skewness are estimated following Bakshi, Kapadia, and

Madan (2003). We provide further details in Appendix B. The volatility innovations for the

systematic and idiosyncratic components are computed using equation (6) except the risk-neutral

betas are used instead of the physical betas. Similar to the physical betas, the correlation

between the systematic components ΔCVOLsys and ΔPVOLsys computed using risk-neutral betas

is very high at above 0.99.      The correlation between ΔCVOLidio and ΔPVOLidio using risk-

neutral betas is 0.91.



                                                                                                   35
       The right-hand panel in Table VIII reports the result of the systematic vs. idiosyncratic

decomposition using risk-neutral betas. We again observe the coefficients on the systematic

components on ΔCVOLsys and ΔPVOLsys are statistically insignificant.          The coefficient on

ΔCVOLidio is around 3.5 with t-statistics above 4.0 and the coefficient on ΔPVOLsys is

approximately –4.0 with t-statistics of –4.4. These coefficients are very similar to the ones

computed using physical betas.

       In summary, the predictive ability of innovations in call and put volatilities for the cross

section of stock returns stems from idiosyncratic, not systematic, components in volatilities and

this result is robust to alternative measures of market beta. Thus if the predictability from

ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL is arising from informed investors placing trades in option markets, these

investors tend to have better information about future company-specific news or events rather

than the way these stocks are reacting to systematic factor risk.



      IV. Predicting the Cross Section of Implied Volatilities with Stock Returns

       So far, we have examined the predictability of past option volatility changes for future

stock returns. According to the informed trading model in Appendix A, there should also be

reverse predictability from stocks to options, so past stock returns should also predict option

volatilities. We are interested in the simplest of variables, the abnormal stock return (or alpha)

which is analogous to the change in the implied volatility for options and is a simple proxy for

news arrivals in stock markets.



A. Predicting Option and Realized Volatilities




                                                                                                 36
        We examine the significance of information spillover from individual stocks to individual

equity options based on the firm-level cross-sectional regressions:

                               CVOLi ,t 1  0,t  1,t Alphai ,t  Controls   i ,t 1
                                PVOLi ,t 1  0,t  1,t Alphai ,t  Controls   i ,t 1
                                                                                                         (8)
                CVOLi ,t 1  PVOLi ,t 1  0,t  1,t Alphai ,t  Controls   i ,t 1
                                RVOLi ,t 1  0,t  1,t Alphai ,t  Controls   i ,t 1

where the dependent variables, CVOL and PVOL, denote the monthly changes in call and put

implied volatilities for stock i over month t to t+1, and RVOL denotes the monthly change in

realized volatility of stock i over month t to t+1. Alpha is the abnormal return (or alpha) for

stock i over the previous month t obtained from the CAPM model using a specification similar to

regression (1).19 The monthly alphas are computed by summing the daily idiosyncratic returns

over the previous month. To test the significance of information flow from stock to option

market, the cross-section of implied volatility changes over month t+1 are regressed on the

abnormal returns of individual stocks in month t.

        The first two specifications in equation (8) examine how call and put volatilities over the

next month respond to excess returns over the previous month.                        The third cross-sectional

regression in equation (8) looks at how call volatilities move relative to put volatilities. Since

call and put volatilities tend to move in unison for the same firm, predicting the spread between

put and call implied volatilities, CVOL–PVOL, attempts to control for the common

component in both call and put volatilities. The final regression in (8) predicts future firm-level

realized volatilities in the cross section.

        We deliberately do not use option returns as the dependent variable in equation (8).

Option returns exhibit marked skewness and have pronounced non-linearities from dynamic

leverage making statistical inference difficult (see, among others, Broadie, Chernov and

                                                                                                            37
Johannes, 2008; Chaudhri and Schroder, 2009). By focusing on implied volatilities we avoid

many of these inference issues. Our analysis is most similar to Goyal and Saretto (2009), but

they examine actual option returns predicted by the difference between implied and realized

volatilities.20

        Table IX presents the Fama-MacBeth (1973) average slope coefficients and their Newey-

West t-statistics in parentheses. Strikingly, many of the same stock risk characteristics that

predict stock returns also predict implied volatilities. Options where the underlying stocks

experienced high abnormal returns over the past month tend to increase their implied volatilities

over the next month. Specifically, a 1% Alpha over the previous month increases call (put)

volatilities by 4.15% (2.32%), on average, with a highly significant t-statistic of 10.58 (6.03).

High book-to-market stocks tend to exhibit decreases in implied volatilities next period with a

coefficient of –0.20 for call volatility changes and –0.13 for put volatility changes. There is a

statistically significant momentum effect for predicting call implied volatilities, but the

coefficient is very small. The illiquidity effect is strong for call, but weaker and insignificant, for

put volatility changes. With the exception of BETA and SIZE, the standard stock characteristics

have significant explanatory power in predicting option volatilities.



                                              Table IX here



        The predictability of the option volatilities by option characteristics is in line with the

literature. Consistent with Goyal and Saretto (2009), options with large RVOL tend to predict

decreases in implied volatilities and so holding period returns on these options tend to be low.

Increases in call and put open interest strongly predict future increases in call and put volatilities


                                                                                                     38
(cf. Roll, Schwartz and Subrahmanyam, 2009). Finally, changes in call (put) implied volatilities

tend to be lower (higher) for options where the smile exhibits more pronounced negative

skewness.

        Table IX interestingly shows that some variables differentially predict call and put

volatilities. Note that call and put volatilities are correlated (Table I notes the cross sectional

correlation is 0.58), but there is some independent movement. In the CVOL–PVOL column,

Alpha and RVOL increase call volatilities more than put volatilities, while book-to-market

decreases call volatilities less than put volatilities.

        Finally, the last column of Table IX shows that there is pronounced predictability in the

cross section of realized volatilities. This predictability in realized volatilities is the opposite to

the predictability in implied volatilities. In particular, the Alpha coefficient in the CVOL

regression is 4.15, whereas the Alpha coefficient in the RVOL regression is –14.32, which is

approximately 3.5 times larger in absolute value. High past stock returns predict increases in

future implied volatilities that are not accompanied by increases in realized volatilities. In fact,

future realized volatility tends to decline. In contrast, the effects for most of the other stock

characteristics are the same sign for both implied and realized volatilities.

        The findings that past stock returns predict option volatilities, the predictability of call

volatilities is stronger than that of put volatilities, and that option volatility is forecasted to

increase while realized volatility decreases all consistent with the model of informed trading in

Appendix A. Intuitively, informed traders with good news trade both call options, which

increases implied volatilities, and stocks. Prices do not perfectly adjust this period, leading to

stock prices, and consequently call option prices, increasing in the next period. This leads to past

high stock alphas predicting call option volatilities. The action of informed trading this period


                                                                                                     39
resolves some uncertainty. Therefore, future realized volatility decreases over the following

period. The predictability of call option volatilities is stronger than put volatilities for a given

alpha because for good news released today, stock prices continue to adjust upward in the next

period. This causes the price of calls to increase, and the price of puts to decrease. There is

continued adjustment, but the stock has already moved toward its fundamental value. This partial

adjustment today causes next period’s adjustment on the put option to be smaller as the put

option delta becomes less negative.



B. Further Economic Investigation

        The predictability of option volatilities may be consistent with stories other than informed

trading. To investigate, we form portfolios of option volatilities similar to the portfolio returns

constructed in Section 3. We focus on predictability by Alphas. Table X reports the results of

averaged next-month implied volatilities where the portfolios are rebalanced at the start of every

month ranking on a stock’s Alpha over the previous month. Table X reports the same familiar

results as Table IX but now in a decile portfolio format. In Panel A, we use all stocks: options of

stocks with low (high) past returns exhibit decreases (increases) in volatility, call and put

volatilities both move but call volatilities move more, and realized volatilities tend to move in the

opposite direction. Note that the differences in implied volatilities are across the extreme decile

portfolios are highly statistically significant in all cases.



                                                Table X here



                                     B.1. Behavioral Explanations


                                                                                                   40
        Option volatilities may simply be mispriced in the sense of a behavioral asset pricing

model. In particular, past high returns on a stock lead agents to become more uncertain of the

future prospects of that stock, and so agents over-estimate future volatility. This is not reflected

in realized fundamentals like future realized volatility. A behavioral model of this kind is

developed by Barberis and Huang (2001). Goyal and Saretto (2009) appeal to this model to

explain the positive returns on portfolios of option straddles that are long stocks with a large

positive difference between historical and implied volatility and short stocks with a large

negative difference between historical and implied volatility. In the Barberis and Huang model,

agents are loss averse over gains and losses narrowly defined over individual stocks (through

mental accounting). Agents perceive stocks with recent gains to be less risky and thus implied

volatility declines.

        According to Barberis and Huang, the greater uncertainty of stock returns when stock

prices have recently risen should be reflected in other uncertainty measures. Following Diether,

Malloy, and Scherbina (2002), we take earnings dispersion of analysts, DISP, as a proxy for

uncertainty about individual stock movements. We expect that for the Barberis and Huang story

to hold, the change in DISP should also increase across the Low Alpha to High Alpha deciles in

Panel A, Table X. This is not the case. The average change of DISP decreases as we move from

the Low to High Alpha deciles from 0.097 to –0.165. That is, the DISP goes in the opposite

direction to the CVOL numbers. This casts doubt on a behavioral over-reaction story for

volatilities, at least as articulated by Barberis and Huang.



                                 B.2. Other Rational Explanations




                                                                                                  41
       Predictability of option volatilities can arise from other rational channels. Lo and Wang

(1995), for example, show that predictable returns affect option prices because they affect

estimates of volatility. An implication of this theory is that increases in predictability generally

decrease option prices. Lo and Wang’s argument is based on holding the unconditional time-

series variance of a stock constant, and estimates of predictability change the conditional

variance. Although Lo and Wang work with time-series predictability, the same concept is true

with cross-sectional predictability which we examine. All else being equal, when the underlying

stock return is more predictable, current option volatilities should decline. Since the predictable

components of both stock returns and option volatilities are persistent processes, we should also

expect that when stock returns are more predictable, the predictability of future option volatilities

should decline.

       To test this, we divide the sample into two groups of stocks based on the absolute

residuals from the cross-sectional regressions of returns. We use the same control variables in

Panel A of Table VI without CVOL and PVOL. Since our objective is to determine whether

the predictability of future volatilities is different for stocks with high and low predictability, we

exclude CVOL and PVOL in the first-stage cross-sectional regressions to avoid confounding

the predictability of stock returns with the predictability of option volatilities. We divide the

stock universe into two groups based on the median value of absolute residuals for each month.

We label these two groups “High Cross-Sectional Predictability” and “Low Cross-Sectional

Predictability.” Panel B of Table X shows predictability of future implied and realized volatilities

is stronger for stocks with low cross-sectional predictability as the 10-1 differences in implied

and realized volatilities across the extreme Alpha deciles are economically and statistically larger

for stocks with low absolute residuals. The difference, however, for the predictability of CVOL


                                                                                                    42
by past Alphas is only very slightly stronger for stocks with low cross-sectional predictability.

Nevertheless, the overall results are consistent with Lo and Wang (1995): when stock returns are

more predictable, the predictability of future volatilities declines.21

        In demand-based option pricing models (see Bollen and Whaley, 2004; Garleanu,

Pedersen and Poteshman, 2009), lagged stock returns could predict option volatilities because

they forecast demand pressure of end users or unhedgeable components of option movements,

which cannot be perfectly removed by option dealers. For the former, the pattern of option

volumes is consistent with the forecasted changes in option volatilities: across the option

portfolios in Panel A of Table X, the change in option call volume increases as we move from

the Low to High Alpha decile. For the latter, we can examine how the predictability of option

volatilities varies as the hedgeability of the underlying stock varies.

        In Panel C of Table X, we divide the universe into high and low volatility stocks based on

the median level of realized volatility. Given basis risk, jump risk, and the inability to trade

continuously, high volatility stocks are more unhedgeable than low volatility stocks. As shown in

Panel C, we find stronger predictability for high volatility stocks because the 10-1 differences in

implied and realized volatilities across the extreme Alpha deciles are economically and

statistically larger for high volatility stocks.

        Second, we use the median ILLIQ measure of Amihud (2002) to split optionable stocks

into two liquidity groups. Panel D of Table X considers liquid and illiquid stocks separately. We

find that the predictability is less pronounced in liquid stocks: the CVOL spread between the

Low Alpha and High Alpha portfolios is smaller, there is less relative movement of call

volatilities vs. put volatilities, and there is also weaker predictability of future realized volatility.




                                                                                                        43
       Finally, we divide stocks into two groups based on the median volatility uncertainty,

where volatility uncertainty is measured by the variance of daily changes in call implied

volatilities in a month. Stocks with high variance of CVOL (or high volatility uncertainty) are

harder to hedge, all else being equal, than stocks with low volatility uncertainty. Hence, Panel E

of Table X shows that the predictability is more pronounced in stocks with high volatility

uncertainty: the CVOL, CVOL – PVOL, and RVOL spreads between the Low Alpha and

High Alpha portfolios are economically and statistically larger for stocks with higher volatility

uncertainty. Overall, these results indicate that the predictability of implied and realized

volatilities may be related to the lack of option hedgeability.



                                          V. Conclusion

We document the ability of option volatilities to predict the cross section of stock returns and

that the cross section of stock returns to predicts option volatilities. Specifically, stocks with past

large innovations in call option implied volatilities positively predict future stock returns, while

stocks with previous large changes in put implied volatilities predict low stock returns. When

decile portfolios are formed based on past first-differences in call volatilities, the spread in

average returns and alphas between the first and tenth portfolios is approximately 1% per month

and highly significant. After accounting for the effect of call implied volatilities, the average raw

and risk-adjusted return differences between the extreme decile portfolios of put volatility

changes are greater than 1% per month and also highly significant. This cross-sectional

predictability of stock returns from call and put volatility innovations is robust to controlling for

the usual firm characteristics and risk factors drawn from both equity and option markets, and

appears in subsample periods including the most recent financial crisis. While strongest for the


                                                                                                     44
next-month horizon, this predictability persists up to six months for call and up to four months

for put volatility changes.

       We introduce a noisy rational expectations model of informed trading that

contemporaneously moves both option and stock markets. Predictability from option to stock

markets, and stock markets to option markets, arises from informed trading. The model also

suggests that the predictability should be stronger when trading volumes in stock and option

markets are higher. We find empirical evidence consistent with the model’s predictions. We also

find that it is changes in the idiosyncratic, not systematic, components of implied volatilities that

are driving this predictability, implying that investors first trading in option markets have better

information about firm-specific news or events.

       In the other direction of predictability from stock market variables to option volatilities,

many variables that predict the cross section of stock returns also predict the cross section of

implied volatilities. A particularly strong predictor is the lagged excess stock return. Options

with underlying equities that have large price appreciations tend to increase in price over the next

period. In particular, a 1% return relative to the CAPM over the previous month causes call (put)

option implied volatilities to increase by around 4% (2%) and the increase in volatilities is larger

for call options than for put options. At the same time, future realized volatilities are predicted to

decline while option volatilities tend to rise. These effects are in excess of the co-movements of

next-month option volatility changes with several lagged cross-sectional stock and option

characteristics. The predictability of option volatilities is strongest for those options that exhibit

the weakest underlying stock return predictability and are hardest to hedge. Both are consistent

with rational sources of option return predictability.




                                                                                                    45
              Appendix A: Model of Informed Stock and Option Trading

       This appendix presents a noisy rational expectations economy with stock and option

securities. The underlying intuition of the model is that informed traders choose to trade in both

stock and option markets, but the extent of their trading depends on the amount of noise trading

present in the separate markets. The prices of the stock and options are linked through the actions

of a market dealer, who can arbitrage between the two markets. Prices move through the trades

of the informed investor, but they do not fully adjust to a fully-revealing rational expectations

economy. Thus, there is predictability from option prices to stock returns, and from stock returns

to option prices. The model also predicts that when noise traders’ demand of both stocks and

options is high, the cross-market predictability of options to stocks (and vice versa) is enhanced.

       The two most related models are by Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas (1998) and Garleanu,

Pedersen and Poteshman (2009). Like Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas (1998), we have informed

traders, noise traders, and a market dealer. We also allow informed traders to place orders in the

equity market, option market, or both. Easley, O’Hara and Srinivas show that if at least some

informed investors choose to trade in options before trading in underlying stocks, option prices

will predict future stock price movements. Informed traders may find it easier to hide their trades

in equity markets, in which case stock markets will lead option markets. In the Easley, O’Hara

and Srinivas model, the fundamental value of the stock is exogenously given and trades occur at

bid-ask spreads determined by a market maker. Like standard micro structure models, the bid-

ask spreads reflect adverse selection. In our model, the price of the stock is endogenously

determined and predictability of options to stock returns, and stock characteristics to option

prices, occurs jointly because we allow simultaneous, rather than sequential, trading in both

stock and option markets. Garleanu, Pedersen and Poteshman (2009) develop an equilibrium


                                                                                                  46
model where the end-user demand of options affects option prices. They take the stock price as

exogenous and do not model asymmetric information.


Economy

        The firm is born at date 0, investors trade the stock at date 1, and the firm’s cashflows F

are realized at date 2. The unconditional distribution of F is binomial where F  FH with

probability 0.5 and F  FL with probability 0.5. We denote the stock prices at time 0 and 1 as S0

and S1 , respectively.

        We assume there is a call option written on the stock. The strike price of the call is K,

FL  K  FH , and the call matures at date 2. We denote the call prices at time 0 and 1 as C0 and

C1 , respectively. The payoff of the call at time 2 is C2  ( F  K )  .

        There are informed agents, uninformed agents, and a market dealer, all with CARA

utility with risk aversion . Informed agents observe a signal,  , just before date 1. The signal

 takes value 1 with probability 0.5 and value 0 with probability 0.5. Conditional on  , F takes

the following distribution:


                                                      FH
                                          

                 p = 0.5        =1
                                         1- 
                                                     FL
                                                     FH
                                         1- 
                               =0

                                         
                                                     FL




                                                                                                 47
where the parameter  ,            1
                                   2
                                          1 , represents the quality of the signal  . We denote

p ( )    (1   )(1   ) , which implies that p ( )  1  p (1   ) .

         The informed traders trade both the stock and call options, and we denote their demands

for the stock and call option are qI and d I , respectively. The representative market dealer also

trades both the stock and the call option, and her demands are qD and d D for the stock and call,

respectively. There are uninformed agents in both stock and option markets, and they cannot

trade across markets. We denote uninformed stock demands as z ~ N (0,  z2 ) , and uninformed

option demands as v ~ N (0, v2 ) , where v and z are independent. We assume the call option is in

zero net supply and there is one share outstanding of the stock. Hence, the market clearing

conditions for the stock and call option markets are:

                                                   qI  qD  z  1,                           (A.1)

and

                                                  d I  d D  v  0.                          (A.2)



Equilibrium


         First consider the case where the informed trader receives no signal. We also assume that

at date 0 there are no demand shocks in both markets. Since the informed trader and market

dealer are identical they buy half a stock each at price S0 and there is no trading in the option

market.


         After the informed trader receives the signal just prior to time 1, the informed trader

solves



                                                                                                 48
                                                max E   1 exp(  WI )                                (A.3)
                                                 qI , d I



subject to

                                                     s.t. qI S1  d1C1  12 S1 ,                             (A.4)

where WI  ( F  S1 ) qI  (C2  C1 )d I . Taking the FOC with respect to qI and d I gives

                                                              1     1  p ( ) S1  FL 
                           qI ( FH  FL )  d I ( FH  K )   log                                         (A.5)
                                                                   p( ) FH  S1 

and

                                                            FH  K
                                                     C1            ( S1  FL ) .                            (A.6)
                                                            FH  FL

Note that the call option is a linear security, which results from the binomial distribution of the

stock cashflows. If we were to specify a put option in place of a call option, the results would be

equivalent.

        The derivation for the optimal demand for the market maker is similar, except that the

market maker cannot observe the signal . We assume the market maker has unlimited wealth, so

she has no budget constraint. The FOC for the market maker’s optimization is

                                                                    1     S  FL 
                                 qD ( FH  FL )  d D ( FH  K )   log  1                                (A.7)
                                                                         FH  S1 

        We can sum equations (A.5) and (A.7) to derive the price of the stock:

                                                       G ( , z , v)               1
                                  S1 ( , z , v)                      FH                    FL ,           (A.8)
                                                     1  G ( , z , v)      1  G ( , z , v)

where the function G ( , z, v) is given by

                                           p ( )            
                     G ( , z , v )                   exp     (1  z )( FH  FL )  v( FH  K )   .   (A.9)
                                        1  p ( )           2                                        




                                                                                                                49
The call option price is determined from equation (A.6). Finally, we can obtain the informed and

market maker demands qI , d I , qD , and d D using the market clearing conditions in equation

(A.4) and the FOC equation (A.5).

        This analysis assumes that the dealer does not anticipate that the informed trader is going

to receive a signal. We can deal with the case that both the trader and dealer anticipate that the

trader will receive a signal by sub-game perfect equilibrium. Upon the arrival of a signal, the

previous solution is still valid. The only difference is that the budget constraint of the informed

trader is changed to qI S1  d I C1  qI 0 S1  d I 0C1 , where qI 0 and d I 0 are the informed trader’s

demand of the stock and option, respectively at time 0. In this setting we still assume that at time

0 there are no noise trader shocks in the stock and option markets. Given the optimal trading

strategy and the price of the stock and the option contingent upon the signal, we can derive the

expected utility of the trader at time 0. The FOC with respect to qI 0 and d I 0 are always zero, so

the optimal qI 0 and d I 0 are zero if we assume that shorting is not permitted and initial wealth is

zero. This is intuitive because the trader knows that he is going to receive an informative signal,

so he prefers to wait until the signal is released to trade. Hence, even if the trader and dealer

anticipate the arrival of the signal, the results will be the same as the equilibrium discussed,

except equilibrium demand will change because the budget constraint of the informed trader is

changed to qI S1  d I C1  0 compared to the previous budget constraint of qI S1  d I C1  12 S1 .



Option-Stock Cross-Predictability

        Our empirical results show that the change in the call option volatility over the previous

month is positively correlated with stock returns over the next month. In the context of the

model, this translates to an increase in the call option’s price at date 1 being positively correlated

                                                                                                       50
with the return of the stock from date 1 to date 2. Call option prices positively predict future

stock returns if cov( F  S1 , C1 )  0 . We also find that increases in stock prices over the previous

month are positively correlated with option volatilities over the next month. We can interpret this

result in the model by examining the sign of cov(C2  C1 , S1 ) .

         The sign of cov( F  S1 , C1 ) is equal to the sign of

                           cov( F , S1 )  var( S1 )  E  ( F  E ( F )  S1  E ( S1 ))( S1  E ( S1 )) .   (A.10)

We can compute this expectation numerically. Also, given , we can compute (z,v) such that the

inner term of the expectation is equal to zero by solving for S1 ( , z , v)  E ( S1 ) .

         The sign of cov(C2  C1 , S1 ) turns out to be given by the same condition, S1 ( , z , v)  E ( S1 ) ,

since

                            cov(C2  C1 , S1 )  E  (C2  E (C2 )  C1  E (C1 ))( S1  E ( S1 )) .          (A.11)

Using the model, we can examine conditions under which cov( F  S1 , C1 )  0 and

cov(C2  C1 , S1 )  0 .




Realized Volatility

         The model also predicts that there will be a negative correlation between realized

volatility and the call option price. That is, if changes in the call option predict future stock

returns, changes in the call option will predict a decrease in realized volatility. Intuitively, the

arrival of information at time 1 shrinks the difference in the stock price between time 1 and time

2 compared to time 0 and time 2 because some uncertainty is resolved and priced by the actions

of informed traders.

         We can compare


                                                                                                                   51
                                         var( F  S1 )  var( F  S0 ),                        (A.12)

where we take S0 as constant. The inequality can be simplified to yield

                        2cov( F , S1 )  var( S1 )  cov( F , S1 )  cov( F  S1 , S1 )  0.   (A.13)

The condition cov( F  S1 , S1 )  0 is the same condition for the predictability of the stock return

from the past call price. Thus, if the stock is predictable by the call option and current stock price

is positively correlated with future cashflow, then volatility of the stock will decrease.

Furthermore, even if the stock is not predictable by the call option, sufficiently high covariance

between the current stock price and the future cashflow will predict a decreasing volatility of the

stock.



Limitations of the model

         Before we present a numerical example, it is worth noting several limitations of the

model. First, in the model call price at time 1 is linear in the stock price. This results from

assuming a binomial tree of the firm’s cashflows F. While analytically tractable, it makes the

first implication of the model,            cov( F  S1 , C1 )  0 identical to stock momentum effect,

cov( F  S1 , S1 )  0 . Thus, the predictability of options does not exist after controlling for past

stock returns in the binomial setting, contrary to the empirical results in Section 4. With richer

cashflow distributions, the call price may not be linear in the stock price, so that the

predictability of the call will exist after controlling for past stock returns. However, it will be

hard to analytically derive the equilibrium prices of calls and stocks with more general

distributions.




                                                                                                    52
        In the model, there is only a single stock and call option. Our empirical work documents

predictability of stock returns from option volatilities, and vice versa, in the cross section.

Extending the model to multiple stocks and their call/put options introduces large complexity in

analyzing the equilibrium prices and joint predictability. The same intuition, however, will go

through when there are multiple stocks. The informed trader receives multiple signals for each

stock and trades multiple stocks and options simultaneously. There will be complex interactions

resulting from the covariance structure of systematic risk from the stocks. However, similar

predictability in our model will apply when the agent receives independent signals of

idiosyncratic cashflows, and we consider idiosyncratic returns and option volatility changes. In

our empirical work, we control for systematic risk using a wide range of factor loadings and risk

characteristics.



Numerical Example

        We take an option with strike K  E ( F ) , which is approximately at the money. We use

the parameters FH  103 , FL  97 , K  100 ,   0.7 ,   1.5 , and  z   v  0.1 . With these

parameters, we can compute

                                           cov( F  S1 , S1 )  0.0352
                                           cov(C2  C1 , S1 )  0.0176

That is, predictability of options to stock returns and stocks to option prices arises jointly. The

stock volatility decreases in period 2 as cov( F , S1 )  cov( F  S1 , S1 )  0.0734 .

        Informed investors trade both stocks and calls and the extent of their trading depends on

the amount of noise trading in stock and option markets. As they trade, both stock and option

prices at time 1 change. Figure A.1 plots the stock and call prices as a function of uninformed


                                                                                                 53
demand shocks given a good signal,   1 . Panel A graphs the stock price in the solid line as a

function of the stock demand shock, z, while we hold the call demand shock at v=0. We plot the

stock price as a function of the call demand shock, v, while holding the stock demand shock at

z=0 in the dashed line. Panel B repeats the same exercises for the call price. In both cases, as the

noise trader presence is larger (higher uninformed demand), prices rise because the informed

investor becomes more aggressive in trading, hiding behind the larger uninformed demand.



                                             Figure A.1 here



       In Figure A.2, we plot a pair of uninformed demand (z,v) such that there is no

predictability between the call price and future stock returns given a good signal,   1 . The same

condition is also responsible for inducing predictability between past stock returns and future call

prices. These are pairs of (z,v) which satisfy the condition in equations (A.10) and (A.11). We

vary the stock demand shock over [1.96 z ,1.96 z ] .



                                             Figure A.2 here



       The pairs of (z,v) such that there is no cross option-stock (and vice versa) predictability

are the downward-sloping line in Figure A.2. Given a call demand shock, an increase in stock

demand induces an increase in the stock price and by no-arbitrage the call price. To offset the

increase in the stock return, the call demand shock has to decrease. Pairs of (z,v) where there is

positive covariation, or where there are positive joint option-stock predictability relations lie to

the upper right hand corner of Figure A.2. Thus, the model predicts that the predictability of


                                                                                                  54
stock returns by option volatilities should be strongest in stocks that experience both large call

and stock volume. This is borne out in the tests performed in Section 4.2.



Extension to a Put Option

       Because this is a binomial model, the option price is linear in the stock price. We can

introduce a put option market similar to the call option market. We now assume there are noise

trader demands in the call market vc ~ N (0, c2 ) and noise trader demands in the put market

v p ~ N (0, p2 ) . These demands can be correlated. The informed trader and market dealer can trade

the stock, call option, or put option, or all three. Denoting uI and uD as the demand for the put of

the informed trader and the market dealer, respectively, and P1 as the put price at time 1 with

strike K, we have

                                                   G ( , z , vc , v p )                    1
                      S1 ( , z , vc , v p )                               FH                              FL ,
                                                 1  G ( , z, vc , v p )          1  G ( , z , vc , v p )

                                                 FH  K
                                       C1               ( S1  FL ),                                               (A.14)
                                                 FH  FL

                                                 K  FL
                                        P1              ( FH  S1 ).
                                                 FH  FL

Empirically, we find that call volatility increases more than put volatility after a change in the

past stock return. Translating this to the model, we can examine

                                 cov(C2  C1  P2  P1 , S1 )  cov  F  S1 , S1  ,                               (A.15)

where the equality is due to put-call parity, C2  P2  ( F  K )   ( K  F )   F  K and we

substitute in the price of the call and the put from equation (A.14). This is the same as the

condition for the predictability of the stock from the past call in equation (A.10) and it holds for

any strike price.


                                                                                                                        55
        The expected return of the call option is positive (the call delta is positive) and the

expected return of the put option is negative (the put delta is negative). In fact, in this economy

both calls and puts are simple linear securities of the stock. Suppose positive news is released at

time 1. Informed traders cause the price of the stock to adjust upward, the price of calls to

increase, and the price of puts to decrease. There is still adjustment of the stock price and options

from time 1 to time 2, but the stock has already moved toward FH . This partial adjustment at

time 1 causes the next period’s adjustment on the put option to be smaller, as the put option delta

becomes less negative. A similar intuition works when the news is negative.

        Note also that (C2  C1 )  ( P2  P1 ) , or equivalently the difference between implied

volatilities between calls and puts, is a trading strategy that is long calls and short puts. By put-

call parity, this strategy is exposed to underlying risk of the stock between time 1 and time 2. It is

no surprise in our model that the condition for cov(C2  C1  P2  P1 , S1 )  0 should be equal to

cov  F  S1 , S1  , as the conditions under which the long call-short put position is profitable are the

same conditions under which the informed trader’s signal that a high F is more likely when S1 is

high.

        In this model, the put, call, and stock are linked by no arbitrage, and we cannot observe

movements in put and call prices outside the no-arbitrage boundaries. The put and call options

are also linear securities. In reality, put and call movements are non-linear and movements

outside arbitrage bounds occur. Extensions to stochastic volatility, along the lines of Back

(1993), and American options could be done to accommodate these facts.




                                                                                                       56
                       Appendix B: Estimating Betas from Option Information

          We use the results in Bakshi, Kapadia, and Madan (2003) and Duan and Wei (2009) to

obtain an estimate of a stock’s market beta from the cross section of options. Bakshi, Kapadia,

and Madan (2003) introduce a procedure to extract the volatility, skewness, and kurtosis of the

risk-neutral return density from a group of out-of-the-money call and put options. Duan and Wei

(2009) use the results in Bakshi, Kapadia, and Madan (2003) and define the risk-neutral market

beta as a function of the risk-neutral skewness of individual stocks and the risk-neutral skewness

of the market.

          Let the τ-period continuously compounded return on the underlying asset i, Si, be

Ri ,t ( )  ln[ Si (t   ) / S i ( )] . Let EtQ represent the expectation operator under the risk-neutral

measure. The time-t price of a quadratic, cubic, and quartic payoff received at time t+τ can be

written as Vi ,t ( )  EtQ [e  r Ri ,t ( ) 2 ] , Wi ,t ( )  EtQ [e  r Ri ,t ( )3 ] , and X i ,t ( )  EtQ [e  r Ri ,t ( ) 4 ] ,

respectively, where r is the constant risk-free rate.

          Bakshi, Kapadia, and Madan (2003) show that the τ-period risk-neutral variance and

skewness are

                                                          VariQ,t ( )  e r Vi ,t ( )  i ,t ( ) 2                                                 (B.1)

                                                           e r Wi ,t ( )  3i ,t ( )e r Vi ,t ( )  2 i ,t ( )3
                                        SkewiQ,t ( ) 
                                                                          e                                    
                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                        (B.2)
                                                                                    Vi ,t ( )  i ,t ( ) 2
                                                                                                                 3/ 2




The expressions Vi ,t ( ) , Wi ,t ( ) , and X i ,t ( ) are given by:

                                                                                            Si ,t
                                    2(1  ln( K i / S i ,t ))                                        2(1  ln( K i / S i ,t ))
             Vi ,t ( )     
                            Si ,t
                                              K i2
                                                                C i ,t ( ; K i )dK i        
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                               K i2
                                                                                                                                 Pi ,t ( ; K i )dK i   (B.3)




                                                                                                                                                           57
                                            
                                                   6 ln( K i / S i ,t )  3[ln( K i / S i ,t )] 2
                     Wi ,t ( )            
                                           Si ,t                        K i2
                                                                                                    C i ,t ( ; K i )dK i
                                                                                                                             (B.4)
                                                   6 ln( K i / S i ,t )  3[ln( K i / S i ,t )] 2
                                          Si ,t

                                          
                                           0                           K i2
                                                                                                    Pi ,t ( ; K i )dK i


                                   
                                           12[ln( K i / S i ,t )] 2  4[ln( K i / S i ,t )]3
                  X i ,t ( )     
                                  Si ,t                                K i2
                                                                                                     C i ,t ( ; K i )dK i
                                                                                                                             (B.5)
                                          12[ln( K i / S i ,t )] 2  4[ln( K i / S i ,t )]3
                                  Si ,t

                                  
                                   0                                  K i2
                                                                                                     Pi ,t ( ; K i )dK i


                                                                    e r Vi ,t ( ) e r Wi ,t ( ) e r X i ,t ( )
                              i ,t ( )  e r  1                                                                       (B.6)
                                                                          2               6              24

where C i ,t ( ; K i ) and Pi ,t ( ; K i ) are the time-t prices of European call and put options written on

the underlying stock Si,t with a strike price Ki and expiration date of τ. We follow Dennis and

Mayhew (2002) and use the trapezoidal approximation to compute the integrals in equations

(B.1) and (B.2) for out-of-the-money call and put options across different strike prices and use

the Volatility Surface data on standardized options with the three-month T-bill return for the

risk-free rate.

        Duan and Wei (2009) show that the risk-neutral skewness of an individual stock,

SkewiQ,t ( ) , is related to the risk-neutral skewness of the market, SkewmQ,t ( ) , through the relation

                                                         SkewiQ,t ( )   i3/2 ( ) SkewmQ,t ,                              (B.7)

where SkewiQ,t ( ) and SkewmQ,t ( ) are estimated using equation (B.2). In our empirical analyses,

we use Volatility Surface standardized call and put options with =30 days to maturity to

estimate the stock beta from equation (B.7). We use Volatility Surface data on the S&P500

index to compute the risk-neutral market skewness.




                                                                                                                                58
                                         REFERENCES

Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects,

Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.



Amin, Kaushik I., Joshua Coval, and H. Nejat Seyhun, 2004, Index option prices and stock

market momentum, Journal of Business 77, 835-873.



Amin, Kaushik I., and Charles M. C. Lee, 1997, Option trading, price discovery, and earnings

news dissemination, Contemporary Accounting Research 14, 153-192.



Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of

volatility and expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259-299.



Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2009, High idiosyncratic

volatility and low returns: International and further U.S. evidence, Journal of Financial

Economics 91, 1-23.



Anthony, Joseph H., 1988, The interrelation of stock and options market trading-volume data,

Journal of Finance 43, 949-964.



Back, Kerry, 1993, Asymmetric information and options, Review of Financial Studies 6, 435-

472.




                                                                                               59
Bali, Turan G., 2000, Testing the empirical performance of stochastic volatility models of the

short term interest rate, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 191-215.



Bali, Turan G., and Armen Hovakimian, 2009, Volatility spreads and expected stock returns,

Management Science 55, 1797-1812.



Bakshi, Gurdip, Nikunj Kapadia, and Dilip Madan, 2003, Stock return characteristics, skew

laws, and the differential pricing of individual equity options, Review of Financial Studies 16,

101-143.



Barberis, Nicholas C., and Ming Huang, 2001, Mental accounting, loss aversion, and individual

stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 1247-1292.



Ben-Horim, Moshe, and Haim Levy, 1980, Total risk and nondiversifiable risk: A pedagogic

note, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 2, 289-297.



Bhattacharya, Mihir, 1987, Price changes of related securities: The case of call options and

stocks, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 1-15.



Bollen, Nicolas P. B., and Robert Whaley, 2004, Does net buying pressure affect the shape of

implied volatility functions? Journal of Finance 59, 711-754.




                                                                                                   60
Broadie, Mark, Mikhail Chernov, and Michael Johannes, 2009, Understanding index option

returns, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4493-4529.



Buraschi, Andrea, and Alexei Jiltsov, 2006, Model uncertainty and option markets with

heterogeneous beliefs, Journal of Finance 61, 2841-2897.



Cao, Charles, Zhiwu Chen, and John M. Griffin, 2005, The informational content of option

volume prior to takeovers, Journal of Business 78, 1073-1109.



Cao, Henry H., 1999, The effect of derivative assets on information acquisition and price

behavior in a rational expectations equilibrium, Review of Financial Studies 12, 131-163.



Cao, Jie, and Bing Han, 2013, Cross-section of option returns and idiosyncratic stock volatility,

Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.



Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57-

82.



Chakravarty, Sugato, Huseyin Gulen, and Stewart Mahew, 2004, Informed trading in stock and

option markets, Journal of Finance 59, 1235-1257.



Chan, Kalok, Y. Peter Chung, and Wai Ming Fong, 2002, The informational role of stock and

option volume, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1049-1075.




                                                                                                    61
Chan, Kalok, Y. Peter Chung, and Herb Johnson, 1993, Why option prices lag stock prices: A

trading based explanation, Journal of Finance 48, 1957-1967.



Chaudhri, Ranadeb, and Mark Schroder, 2009, Monotonicity of the stochastic discount factor

and expected option returns, Working paper, Michigan State University.



Chernov, Mikhail, 2007, On the role of risk premia in volatility forecasting, Journal of Business

and Economic Statistics 25, 411-426.



Chowdhry, Bhagwan, and Vikram Nanda, 1991, Multimarket Trading and Market Liquidity,

Review of Financial Studies 4, 483-511.



Christensen, Bent, and Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala, 1998, The relation between implied and

realized volatility, Journal of Financial Economics, 50, 125-150.



Christoffersen, Peter F., Kris Jacobs, and Gregory Vainberg, 2008, Forward-looking betas,

Working paper, McGill University.



Conrad, Jennifer, Robert F. Dittmar, and Eric Ghysels, 2012, Ex ante skewness and expected

stock returns, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.




                                                                                                62
Cremers, Martijn, and David Weinbaum, 2010, Deviations from put-call parity and stock return

predictability, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 335-367.



Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual

fund performance with characteristic based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058.



Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional

variation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1-33.



Dennis, Patrick, and Stewart Mayhew, 2002, Risk-neutral skewness: Evidence from stock

options, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 471-493.



Detemple, Jerome, and Larry Selden, 1991, A general equilibrium analysis of option and stock

market interactions, International Economic Review 32, 279-303.



Diether, Karl, Chris Malloy, and Anna Scherbina, 2002, Differences of opinion and the cross-

section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.



Dimson, Elroy, 1979, Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading, Journal

of Financial Economics 7, 197-226.



Duan, Jin-Chuan, and Jason Wei, 2009, Systematic risk and the price Structure of individual

equity options, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1981-2006.




                                                                                               63
Easley, David, Soren Hvidkjaer, and Maureen O’Hara, 2002, Is information risk a determinant of

asset returns? Journal of Finance 57, 2185-2221.



Easley, David, Maureen O’Hara, and P.S. Srinivas, 1998. Option volume and stock prices:

Evidence on where informed traders trade, Journal of Finance 53, 431-465.



Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, Cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal

of Finance 47, 427-465.



Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks

and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.



Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk and return: Some empirical tests, Journal

of Political Economy 81, 607-636.



Figlewski, Stephen, 1989, Options arbitrage in imperfect markets, Journal of Finance 44, 1289-

1311.



Fleming, Jeff, Barbara Ostdiek, and Robert Whaley, 1996, Trading costs and the relative rates of

price discovery in stock, futures, and option markets, Journal of Futures Markets 16, 353-387.




                                                                                                 64
Garlenau, Nicolae, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Allen M. Poteshman, 2009, Demand-based option

pricing, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4259-4299.



Goyal, Amit, and Alessio Saretto, 2009, Cross-section of option returns and volatility, Journal of

Financial Economics 94, 310-326.



Harvey, Campbell R., and Akhtar Siddique, 2000, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests,

Journal of Finance 55, 1263-1295.



Harvey, Campbell R., and Robert E. Whaley, 1992, Market volatility prediction and the

efficiency of the S&P 100 index option market, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 43-73.



Hirshleifer, David, 2001, Investor psychology and asset pricing, Journal of Finance 56, 1533-

1597.



Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum

trading, and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.



Hong, Harrison, Terence Lim, Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly: Size, analyst

coverage, and the profitability of momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 55, 265-295.



Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns, Journal of

Finance 45, 881-898.




                                                                                                65
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling

losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.



Johnson, Travis L., and Eric C. So, 2012, The option to stock volume ratio and future returns,

Journal of Financial Economics 106, 262-286.



Lehmann, Bruce, 1990, Fads, martingales, and market efficiency, Quarterly Journal of

Economics 105, 1-28.



Lo, Andrew, and Jiang Wang, 1995, Implementing option pricing models when asset returns are

predictable, Journal of Finance 50, 87-129.



Longstaff, Francis, 1995, Option pricing and the martingale restriction, Review of Financial

Studies 8, 1091-1124.



Manaster, Steven, and Richard J. Rendleman, 1982, Option prices as predictors of equilibrium

stock prices, Journal of Finance 37, 1043-1057.



Murayev, Dmitriy, Neil D. Pearson, and John Paul Broussard, 2013, Is there price discovery in

equity options? Journal of Financial Economics 107, 259-283.




                                                                                                 66
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite,

heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.



Ofek, Eli, Matthew Richardson, and Robert Whitelaw, 2004, Limited arbitrage and short sale

constraints: Evidence from the option markets, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 305-342.



Pan, Jun, and Allen M. Poteshman, 2006, The information in option volume for future stock

prices, Review of Financial Studies 19, 871-908.



Roll, Richard, Eduardo Schwartz, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2009, Options trading activity

and firm valuation, Journal of Financial Economics 94, 345-360.



Sargent, Thomas J., 1994, Bounded rationality, Oxford University Press.



Scholes, Myron, and Joseph Williams, 1977, Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data,

Journal of Financial Economics 6, 309-327.



Stephan, Jens A., and Robert E. Whaley, 1990, Intraday price change and trading volume

relations in the stock and stock option markets, Journal of Finance 45, 191-220.



Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2009, Information immobility and the home bias

puzzle, Journal of Finance 64, 1187-1215.




                                                                                             67
Vanden, Joel M., 2008, Information quality and options, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2635-

2676.



Xing, Yuhang, Xiaoyan Zhang, and Rui Zhao, 2010, What does individual option volatility

smirks tell us about future equity returns? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45,

641-662.




                                                                                                 68
                                             Table I
                          Descriptive Statistics of Implied Volatilities
Panel A presents the average number of stocks per month for each year from 1996 to 2011. Average and
standard deviation of the monthly call and put implied volatilities (CVOL, PVOL) are reported for each year
from 1996 to 2011. The last row presents the overall averages. The annualized implied volatilities are
obtained from the Volatility Surface at OptionMetrics and cover the period from January 1996 to December
2011. Panel B reports the average firm-level cross-correlations of the levels and changes in implied
volatilities, and the levels and changes in realized volatility.



                Panel A: Summary Statistics for the Call and Put Implied Volatilities

                                                  CVOL                                PVOL
     Date           # of stocks         Average            Stdev            Average             Stdev
     1996              1261              42.55             20.60              43.35             20.54
     1997              1507              45.09             20.64              45.68             20.41
     1998              1689              51.21             22.23              51.53             21.51
     1999              1755              57.10             24.23              57.82             23.96
     2000              1624              71.57             31.89              72.71             31.79
     2001              1589              62.64             28.63              64.63             29.84
     2002              1654              55.22             24.48              56.56             26.25
     2003              1616              43.54             19.08              44.05             19.07
     2004              1729              39.08             18.13              39.86             18.76
     2005              1873              37.12             18.61              38.11             18.79
     2006              1974              37.29             17.45              38.09             17.83
     2007              2114              39.70             18.54              40.37             18.86
     2008              2104              60.24             24.48              62.73             26.12
     2009              2089              60.55             26.12              60.26             25.75
     2010              2175              46.56             22.83              45.96             23.49
     2011              2312              48.28             24.88              48.96             26.54
   Average             1816              49.86             22.68              50.67             23.10




                                                                                                        69
                   Table I (continued)


          Panel B: Average Firm-Level Correlations

        CVOL    PVOL      ΔCVOL     ΔPVOL      RVOL     ΔRVOL
CVOL       1
PVOL     0.92      1
ΔCVOL    0.27    0.15         1
ΔPVOL    0.16    0.27       0.58       1
RVOL     0.66    0.66       0.02      0.03        1
ΔRVOL    0.02    0.03       0.08      0.10       0.47     1




                                                                70
                                              Table II
                    Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL
In Panel A, Portfolio 1 (Low ΔCVOL) contains stocks with the lowest monthly changes in call implied volatilities in
the previous month and Portfolio 10 (High ΔCVOL) includes stocks with the highest monthly changes in call
implied volatilities in the previous month. We equal weight stocks in each decile portfolio and rebalance monthly.
For each decile of ΔCVOL, the columns report the average raw returns, the CAPM and FF3 alphas, and the average
returns in excess of the size and book-to-market matched benchmark portfolios (characteristic-control) following
Daniel and Titman (1997). The row “10-1 Diff.” reports the difference in average raw and risk-adjusted returns
between the High ΔCVOL and Low ΔCVOL deciles. Newey-West t-statistics are given in parentheses. Panel B
reports the corresponding results from the decile portfolios of ΔPVOL. Panel C presents the corresponding results
from the decile portfolios of ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL.

                           Panel A: Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔCVOL

                                                  CAPM               FF3        Characteristic-
                                  Return          Alpha             Alpha          Control
             Low ΔCVOL             0.29            –0.59            –0.74            –0.48
             2                     0.50            –0.27            –0.43            –0.31
             3                     0.65            –0.07            –0.23            –0.24
             4                     0.79            0.09             –0.05            –0.10
             5                     0.92            0.23              0.06             0.01
             6                     1.01            0.30              0.13             0.07
             7                     1.05            0.33              0.15             0.14
             8                     1.18            0.44              0.25             0.26
             9                     1.19            0.37              0.20             0.27
             High ΔCVOL            1.38            0.45              0.26             0.38
             10-1 Diff.            1.09             1.04             1.00            0.86
             t-stat.              (3.45)           (3.27)           (3.21)          (2.87)


                           Panel B: Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔPVOL

                                                  CAPM               FF3        Characteristic-
                                  Return          Alpha             Alpha          Control
             Low ΔPVOL             0.94            0.06             –0.08             0.08
             2                     0.91            0.14             –0.01             0.03
             3                     0.88            0.14             –0.03            –0.04
             4                     0.84            0.13             –0.02            –0.08
             5                     0.89            0.20              0.02            –0.01
             6                     1.15            0.44              0.30             0.20
             7                     0.98            0.25              0.09             0.07
             8                     0.89            0.14             –0.05             0.01
             9                     0.98            0.17             –0.02             0.08
             High ΔPVOL            0.52            -0.40            –0.58            –0.34
             10-1 Diff.           –0.42            –0.46            –0.50            –0.42
             t-stat.             (–2.03)          (–2.14)          (–2.46)          (–2.61)
                                                                                                                71
                          Table II (continued)

        Panel C: Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL


                                       CAPM           FF3        Characteristic-
                          Return       Alpha         Alpha          Control
Low ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL            1.81          0.94         0.72           0.71
2                          1.17          0.37         0.19           0.20
3                          1.06          0.31         0.14           0.15
4                          0.93          0.19         0.05           0.00
5                          0.94          0.23         0.10           0.08
6                          0.93          0.21         0.08           0.10
7                          0.82          0.09        –0.05           –0.03
8                          0.63         –0.13        –0.31           –0.21
9                          0.58         –0.22        –0.38           –0.26
High ΔPVOL–ΔCVOL           0.13         –0.72        –0.93           –0.73
10-1 Diff.                –1.68         –1.66         –1.65           –1.44
t-stat.                  (–6.77)       (–6.67)       (–6.49)         (–5.31)




                                                                                   72
                                                                        Table III
                                             Bivariate Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL
In Panel A, decile portfolios are first formed by sorting the optionable stocks based on ΔPVOL. Then, within each ΔPVOL decile, stocks are sorted into decile portfolios
ranked based on the monthly changes in call implied volatilities (ΔCVOL) so that ΔCVOL1 (ΔCVOL10) contains stocks with the lowest (highest) ΔCVOL. The column
labeled “ΔCVOL10 – ΔCVOL1” shows the average raw return difference between High ΔCVOL (ΔCVOL10) and Low ΔCVOL (ΔCVOL1) portfolios within each
ΔPVOL decile. The last column reports the corresponding Newey-West t-statistics in parentheses. Panel B performs a similar dependent sort procedure but first
sequentially sorts on ΔCVOL and then on ΔPVOL. The column labeled “ΔPVOL10 – ΔPVOL1” shows the average raw return difference between ΔPVOL5 and ΔPVOL1
portfolios within each ΔCVOL decile. In Panels A and B, “Return Diff.” reports the average raw return difference between ΔCVOL10 (ΔPVOL10) and ΔCVOL1
(ΔPVOL1) after controlling for ΔPVOL (ΔCVOL). “FF3 Alpha Diff.” reports the 10-1 differences in the FF3 alphas. The monthly change in option trading volume and
the monthly change in open interest are reported.


                                        Panel A: Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔCVOL Controlling for ΔPVOL


               ΔCVOL1      ΔCVOL2      ΔCVOL3      ΔCVOL4       ΔCVOL5      ΔCVOL6      ΔCVOL7      ΔCVOL8      ΔCVOL9        ΔCVOL10       ΔCVOL10–ΔCVOL1        t-stat.
  ΔPVOL1         0.23         0.85        0.12        0.93        0.92        0.74        1.21         1.68        1.03          1.76             1.54            (2.84)
  ΔPVOL2         0.62         0.21        0.83        0.45        0.84        0.69        1.08         0.89        1.44          2.09             1.47            (3.04)
  ΔPVOL3         0.28         0.69        0.57        0.78        0.86        0.51        0.86         1.35        1.07          1.80             1.52            (3.87)
  ΔPVOL4         0.60         0.18        0.38        1.12        0.65        0.78        0.85         0.71        1.29          1.96             1.36            (3.70)
  ΔPVOL5         0.11         0.46        0.60        0.89        0.93        1.08        1.00         1.07        1.05          1.75             1.63            (4.27)
  ΔPVOL6         0.79         1.28        0.71        0.96        1.22        1.25        1.17         1.05        1.48          1.58             0.79            (1.98)
  ΔPVOL7         0.10         0.59        0.50        1.04        1.12        1.11        1.19         1.17        1.22          1.81             1.71            (3.72)
  ΔPVOL8         0.53         0.49        1.07        0.89        0.66        0.74        1.03         0.85        1.30          1.29             0.76            (1.96)
  ΔPVOL9         0.21         0.39        0.39        1.10        1.02        1.09        1.12         1.00        1.71          1.81             1.60            (3.62)
 ΔPVOL10         –0.76        0.14       –0.18        0.72        1.21        0.94        0.97         0.48        1.22          0.62             1.38            (2.44)

 ΔVolumeC         7.9         –2.8       –27.0       –70.6       –63.0        –92.3       –72.6       –28.1        5.7           212.3
    ΔOI   C
                 38.5         30.9        22.2        22.4        24.1        23.8        48.8         66.4       107.5          218.6

                                                                                                                             Return Diff.         1.38            (5.85)
                                                                                                                          FF3 Alpha Diff.         1.36            (5.22)



                                                                                                                                                                      73
                                                          Table III (continued)

                              Panel B: Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔPVOL Controlling for ΔCVOL


            ΔPVOL1   ΔPVOL2   ΔPVOL3   ΔPVOL4     ΔPVOL5      ΔPVOL6    ΔPVOL7    ΔPVOL8   ΔPVOL9        ΔPVOL10      ΔPVOL10–ΔPVOL1   t-stat.
ΔCVOL1       0.87     0.72     -0.11     0.58       1.04        0.20     0.33      -0.18     -0.11         -0.41           –1.28       (–3.61)
ΔCVOL2       1.07     0.48     0.93      0.27       0.23        0.45     0.89      0.55      0.26          -0.10           –1.17       (–2.98)
ΔCVOL3       1.44     0.80     0.70      0.88       0.27        0.58     0.31      0.50      0.62          0.34            –1.10       (–2.53)
ΔCVOL4       0.81     1.08     0.74      0.67       1.05        0.71     0.84      0.97      0.49          0.54            –0.27       (–0.78)
ΔCVOL5       1.91     1.08     0.80      0.85       1.03        0.86     0.91      0.88      0.79          0.10            –1.81       (–4.47)
ΔCVOL6       0.99     0.73     0.94      0.80       1.21        1.24     0.82      1.51      0.92          0.92            –0.06       (–0.19)
ΔCVOL7       1.41     0.95     1.25      1.45       0.90        1.13     1.06      1.09      0.70          0.60            –0.81       (–2.21)
ΔCVOL8       1.73     1.87     1.32      1.31       0.76        0.85     0.94      1.27      1.31          0.49            –1.23       (–3.23)
ΔCVOL9       1.57     1.30     1.44      0.91       1.43        1.45     1.13      1.01      1.07          0.60            –0.97       (–2.27)
ΔCVOL10      2.13     2.24     1.65      1.53       1.56        1.42     1.37      1.24      0.19          0.44            –1.69       (–2.78)

ΔVolumeP     –5.0     –18.3    –33.2     –48.7     –58.6       –49.1     –33.5     –3.1      48.5          153.8
  ΔOI   P
              0.2     –2.3      2.0       5.3       4.6         18.0     28.0      44.5      64.5          112.2

                                                                                                       Return Diff.        –1.04       (–6.40)
                                                                                                    FF3 Alpha Diff.        –1.06       (–6.38)




                                                                                                                                           74
                                                           Table IV
                    Descriptive Statistics for Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL

In Panel A, decile portfolios are first formed by sorting the optionable stocks based on ΔPVOL. Then, within each ΔPVOL decile, stocks are sorted
into decile portfolios ranked based on the monthly changes in call implied volatilities (ΔCVOL) so that ΔCVOL1 (ΔCVOL10) contains stocks with
the lowest (highest) ΔCVOL. Panel A presents average portfolio characteristics for each ΔCVOL decile averaged across the 10 ΔPVOL deciles to
produce decile portfolios with dispersion in ΔCVOL, but which contain all ΔPVOL values. This procedure creates a set of ΔCVOL portfolios with
similar levels of ΔPVOL, and thus these ΔCVOL portfolios control for differences in ΔPVOL. For each ΔCVOL decile (controlling for ΔPVOL),
Panel A reports the average across the months in the sample of the median values within each month of various characteristics for the optionable
stocks — one-month ahead return (Return), the 3-factor Fama-French alpha (FF3 alpha), the market beta (BETA), the log market capitalization
(SIZE), the book-to-market ratio (BM), the cumulative return over the 12 months prior to portfolio formation (MOM), the return in the portfolio
formation month (REV), a measure of illiquidity (ILLIQ), the realized skewness (SKEW), the co-skewness (COSKEW), and the risk-neutral
skewness (QSKEW). SKEW and COSKEW are computed using daily returns over the past one year. QSKEW is defined as the difference between
OTM put implied volatility and the average of ATM call and put implied volatilities. Panel B reports the corresponding results for the decile
portfolios of ΔPVOL controlling for ΔCVOL.



                             Panel A: Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔCVOL Controlling for ΔPVOL

                         Return     FF3 alpha    BETA       SIZE        BM       MOM         REV       ILLIQ     SKEW      COSKEW       QSKEW
 Low ΔCVOL                0.27        –0.53       1.17       6.45      0.50      –1.18       3.87      0.110      0.29       –1.55        6.28
 2                        0.53        –0.17       1.12       7.10      0.49      5.32       2.48       0.055      0.24       –0.94        5.36
 3                        0.50        –0.17       1.11       7.45      0.48      8.77       1.83       0.037      0.22       –0.63        4.86
 4                        0.89         0.24       1.08       7.64      0.47      10.59      1.24       0.030      0.21       –0.55        4.60
 5                        0.94         0.33       1.07       7.72      0.47      12.01      0.80       0.028      0.21       –0.54        4.38
 6                        0.89         0.26       1.08       7.73      0.47      12.18      0.39       0.027      0.21       –0.45        4.24
 7                        1.05        0.40        1.11       7.63      0.48      11.57      –0.20      0.032      0.22       –0.34        4.13
 8                        1.03        0.34        1.12       7.44      0.48      10.84      –0.98      0.041      0.21       –0.62        4.03
 9                        1.28        0.53        1.17       7.10      0.49      9.33       –1.91      0.060      0.23       –1.07        3.67
 High ΔCVOL               1.65         0.83       1.23       6.45      0.50      3.51       –4.06      0.126      0.25       –1.73        2.25




                                                                                                                                              75
                                          Table IV (continued)


                 Panel B: Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔPVOL Controlling for ΔCVOL

             Return    FF3 alpha   BETA     SIZE     BM       MOM      REV      ILLIQ    SKEW    COSKEW   QSKEW
Low ΔPVOL    1.39        0.60      1.29     6.48     0.47     –0.89    5.67      0.10     0.31    –1.50    6.28
2            1.13        0.41      1.15     7.04     0.48     4.69     3.90      0.06     0.25    –0.86    5.35
3            0.97        0.31      1.07     7.40     0.49     8.04     2.89      0.04     0.22    –0.64    4.93
4            0.93        0.29      1.02     7.62     0.49     9.07     1.93      0.03     0.21    –0.67    4.54
5            0.95        0.32      1.00     7.71     0.49     9.93     1.10      0.03     0.20    –0.48    4.37
6            0.89        0.25      1.01     7.72     0.49     10.70    0.30      0.03     0.20    –0.55    4.23
7            0.86        0.19      1.04     7.63     0.49     11.28    –0.59     0.03     0.21    –0.64    4.03
8            0.88        0.18      1.11     7.46     0.48     11.97    –1.71     0.04     0.21    –0.66    3.94
9            0.62       –0.10      1.18     7.15     0.49     10.89    –3.32     0.06     0.23    –0.67    3.63
High ΔPVOL   0.35       –0.45      1.38     6.50     0.47     6.91     –6.52     0.12     0.25    –1.59    2.62




                                                                                                              76
                                               Table V
                                        Long-Term Predictability
This table presents the bivariate portfolios of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL based on the dependent sorts. We hold these
portfolios for 1 to 6 months and rebalance them monthly. In the first panel, decile portfolios are first formed by
sorting the optionable stocks based on ΔPVOL. Then, within each ΔPVOL decile, stocks are sorted into decile
portfolios ranked based on the monthly changes in call implied volatilities (ΔCVOL) so that ΔCVOL1 (ΔCVOL10)
contains stocks with the lowest (highest) ΔCVOL. The second panel performs a similar dependent sort procedure
but first sequentially sorts on ΔCVOL and then on ΔPVOL. The first panel reports the 1-month to 6-month ahead
average raw and risk-adjusted return differences between High ΔCVOL and Low ΔCVOL portfolios after
controlling for ΔPVOL. The second panel reports the 1-month to 6-month ahead average raw and risk-adjusted
return differences between High ΔPVOL and Low ΔPVOL portfolios after controlling for ΔCVOL. Newey-West t-
statistics are reported in parentheses.


                           1-month       2-month       3-month       4-month       5-month       6-month

 Ranking on ΔCVOL Controlling for ΔPVOL

 Average Return Diff.        1.38          0.63          0.47          0.34          0.29          0.25
                            (5.85)        (5.20)        (4.32)        (4.39)        (4.17)        (3.38)
 FF3 Alpha Diff.             1.36          0.59          0.44          0.32          0.27          0.23
                            (5.22)        (4.60)        (3.72)        (3.50)        (3.37)        (2.88)

 Ranking on ΔPVOL Controlling for ΔCVOL

 Average Return Diff.       –1.04         –0.47         –0.27          –0.16         –0.11         –0.07
                           (–6.40)       (–6.60)       (–3.82)        (–2.64)       (–2.12)       (–1.54)
 FF3 Alpha Diff.            –1.06         –0.48         –0.27          –0.15         –0.10         –0.07
                           (–6.38)       (–6.47)       (–3.50)        (–2.31)       (–1.88)       (–1.55)




                                                                                                               77
                                         Table VI
          Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regressions with Implied Volatility Innovations
Panel A presents the firm-level cross-sectional regressions of equity returns on the monthly changes in call and put implied
volatilities (ΔCVOL, ΔPVOL) after controlling for market beta (BETA), log market capitalization (SIZE), log book-to-
market ratio (BM), momentum (MOM), illiquidity (ILLIQ), short-term reversal (REV), realized stock return volatility
(RVOL), the log call-put ratio of option trading volume (C/P Volume), the log ratio of call-put open interest (C/P OI), the
realized-implied volatility spread (RVOL–IVOL), and the risk-neutral measure of skewness (QSKEW). PastRetDecile is a
variable that takes values from 1 to 10 for stocks in decile portfolios ranked on past one-month return. Panel B reports the
firm-level Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions in equation (4). The one-month ahead returns of individual stocks are
regressed on the asymmetric call and put implied volatility shocks; ΔCVOLHighCallVol, ΔCVOLLowCallVol, ΔPVOLHighPutVol, and
ΔPVOLLowCallVol are defined below equation (4). The results are presented for at-the-money 30-day options. The average
slope coefficients and their Newey-West t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The last row reports the average R2 values
and their Newey-West t-statistics in parentheses.

                  Panel A: Predicting Equity Returns by ΔCVOL, ΔPVOL and Other Predictors

                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
ΔCVOL                  1.5729                   3.7754        3.8148      0.2208                    2.4701      3.6963
                       (3.13)                    (7.09)       (7.09)      (0.29)                    (3.15)      (6.96)
ΔPVOL                              –1.8513      –3.9228      –4.0506                  –3.0181      –3.7990     –5.1524
                                   (–3.78)      (–7.13)      (–7.70)                  (–4.33)      (–6.98)     (–6.71)
ΔCVOL                                                                    0.3086                    0.2822
PastRetDecile                                                             (2.63)                    (2.37)
ΔPVOL                                                                                 0.3075                   0.3321
PastRetDecile                                                                          (2.23)                   (2.37)
BETA                   –0.0018     –0.0051      –0.0060       0.0086     –0.0953      –0.1029      –0.1033     –0.1004
                       (–0.03)     (–0.09)      (–0.10)       (0.10)     (–0.61)      (–0.65)      (–0.66)     (–0.64)
SIZE                   –0.1085     –0.0956      –0.1038      –0.0614     –0.1017      –0.0895      –0.0967     –0.0968
                       (–1.42)     (–1.26)      (–1.36)      (–0.65)     (–1.36)      (–1.21)      (–1.30)     (–1.30)
BM                      0.3066      0.3100       0.3056       0.3472      0.3034       0.3078       0.3020      0.3032
                        (2.67)      (2.69)       (2.69)       (2.48)      (2.71)       (2.74)       (2.72)      (2.73)
MOM                    –0.0006     –0.0006      –0.0007      –0.0012     –0.0010      –0.0009      –0.0010     –0.0010
                       (–0.17)     (–0.15)      (–0.18)      (–0.31)     (–0.24)      (–0.23)      (–0.25)     (–0.26)
ILLIQ                  0.1520      0.1595        0.1496       0.1326     0.1561        0.1600       0.1550      0.1509
                        (1.33)      (1.40)       (1.33)       (1.21)      (1.44)       (1.47)       (1.44)      (1.40)
REV                    –0.0192     –0.0236      –0.0203      –0.0182     –0.0193      –0.0232      –0.0203     –0.0201
                       (–2.40)     (–2.82)      (–2.50)      (–2.16)     (–2.43)      (–2.82)      (–2.52)     (–2.51)
RVOL                   -0.8069     –0.6731      –0.7221                  –0.6201      –0.5033      –0.5388     –0.5536
                       (–1.31)     (–1.09)      (–1.17)                  (–1.08)      (–0.89)      (–0.95)     (–0.98)
C/P Volume             -0.0005     –0.0017      –0.0022       0.0051     –0.0043      –0.0059      –0.0059     –0.0058
                       (–0.01)     (–0.04)      (–0.05)       (0.12)     (–0.10)      (–0.14)      (–0.14)     (–0.14)
C/P OI                 0.0653      0.0631        0.0641       0.0639      0.0659       0.0651       0.0642      0.0659
                        (1.19)      (1.14)       (1.17)       (1.15)      (1.19)       (1.18)       (1.17)      (1.20)
RVOL–IVOL                                                    –0.6880
                                                             (–2.39)
QSKEW                  –2.7798     –3.1336      –2.2963      –2.1563     –2.5636      (–2.9302     –2.0866     –2.1124
                       (–4.61)     (–5.32)      (–4.08)      (–3.71)     (–4.37)       (–5.10)     (–3.80)     (–3.80)
R2                      9.00%       9.00%        9.15%        8.32%       9.31%         9.31%       9.45%       9.46%
                       (10.93)     (10.95)      (11.09)      (11.63)     (10.92)       (10.93)     (11.07)     (11.07)
                                                                                                                         78
                                  Table VI (continued)



             Panel B: Predicting Equity Returns by Asymmetric Volatility Shocks

                                           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
             CVOL  HighCallVol
                    i ,t                 2.8653                      4.2746       3.7228
                                          (3.18)                      (4.45)      (4.74)
             CVOL   LowCallVol
                     i ,t                1.2417                      3.4141       2.5113
                                          (1.72)                      (4.42)      (3.60)
             PVOL  HighPutVol
                    i ,t                               –1.5763       –3.7445      –3.3785
                                                       (–3.06)       (–5.97)      (–5.47)
             PVOL   LowPutVol
                     i ,t                              –0.3728       –1.8225      –1.2716
                                                       (–0.49)       (–2.52)      (–1.95)
Coefficient Tests
CVOLHighCallVol
     i ,t         CVOLLowCallVol
                        i ,t             t = 2.14

PVOLHighPutVol
     i ,t        PCVOLLowPutVol
                       i ,t                           t = 2.33

Joint Test
CVOLHighCallVol
     i ,t         CVOLLowCallVol
                        i ,t       ,
 PVOLHighPutVol
      i ,t        PCVOLLowPutVol
                        i ,t
                                                                 Wald = 7.16   Wald =11.04
                                                                 (p = 2.78%)   (p = 0.40%)

Other Controls                             No           No           No           Yes




                                                                                           79
                                          Table VII
               Bivariate Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL
        Conditioned on the Changes in Stock, Call, and Put Options Trading Volume
In Panel A, for each month stocks are separated into two groups based on the median change in call options trading
volume. Stocks with higher than median change in call options trading volume are in the “High Call Volume” group
and stocks with lower than median change in call options trading volume are in the “Low Call Volume” group.
Similarly, stocks are independently separated into two groups based on the median change in trading volume of
individual stocks. Stocks with higher than median change in trading volume are in the “High Stock Volume” group
and stocks with lower than median change in trading volume are in the “Low Stock Volume” group. Then, for the
two groups of stocks in “High Call Volume and High Stock Volume” and “Low Call Volume and Low Stock
Volume,” we form bivariate decile portfolios of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL. In Panel A, decile portfolios are first formed
by sorting the optionable stocks based on ΔPVOL. Then, within each ΔPVOL decile, stocks are sorted into decile
portfolios ranked based on the monthly changes in call implied volatilities (ΔCVOL) so that ΔCVOL1 (ΔCVOL10)
contains stocks with the lowest (highest) ΔCVOL. Panel A presents returns averaged across the 10 ΔPVOL deciles
to produce decile portfolios with dispersion in ΔCVOL, but which contain all ΔPVOL values. This procedure
creates a set of ΔCVOL portfolios with similar levels of ΔPVOL, and thus these ΔCVOL portfolios control for
differences in ΔPVOL. In Panel A, “10-1 Return Diff.” reports the average raw return difference between
ΔCVOL10 and ΔCVOL1 after controlling for ΔPVOL. “FF3 Alpha Diff.” reports the 10-1 differences in the FF3
alphas. In Panel B, stocks are first separated into four groups based on the median change in put options trading
volume and the median change in stock trading volume. Then, for the two groups of stocks in “High Put Volume
and High Stock Volume” and “Low Put Volume and Low Stock Volume,” we form bivariate portfolios of ΔCVOL
and ΔPVOL. In Panel B, decile portfolios are first formed by sorting the optionable stocks based on ΔCVOL. Then,
within each ΔCVOL decile, stocks are sorted into decile portfolios ranked based on ΔPVOL. Panel B reports the
average raw return and FF3 alpha differences between ΔPVOL10 and ΔPVOL1 after controlling for ΔCVOL.



                     Panel A: Decile Portfolios of ΔCVOL Controlling for ΔPVOL
               Conditioned on the Change in Call Volume and the Change in Stock Volume


                                       High Call Volume                     Low Call Volume
                                       High Stock Volume                   Low Stock Volume
                                               Return                             Return
             Low ΔCVOL                          0.24                               0.28
             2                                  0.42                               0.60
             3                                  0.57                               0.48
             4                                  1.15                               0.79
             5                                  1.12                               0.84
             6                                  0.95                               0.88
             7                                  0.96                               1.05
             8                                  1.02                               1.06
             9                                  1.14                               1.04
             High ΔCVOL                         1.67                               1.17
             10-1 Return Diff.                  1.42                                0.89
             t-stat.                           (5.17)                              (2.52)
             FF3 Alpha Diff.                    1.35                                0.87
             t-stat.                           (4.77)                              (2.45)



                                                                                                               80
                         Table VII (continued)


        Panel B: Decile Portfolios of ΔPVOL Controlling for ΔCVOL
  Conditioned on the Change in Put Volume and the Change in Stock Volume



                       High Put Volume               Low Put Volume
                      High Stock Volume             Low Stock Volume
                            Return                        Return
Low ΔPVOL                    1.47                           1.37
2                            1.22                           0.93
3                            0.87                           1.10
4                            1.04                           0.94
5                            0.81                           0.71
6                            1.02                           0.73
7                            1.00                           0.94
8                            0.49                           0.88
9                            0.71                           0.54
High ΔPVOL                   0.26                           0.64
10-1 Return Diff.            –1.20                         –0.73
t-stat.                     (–4.82)                       (–2.11)
FF3 Alpha Diff.              –1.26                         –0.66
t-stat.                     (–5.32)                       (–2.13)




                                                                           81
                                            Table VIII
                Predicting Returns by Systematic and Idiosyncratic Volatility Shocks
This table presents the average slope coefficients and their Newey-West t-statistics in parentheses from the Fama-
MacBeth cross-sectional regressions in eq. (5) for the period of January 1996 to September 2008. The one-month
ahead returns of individual stocks are regressed on the systematic and idiosyncratic components of the changes in
call and put implied volatilities and the control variables. ΔCVOLsys, ΔCVOLidio, ΔPVOLsys, and ΔPVOLidio are
defined in eq. (7) and are obtained from the physical measure of market beta (the left panel) and from the risk-
neutral measure of market beta (the right panel). The results are presented for at-the-money call and put options with
30 days to maturity. The last row reports the average R2 values and their Newey-West t-statistics in parentheses.

                                   Physical Measure of                         Risk-Neutral Measure of
                                      Market Beta                                   Market Beta
                           (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)
         ΔCVOL    sys
                         –0.1994    –0.2470                          –0.0053     –0.0058
                         (–0.31)    (–0.40)                          (–0.45)      (–0.49)
         ΔCVOLidio       3.7376     3.7246    3.7376     3.7246       3.6147      3.5197    3.6007    3.5274
                          (7.26)     (7.22)   (7.26)     (7.22)       (4.48)      (4.23)    (4.46)       (4.22)
         ΔPVOL    sys
                                              –0.1709    –0.2027                            –0.0027   –0.0054
                                              (–0.27)    (–0.33)                            (–0.47)   (–0.47)
         ΔPVOLidio       –3.8647    –3.9927   –3.8647    –3.9927     –4.0196     –4.0340    –4.0102   –4.0152
                         (–7.18)    (–7.74)   (–7.18)    (–7.74)     (–4.48)      (–4.42)   (–4.47)   (–4.40)
         BETA            0.0181     0.0140    0.0041     -0.0021      0.0487      0.0539    0.0483    0.0534
                          (0.21)     (0.11)   (0.05)     (–0.02)      (0.66)      (0.71)    (0.65)       (0.70)
         SIZE            –0.0990    –0.0558   –0.0990    –0.0558     –0.0961     –0.0874    –0.0951   –0.0866
                         (–1.30)    (–0.60)   (–1.30)    (–0.60)     (–1.12)      (–1.01)   (–1.10)   (–1.00)
         BM              0.3057     0.3405    0.3057     0.3405       0.3568      0.3621    0.3561    0.3610
                          (2.76)     (2.56)   (2.76)     (2.56)       (3.23)      (3.24)    (3.23)       (3.24)
         MOM             –0.0007    –0.0012   –0.0007    –0.0012     –0.0002     –0.0004    –0.0003   –0.0004
                         (–0.19)    (–0.31)   (–0.19)    (–0.31)     (–0.06)      (–0.09)   (–0.06)   (–0.09)
         ILLIQ           0.1460     0.1269    0.1460     0.1269       0.0494      0.0456    0.0492    0.0458
                          (1.33)     (1.19)   (1.33)     (1.19)       (0.29)      (0.27)    (0.29)       (0.27)
         REV             –0.0200    –0.0180   –0.0200    –0.0180     –0.0248     –0.0244    –0.0247   –0.0244
                         (–2.48)    (–2.14)   (–2.48)    (–2.14)     (–2.78)      (–2.71)   (–2.77)   (–2.71)
         RVOL            –0.7432              –0.7432                –0.2583                –0.2644
                         (–1.28)              (–1.28)                (–0.57)                (–0.59)
         C/P Volume      –0.0012    0.0044    –0.0012    0.0044      –0.0142     –0.0118    –0.0135   –0.0110
                         (–0.03)     (0.10)   (–0.03)    (0.10)      (–0.25)      (–0.21)   (–0.24)   (–0.19)
         C/P OI          0.0682     0.0679    0.0682     0.0679       0.0841      0.0829    0.0826    0.0811
                          (1.25)     (1.21)   (1.25)     (1.21)       (1.20)      (1.17)    (1.18)       (1.15)
         RVOL–IVOL                  –0.6410              –0.6410                 –0.5705              –0.5725
                                    (–2.24)              (–2.24)                  (–1.31)             (–1.31)
         QSKEW           –2.3888    –2.2752   –2.3888    –2.2752     –0.7558     –0.9028    –0.7344   –0.8859
                         (–4.40)    (–4.07)   (–4.40)    (–4.07)     (–0.75)      (–0.80)   (–0.73)   (–0.78)
         R2               9.55%      8.86%    9.55%      8.86%       12.26%       12.15%    12.26%    12.14%
                         (10.97)    (11.19)   (10.97)    (11.19)     (11.64)      (11.58)   (11.64)   (11.58)

                                                                                                                   82
                                            Table IX
                 Predicting the Cross Section of Implied and Realized Volatilities
This table presents coefficients from the cross-sectional regression in equation (12) which predict changes in
options’ implied volatilities and the changes in realized volatility. The daily alphas are estimated based on the
CAPM using daily return observations over the previous month. The monthly Alphas are calculated by summing
the daily alphas in a month. The dependent variables are, respectively, the next-month changes in call volatilities,
ΔCVOL, the next-month changes in put volatilities, ΔPVOL, the change in call volatilities relative to put volatilities,
ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL, and the change in realized volatilities, ΔRVOL. The average slope coefficients and their Newey-
West t-statistics from the firm-level cross-sectional regressions are reported. The control variables include market
beta (BETA), log market capitalization (SIZE), log book-to-market ratio (BM), momentum (MOM), illiquidity
(ILLIQ), realized volatility (RVOL), change in the call open interest (ΔOIC), change in the put open interest (ΔOIP),
and the risk-neutral skewness (QSKEW). Newey-West t-statistics are given in parentheses. The sample period is
from January 1996 to December 2011.


                                                                         CVOL –
                                        ΔCVOL            ΔPVOL            ΔPVOL            ΔRVOL
                    ALPHA                4.1504           2.3155           1.8349          –14.323
                                        (10.58)           (6.03)           (6.17)          (–10.11)
                    BETA                –0.0163          0.0482           –0.0645           1.2080
                                        (–0.51)           (1.04)          (–1.76)            (7.22)
                    SIZE                –0.0141          –0.0473          0.0332           –3.4680
                                        (–0.30)          (–1.36)           (0.81)          (–39.35)
                    BM                  –0.2038          –0.1332          –0.0706          –2.4210
                                        (–3.74)          (–2.72)          (–2.77)           (–6.90)
                    MOM                  0.0016           0.0015           0.0001           0.0103
                                         (2.12)           (1.96)           (0.31)            (1.36)
                    ILLIQ                0.1878           0.1563           0.0315           1.1552
                                         (2.08)           (1.55)           (0.33)            (4.36)
                    RVOL                –1.2887          –2.0157          0.7270           –60.765
                                        (–3.77)          (–6.27)           (3.06)          (–36.44)
                    ΔOIC                –0.7151          –0.4676          –0.2475          –0.6412
                                        (–8.63)          (–4.72)          (–2.84)          (–4.42)
                    ΔOIP                –0.3003          –0.2350          –0.0654          –0.4230
                                        (–7.90)          (–5.01)          (–1.60)          (–4.53)
                    QSKEW                26.606          –4.0769           30.683          –5.1930
                                        (14.62)          (–2.03)          (10.53)          (–2.63)
                    R2                   7.98%            5.56%            7.55%           34.30%
                                        (15.75)          (11.60)          (13.98)          (41.83)




                                                                                                                    83
                                            Table X
            Portfolio Level Analyses for Predicting Implied and Realized Volatilities
This table presents portfolio level results for the predictive power of abnormal returns of individual stocks (CAPM
alphas) for the future changes in implied and realized volatilities. The monthly alphas are calculated by summing the
daily alphas in a month. The daily alphas are estimated based on the CAPM using daily return observations over the
previous month. Decile portfolios are formed based on the monthly CAPM alphas and then the average values are
reported for the next-month changes in call volatilities (ΔCVOL), the next-month change in call volatilities relative
to put volatilities (ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL), and the next-month change in realized volatilities (ΔRVOL). Panel A reports
results for all optionable stocks. Panel B shows results for stocks with high and low cross-sectional stock return
predictability separately, where predictability is measured by the absolute value of residuals from the first stage
cross-sectional regressions using the same predictors in Panel A of Table VI without ΔCVOL or ΔPVOL. Panel C
provides results for stocks with high volatility and low volatility separately, where volatility of individual stocks is
measured by the monthly realized volatility. Panel D shows results for Liquid and Illiquid stocks separately, where
liquidity of individual stocks are determined by Amihud’s (2002) ILLIQ measure. Panel E presents results for stocks
with high volatility uncertainty and low volatility uncertainty separately, where volatility uncertainty is proxied by
the variance of daily changes in call implied volatilities in a month. Newey-West t-statistics are given in
parentheses. The sample period is from January 1996 to December 2011.



                                                Panel A: All Stocks

                                             ΔCVOL          ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL             ΔRVOL
                           Low Alpha           –1.53               –0.82               –1.70
                               2               –0.54               –0.39                3.20
                               3               –0.37               –0.12                3.20
                               4               –0.12               –0.11                2.77
                               5               –0.04               –0.04                2.29
                               6               0.20                 0.19                 1.67
                               7               0.30                 0.23                 1.21
                               8               0.52                 0.22                -0.24
                               9               0.60                 0.39                -2.18
                           High Alpha          0.59                 0.66               -12.78
                            10-1 Diff.          2.12                1.48               –11.08
                              t-stat.          (8.62)              (7.01)             (–11.34)




                                                                                                                     84
                                              Table X (continued)



             Panel B: High Cross-Sectional Predictability vs. Low Cross-Sectional Predictability

                Stocks with Low Cross-Sectional Predictability   Stocks with High Cross-Sectional Predictability
                 ΔCVOL        ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL          ΔRVOL        ΔCVOL        ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL          ΔRVOL
Low Alpha         –1.46             –0.83              0.14        –1.63              –0.74            –5.10
    2             –0.38             –0.50              6.32        –0.80              –0.28            –0.29
    3             –0.25             –0.29              6.13        –0.53              –0.10             0.33
    4              0.15             –0.07              5.82        –0.41              –0.19             0.24
    5              0.13             –0.02              5.14        –0.05               0.06             0.07
    6              0.50              0.21              4.58        –0.05               0.17            –0.62
    7              0.52              0.17              3.83        0.13                0.20            –1.00
    8              0.88              0.42              2.18        0.16                0.15            –2.08
    9              0.90              0.49             –0.32        0.42                0.40            –4.25
High Alpha         0.64              0.73             –12.14       0.40                0.44            –14.11
10-1 Diff.         2.10              1.56             –12.28        2.02               1.18            –9.01
  t-stat.         (6.27)            (6.50)           (–10.10)      (9.31)             (6.30)          (–11.17)




                                  Panel C: High Volatility vs. Low Volatility

                           Low Volatility Stocks                            High Volatility Stocks
                 ΔCVOL        ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL          ΔRVOL        ΔCVOL        ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL          ΔRVOL
Low Alpha         –0.33             –0.45              9.73        –2.16              –1.00            –7.63
    2             –0.29             –0.29              6.28        –1.04              –0.65            –0.58
    3             –0.14             –0.13              5.31        –0.66              –0.31            –1.11
    4             –0.14             –0.16              4.70        –0.37              –0.09            –1.08
    5              0.16              0.00              4.12        –0.13               0.05            –1.63
    6              0.24              0.16              3.95        0.05                0.25            –2.60
    7              0.51              0.27              3.74        0.16                0.36            –4.04
    8              0.44              0.19              3.54        0.36                0.39            –5.50
    9              0.77              0.34              3.23        0.53                0.51            –8.16
High Alpha         0.91              0.33              3.53        0.42                0.68            –20.96
10-1 Diff.         1.24              0.78             –6.20         2.58               1.69            –13.33
  t-stat.         (5.56)            (4.54)           (–9.50)       (8.12)             (6.67)          (–10.09)




                                                                                                                   85
                                          Table X (continued)


                                 Panel D: Liquid vs. Illiquid Stocks

                          Liquid Stocks                                  Illiquid Stocks
             ΔCVOL      ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL          ΔRVOL       ΔCVOL       ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL          ΔRVOL
Low Alpha    –1.23             –0.30            –0.65       –1.89             –1.12           –4.02
    2        –0.51             –0.17            2.08        –0.65             –0.64            4.22
    3        –0.24             –0.14            2.17        –0.45             –0.37            3.83
    4        –0.19             –0.11            2.19        –0.24             –0.02            4.22
    5         0.03             –0.07            1.57        0.05              –0.11            3.44
    6         0.18              0.12            1.18        0.27               0.16            2.73
    7         0.38              0.33            0.85        0.25               0.34            0.83
    8         0.54              0.24             0.15       0.33               0.53           –0.61
    9         0.70              0.26            –1.04       0.63               0.54           –3.78
High Alpha    0.79              0.31            –6.86       0.51               0.66           –17.61
10-1 Diff.    2.02             0.61             –6.21        2.40              1.78            –13.59
  t-stat.    (6.23)           (4.52)           (–6.87)      (7.79)            (6.98)          (–11.46)




               Panel E: High Volatility Uncertainty vs. Low Volatility Uncertainty

              Stocks with Low Volatility Uncertainty         Stocks with High Volatility Uncertainty
             ΔCVOL      ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL          ΔRVOL       ΔCVOL       ΔCVOL – ΔPVOL          ΔRVOL
Low Alpha     0.18             –0.23            2.96        –2.39             –1.10           –5.68
    2         0.11             –0.18            3.51        –1.16             –0.54            2.70
    3         0.17              0.00            3.26        –0.89             –0.47            2.76
    4         0.20             –0.09            2.97        –0.81             –0.13            2.30
    5         0.34             –0.06            2.57        –0.52              0.03            1.93
    6         0.40              0.12            2.25        –0.14              0.14            1.25
    7         0.52              0.19            1.96        –0.11              0.29           –0.18
    8         0.58              0.15            1.21        0.05               0.46           –2.33
    9         0.91              0.26            0.61        0.45               0.63           –4.97
High Alpha    1.16              0.22            –3.85       0.29               0.84           –18.55
10-1 Diff.    0.98             0.45             –6.82        2.68              1.94            –12.88
  t-stat.    (5.12)           (3.78)           (–9.70)      (8.63)            (7.36)          (–10.64)




                                                                                                         86
            Figure 1. Implied Volatilities in the Pre- and Post-Formation Months
Panel A graphs the level of call implied volatilities for the Low ΔCVOL and High ΔCVOL deciles from the
dependent sorts of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL portfolios formed at time t from month t–6 to month t+6. Panel B graphs
the level of put implied volatilities for the Low ΔPVOL and High ΔPVOL deciles from the dependent sorts of
ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL portfolios formed at time t from month t–6 to month t+6.

                                                Panel A




                                                Panel B




                                                                                                       87
      Figure A.1. Stock and Call Prices as a Function of Uninformed Demand Shocks
We plot the stock and call prices as a function of uninformed demand shocks given a good signal,   1 .
Panel A graphs the stock price in the solid line as a function of the stock demand shock, z, while we hold
the call demand shock at v=0. The stock price is plotted as a function of the call demand shock, v, while
holding the stock demand shock at z=0 in the dashed line. Panel B repeats the same exercises for the call
price. In both cases, as the noise trader presence is larger (higher uninformed demand), prices rise
because the informed investor becomes more aggressive in trading, hiding behind the larger uninformed
demand.

                                                Panel A




                                                Panel B




                                                                                                       88
       Figure A.2. Pairs of Call and Stock Demand Shocks Generating Predictability
We plot pairs of uninformed demand (z,v) such that there is no predictability between the call price and
future stock returns given a good signal,   1 . The same condition is also responsible for inducing
predictability between past stock returns and future call prices. These are pairs of (z,v) which satisfy the
condition in equations (A.10) and (A.11). The stock demand shock varies over [1.96 z ,1.96 z ] .




                                                                                                         89
ENDNOTES
1
    Many theoretical models jointly pricing options and underlying assets in incomplete markets

have incorporated many of these real-world frictions. See Detemple and Selden (1991), Back

(1993), Cao (1999), Buraschi and Jiltsov (2006), and Vanden (2008), among others.
2
    At the daily or intra-day frequencies Manaster and Rendleman (1982), Bhattacharya (1987),

and Anthony (1988) find that options predict future stock prices. Fleming, Ostdiek and Whaley

(1996) document derivatives lead the underlying markets using futures and options on futures.

On the other hand, Stephan and Whaley (1990) and Chan, Chung and Johnson (1993) find stock

markets lead option markets. Chakravarty, Gulen and Mayhew (2004) find that both stock and

option markets contribute to price discovery, while Muravyev, Pearson and Broussard (2013)

find that price discovery occurs only in the stock market.
3
    This predictability is inconsistent with standard arbitrage-free option pricing models, which a

long literature has also shown. The earlier papers in this literature include Figlewski (1989) and

Longstaff (1995). More recently see Goyal and Saretto (2009) and Cao and Han (2013).
4
    There are many reasons why put-call parity does not hold, as documented by Ofek, Richardson

and Whitelaw (2004) and Cremers and Weinbaum (2010), among others. In particular, the

exchange-traded options are American and so put-call parity only holds as an inequality. The

implied volatilities we use are interpolated from the Volatility Surface and do not represent

actual transactions prices, which in options markets have large bid-ask spreads and non-

synchronous trades. These issues do not affect the use of our option volatilities as we use

predictive instruments observable at the beginning of each period.
5
    Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002) introduce a measure of the probability of information-

based trading, PIN, and show empirically that stocks with higher probability of information-

based trading have higher returns. Using PIN as a control variable does not influence the
                                                                                                 90
significantly positive (negative) link between the call (put) volatility innovations and expected

returns. We also examine the effect of systematic coskewness following Harvey and Siddique

(2000). Including coskewness does not affect our results either. See the internet appendix.
6
    As an additional robustness check, we also consider proportional changes in CVOL and PVOL

and find very similar results. The results from the percent changes in call and put implied

volatilities (%ΔCVOL, %ΔPVOL) are available in the internet appendix.
7
    In the simplified model of Appendix A, put and call options are equivalent securities because

we assume binomial payoffs.
8
     It is possible to construct bivariate portfolios ranking on ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL based on

independent sorts, which are reported in the internet appendix. Briefly, the return differences

produced using independent sorts are larger than the ones reported in Table III. Controlling for

ΔPVOL, the average difference in returns (FF3 Alphas) between extreme ΔCVOL decile

portfolios is 1.81% (1.80%) per month. Controlling for ΔCVOL, the average difference in

returns (FF3 Alphas) between extreme ΔPVOL decile portfolios is –1.27% (–1.26%) per month.
9
    If we augment the Fama-French (1993) regression with additional factors for momentum and

short-term reversals, the alphas are almost unchanged. These numbers are available in the

internet appendix.
10
     SKEW and COSKEW are computed using daily returns over the past one year. Definitions of

all other variables are given in Section 2. As discussed in the internet appendix, the calculation of

COSKEW follows Harvey and Siddique (2000), where we regress stock returns on the market

and the squared market returns. The slope coefficient on the squared market return is COSKEW

of Harvey and Siddique (2000).
11
     We thank a referee for suggesting this analysis.


                                                                                                   91
12
     To address potential concerns about outlier observations, we eliminate the 1st and 99th

percentiles of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL and replicate Table VI. For further robustness check, in

addition to excluding the 1st and 99th percentiles of ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL, we eliminate low-

priced stocks (price < $5 per share). As shown in the internet appendix, the average slope

coefficients on ΔCVOL (ΔPVOL) remain positive (negative) and highly significant after

eliminating the low-priced stocks as well as the extreme observations for call and put implied

volatilities.
13
     This is similar to the cross-sectional volatility effect of Ang et al. (2006, 2009) where stocks

with high past volatility have low returns, except Ang et al. work mainly with idiosyncratic

volatility defined relative to the Fama and French (1993) model instead of total volatility.
14
     The internet appendix also shows that controlling for the Cremers and Weinbaum (2010)

variable, CVOL–PVOL, in the regressions does not affect our main findings. We find that the

coefficient on CVOL–PVOL is positive and statistically significant, consistent with Cremers and

Weinbaum, but the coefficients on ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL are similar to those reported in Table VI

and are highly statistically significant.
15
     We reject the null hypothesis that the average slope coefficients on the changes in call and put

implied volatilities are identical, with a t-statistic of 2.17 (p-value = 3%). This implies that

ΔCVOL and ΔPVOL have significant and different impacts on future stock returns, rejecting the

constrained joint predictability of these variables.
16
     In the internet appendix, we also present results from the pooled panel regressions for the full

sample period. The standard errors of the parameter estimates are clustered by firm and time.

The pooled panel regression results indicate that after controlling for all firm characteristics, risk

and skewness attributes, the slope coefficients on ΔCVOL (ΔPVOL) are positive (negative) and


                                                                                                    92
highly significant, similar to our findings from the Fama-MacBeth regressions reported in Table

VI, Panel A.
17
     The demand-based option pricing models of Bollen and Whaley (2004) and Garleanu,

Pedersen and Poteshman (2009) do not directly predict that there should be lead-lag relations

between option and stock markets. In addition to a demand effect in option markets, there must

be a non-instantaneous response of the underlying stock market. Some rational and behavioral

models explain this delayed reaction including information immobility (Van Nieuwerburgh and

Veldkamp, 2009), limited attention (Hirshleifer, 2001), bounded rationality or limited updating

of beliefs of agents in the stock market (Sargent, 1994), or the slow dissemination of news, or

initial limited access to that news (see e.g. Hong and Stein, 1999). Our model in Appendix A

shows that the action of informed traders can produce joint option market to stock market

predictability, and vice versa, in a noisy rational expectations model.
18
     A similar econometric specification is proposed by Bali (2000) to test the presence and

significance of asymmetry in the conditional mean and conditional volatility of interest rate

changes.
19
     As shown in the internet appendix, almost identical results are obtained using past month stock

returns.
20
     Our focus on cross-sectional predictability of implied volatilities is very different to most

studies in the literature focusing on time-series relations like Harvey and Whaley (1992), who

examine the predictability of the S&P 100 index option volatility, Christensen and Prabhala

(1998) and Chernov (2007), who also focus on the aggregate index level, and Bollen and Whaley

(2004), who investigate time-series predictability of 20 individual options but focus only on net

buying pressure.


                                                                                                  93
21
     We also obtain similar results when we measure stock return predictability using time-series

predictability measures as opposed to cross-sectional measures in Table X, Panel B. See the

internet appendix.




                                                                                               94
