NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WOMEN’S EDUCATION:
HARBINGER OF ANOTHER SPRING? EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT IN TURKEY
Mehmet Alper Dinçer
Neeraj Kaushal
Michael Grossman
Working Paper 19597
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19597
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

We thank Hacettepe University, Institute of Population Studies for providing us with the data used
in this study, under permission for data use no 2010/23. The views, analyses, and conclusions in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Mehmet Alper Dinçer, Neeraj Kaushal, and Michael Grossman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Women’s Education: Harbinger of Another Spring? Evidence from a Natural Experiment
in Turkey
Mehmet Alper Dinçer, Neeraj Kaushal, and Michael Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 19597
October 2013
JEL No. I1,I24,I25,J12,J13,J16
ABSTRACT
We use the 1997 Education Law in Turkey that increased compulsory formal schooling from five to
eight years to study the effect of women’s education on a range of outcomes relating to women’s fertility,
their children’s health and measures of empowerment. We apply an instrumental variables methodology
and find that a 10 percentage point increase in the proportion of ever married women with eight years
of schooling lowered number of pregnancies per woman by 0.13 and number of children per women
by 0.11. There is also some evidence of a decline in child mortality, caused by mother’s education,
but effects turn statistically insignificant in our preferred models. We also find that a 10 percentage
point increase in the proportion with eight years of schooling raised the proportion of women using
modern family planning methods by eight to nine percent and the proportion of women with knowledge
of their ovulation cycle by five to seven percent. However, we find little evidence that schooling changed
women’s attitudes towards gender equality.
Mehmet Alper Dinçer
Sabanci University
Education Reform Initiative
Bankalar Caddesi Minerva Han No. 2,
Kat: 5 Karakoy 34420 Istanbul
Turkey
alper.dincer@gmail.com
Neeraj Kaushal
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nk464@columbia.edu

Michael Grossman
National Bureau of Economic Research
5 Hanover Square
16th Floor, Suite 1602
New York, NY 10004-2630
and City University of New York Graduate Center
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu

Introduction
The impacts of women’s education on their wellbeing and the wellbeing of their children
have been widely documented.1 But almost all of the research is based on non-Middle Eastern
countries. Cultural norms and social environments in Middle Eastern societies discriminate
against women, limit their economic and educational opportunities, and relegate them to a lesser
status than men (UNDP, 2005). The returns to women’s education may be different in a social
and cultural environment that discriminates against them than in societies that accord them a
more equal status. Despite its significance, there is limited empirical research to estimate the
effects of women’s education within the social and cultural settings of a Middle Eastern country.
Such research is critical in light of recent papers that cast doubt on previous findings of positive
effects of maternal education on fertility and infant health (Lindeboom, Llena-Nozal, and Der
Klaauw, 2009; McCrary & Royer, 2011; Zhang, 2011).
In this paper, we take advantage of Turkey’s Compulsory Education Law, and variation
in the intensity of its implementation across regions in Turkey, to study the effect of women’s
formal years of schooling on a range of measures that capture women’s fertility, empowerment,
and child mortality. Turkey is the largest economy in the Middle East and by many measures, a
relatively modern society. Despite its growing economic and geopolitical influence, the position
of women in Turkey continues to be defined along traditional lines: In 2010, only 27% of women
(versus 47% of men) had a secondary or higher education and a mere 24% worked for wages
(versus 70% men) – a proportion that declined from 32% in 1990 (UNDP, 2011). Surveys
indicate that a third of women in Turkey have been exposed to physical violence at home

1

See literature reviewed in Black and Devereux (2011), Card (1999), Grossman (2000, 2006), and Kaushal
(forthcoming).

2

(Altinay & Arat, 2007). In 2011, Turkey was ranked 122nd (out of 135 countries) in the gender
equality index of the World Economic Forum (Hausmann, Tyson, & Zahidi, 2012).
In 1997, Turkey passed the Compulsory Education Law that increased mandatory formal
schooling from five to eight years. Individuals born after 1985 (who were 11 or less in 1997)
were the target of the Compulsory Education Law. Its primary objective was to prepare Turkey’s
entry into the European Union by increasing educational attainment and reducing geographic and
gender-specific educational disparity. Access to education has been widely acknowledged by the
EU as a means of enhancing economic and social development in Turkey as well as in bringing
economic and social cohesion across its eastern and western regions. To accommodate the
expected increase in enrollment, the government devoted additional resources on school
infrastructure and in hiring new teachers leading to a 36% increase in primary school teachers
during 1996-2003 (Dulger, 2004; State Institute of Statistics, 1999; Turkish Statistical Institute,
2006).
We capitalize on the 1997 compulsory school reform legislation to estimate the causal
effect of women’s schooling on a range of outcomes relating to child mortality, women’s
reproductive health, and measures of empowerment, including age at first marriage, age at first
child birth, use of contraceptives, fertility outcomes, and attitudes towards gender equality. We
form a treatment group of women who were born between 1986 and 1990 and were affected by
the legislation and a corresponding comparison group of women who were born between 1979
and 1985 and were not affected. Investment in new teachers varied across the sub-regions of
Turkey. Within each sub-region, we exploit variations across cohorts in the number of primary
school teachers in the sub-region of residence at age 11 to construct an instrument to predict the
educational attainment of young women. The predicted education variable is then used to

3

estimate the effect of education on a variety of outcomes experienced by the treatment group of
women and their offspring from information obtained when the treatment cohort was between
the ages of 18 and 22 and the comparison cohort was between the ages of 23 and 29.

Review of Literature
Economists argue that more educated individuals are more efficient producers of health
and more educated parents are more efficient in producing healthy children (Grossman, 2006).
Knowledge helps parents make informed decisions on their children’s nutrition and healthcare. It
influences health-related behaviors (such as smoking, drug abuse, binge drinking) and lifestyles
(e.g. physical exercise), and parents’, in particular mother’s, health behavior and lifestyle impact
child health (e.g. birth weight). Parental education is also the most basic component of socioeconomic status, which according to epidemiologists is the key determinant of own and child
health (Adler & Newman, 2002). Further, education may affect attitudes towards gender equality
empowering women (Mocan & Cannonier, 2012). Because mothers are often the primary
caregiver for infants and young children, their empowerment is likely to channel family
resources towards mother- and child-wellbeing.
There is extensive empirical evidence of the association between parental education and
child health (see Grossman, 2006, for a detailed review of this literature). Because genetic
endowments are a key determinant of a child’s health, it is challenging to provide convincing
evidence that the correlation between parental education and child health implies causality: that
parental education improves child health. Arguably, heritable ability may result in more able
women seeking higher education and having more able children who have better health
(Behrman & Rosenzweig, 2002). Further, future orientation may cause mothers to acquire more

4

education and invest in their children’s health (Fuchs, 1982). In short, an unobserved third factor
may be causing both higher education among women and better health of their children.
Several researchers have applied increases in parental education resulting from
compulsory education laws in different countries to study the effect of an exogenous increase in
parental education on the health outcomes of their children (Breierova & Duflo, 2004; Chou,
Grossman, Liu, & Joyce, 2010; and Osili & Long, 2008). These studies exploit changes in
compulsory education laws in Indonesia, Taiwan, and Nigeria and conclude that parent’s
education has a negative effect on child and infant mortality. In contrast to the findings of these
investigations, a recent innovative study that uses the decline in maternal education triggered by
high-school closures during the Cultural Revolution in China from 1977 to 1984 finds that
women who completed high-school were more likely to use prenatal care and were more likely
to work off-farm, but their high-school completion had no effect on premature-births, low-birth
weight, neonatal mortality, and infant mortality (Zhang, 2011).2 Two other studies, one based on
U.S. data and the other on British data, reached similar conclusions. McCrary and Royer (2011)
used school entry policies in the US to identify the effect of mother’s education on fertility and
infant health and found these effects of be small and possibly heterogeneous. Lindeboom, LlenaNozal, and Der Klaauw (2009) used British compulsory schooling laws and found that
postponing the school leaving age of parents by one year had little effect on the health of their
children. These findings thus cast doubt on previous research on the effects of mother’s
education on child health and its applicability across diverse cultural and institutional settings.

2

Similarly, researchers have applied different models to reach different conclusions. Kan and Lee (2012) apply a
regression discontinuity model and find that while the change in compulsory education law in Taiwan increased
women’s education, it had no effect on their fertility and child mortality. However, they do not use the extensive
school intensity data employed by Chou and colleagues (2010). Further, Kan and Lee's treatment groups omit a
substantial number of women who were affected by the law and include some women who were not affected by it.

5

Researchers have also investigated the effect of education on early marriage and
childbearing in adolescence – both are known to have adverse consequences on mother and child
health (WHO, 1995). This is an important issue in many Middle Eastern countries where
marriage and child bearing in adolescence are high. For instance, approximately 17% of evermarried women aged 20-45 in Turkey are married before the age of 16 and 13% have a child
before they turn 17.3 A reduction in childbearing in adolescence is likely to improve birth
outcomes and mother’s and child’s health. Becker’s human capital model, for instance, predicts
that education results in a quantity-quality trade off in fertility: more educated parents opting for
fewer children of higher quality – e.g. better health (Becker & Lewis, 1973).
Empirical studies also suggest that more educated couples have wider knowledge, and
make more efficient use of contraceptive methods (Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1989; Breierova
and Duflo, 2004). If mothers’ education causes a reduction in early marriage and childbearing
and improves fertility outcomes, it will improve mother- and child-health. Establishing causality
between mother’s education and early marriage, early child-bearing, and fertility outcomes is
also a challenge because low level of empowerment and high dependency may result in women
marrying early and having children thus forgoing education. While this phenomenon may be
more prevalent in Middle Eastern countries, in western societies too, teenage pregnancy may
limit the options of young mothers and interrupt their schooling.4 In this context, fertility will be
an endogenous variable affecting schooling (Angrist & Evans, 1998). In general, the observed
association between low-education and early marriage and fertility could simply be on account

3

Authors’ computations based on the 2008 Turkey Demographic and Health Survey.
In some industrialized societies, where fertility has been declining and secondary education is almost universal
among women, researchers have been asking a somewhat different question: Is education or higher education an
obstacle to women’s fertility (Cohen, Øystein, & Keilman, 2011).
4

6

of reverse causality or an unobserved third factor causing both low education and early
childbearing.
Here again researchers have used “natural experiments” to determine the direction of
causality between education and marriage and education and teenage fertility. Currie and Moretti
(2003) use data on opening of two and four year colleges between 1940 and 1990 in the US as an
instrument to predict maternal education to study the effect of the predicted education variable
on mother’s marriage, infant health, use of prenatal care, and smoking and find that mother’s
education has a positive influence on these outcomes. Similarly, Osili and Long (2008) exploited
the Universal Primary Education Program introduced in Nigeria in 1976 and exposure to this
program by age and region to study the effect of women’s education on their fertility and found
that increasing female education by one year reduced early fertility by 0.26 births. Using the
extension of compulsory education from 6th to 9th grade in Mexico in 1993, Andalon, Grossman,
& Williams (2013) find that raising women’s education beyond 6th grade improved their
knowledge and use of contraception. Again, whether findings from these studies can be
generalized across cultural and institutional settings is an empirical issue and we investigate that
in the context of a Middle Eastern country.

Previous Research on Effects of Education in Turkey
There is no published research on of the effects of mother’s formal education on child
health and mortality in Turkey. Two working papers have studied the effects of Turkey’s
Compulsory Education Law on marriage and fertility (Kırdar, Dayıoğlu Tayfur, & Koç, 2011)
and on religious tolerance and attitudes towards women’s empowerment (Gulesci & Meyersson,
2012). Both studies fail to adjust for confounding factors correlated with the policy as they are

7

based on changes in outcomes from the pre- to post-policy periods. There were several economic
and social factors and policy changes coinciding with the education reform that could potentially
confound these estimates. For instance, this is a period of a steady decline in women’s
employment in Turkey.5 The decline is often attributed to urbanization and shifts in family
activities away from agriculture to sectors where women’s participation is relatively low (World
Bank, 2009). Further, the 1990s is a decade of financial instability in Turkey that culminated in
the 2001 financial crisis (Görmez and Yiğit, 2010). Such national trends in women’s
employment, urbanization, and overall economic growth are likely to confound estimates of the
effect of education reform in a research design that is based on pre- to post- policy changes in
outcomes.
In addition, changes in social policy may also have a confounding effect. For instance, in
2002, a change in the Civil Code raised the minimum marriage age of women in Turkey from 15
to 17 years, making it equal to the minimum marriage age of men. Nationwide women aged 11
or less in 1997, the target of the Compulsory Education law, are also affected by the change in
the Civil Code since they were all less than 17 in 2002. Indeed, any methodology based on
comparisons of outcomes of women born before and after 1986 will not be able to distinguish the
effect of the Compulsory Education Law from the effect of the change in legal minimum
marriage age.
Gulesci and Meyersson use a regression discontinuity model and assume that women
born in or after September 1986 are bound by the Compulsory Schooling Law to acquire 8 years
of schooling. The Bylaw of Primary Education in Turkey, however, counts age by calendar year,

5

Women’s employment declined from 34% in 1988 to 22% in 2008 (The World Bank, 2009).

8

and not school year.6 Thus it is likely that Gulesci and Meyersson measured the target group of
the Compulsory School Law with some degree of error. 7
In our analysis, we assume that schools in Turkey follow the Bylaw of Primary
Educations Institutions for admission and in the implementation of Compulsory Schooling Law.
Individuals born in 1986 or later are considered the target of education reform. Further, we apply
changes in Compulsory Education Law and geographic differences in the intensity of its
implementation, described in detail below, to identify the effects of ever-married women’s
education on child health and a range of measures capturing the fertility and empowerment of
ever-married women. This methodology allows us to control for, in a parsimonious manner,
unobserved national economic and social trends and policy changes that are correlated with
education reform.

Turkey’s Compulsory Education Law
In 1996, Turkey entered the European Union customs union and began preparing for full
membership in future. Within the broader context of lowering economic and social disparities, in
1997, the Turkish government launched the Rapid Coverage of Compulsory Education Program
that increased years of compulsory schooling from five to eight. To meet the expected increase in
enrollment, during 1996-2003, the government built 80,000 new classrooms, a 41% increase
over the 1996 base, and hired 103,000 additional primary school teachers, which was a 36%
6

The Bylaw of Primary Education Institutions published in Official Gazette number 21308 on 7 August 1992
regulates school starting age in Article 14 as follows: “A child who completed 72 months at the end of the calendar
year should enroll in primary school.” (Authors’ translation)
7
To investigate how strictly schools adhere to the provisions of the Bylaw, we used the 1999 Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) for Turkey on eighth graders in school year 1998-1999 and found that
22% were born in 1984 and 65% in 1985. Further, we find that the number of eighth graders born in January 1985is
three-times the number born in December 1984, whereas the number of eighth graders born in September 1985 is
somewhat less than those born in August 1985. Thus even in practice age at entry is counted as of the start of the
calendar year (January 1st) and not the start of the school year (September 1st). Note that these students were in grade
four in 1994-1995.

9

increase over the 1996 base (Dulger 2004; State Institute of Statistics, 1999; Turkish Statistical
Institute, 2006; also see Figures 1a and 1b). Further, investment in new teachers and
infrastructure varied across regions with the aim of devoting more resources to regions with low
enrollment among primary school age students.
Primary school enrollment (grades 1-8) rose rapidly in the first four years of the reform: from 9.1
million in 1997 to 10.5 million in 2000 (Turkish Statistical Institute, 2006). Figure 2 presents the
trend in gross enrollment in grades 6-8 during 1989-2000, covering eight years prior to the
implementation of the Compulsory Education Law and eight years of the post-implementation
period. There is a modestly upward trend in enrollment in grades 6-8 during 1989-1993,
followed by a leveling off during 1993-1997. Enrollment begins to rise steadily after 1997, with
the implementation of the Compulsory Education Law, as cohorts mandated to remain in school
reach grade 6 or progress from grades 6 to 8, reaching a plateau about four years after the policy
change. Overall, between 1996 and 2000 enrollment in grades 6-8 increased 1.1 million or 42
percent; and gross enrollment rate increased from 66% to 93%. Further, the gap in enrollment
across the more developed western regions (e.g. Istanbul, West Marmara and East Marmara) and
less developed eastern regions (e.g. Northeast Anatolia, Central East Anatolia, and Southeast
Anatolia) declined during this period.

Data
The primary data used in this study come from the Turkey Demographic and Health
Surveys (TDHS) of 2003 and 2008. The TDHSs collect data on demographic characteristics of
each household member, including their age, sex, region and province of birth, birth place type
(rural/urban), completed years of schooling, and current region and province of residence. For a

10

nationally representative sample of ever–married women aged 15 to 49, the TDHSs collect data
on respondent’s parents’ education, mother tongue8, and region9 and province of residence in
childhood.10 Our analysis is based on the ever married sample and we focus on women aged 18
to 29 at the time of the survey. The variables on region of residence in childhood and cohort of
childhood (when turned 11) are used to match TDHS individual level data with the
administrative data on primary school teachers (teachers for grades 1-8) per child (aged 6 to 13)
by region and year, henceforth referred to as teacher-child ratio, for convenience. The data on
province of residence in childhood is used to construct 20 sub-regions of childhood.11 Further,
the variable on sub-region of residence in childhood and cohort of childhood (when turned 11)
are used to match TDHS individual level data with the administrative data on teacher-child ratio
by sub-region and year. The source of administrative data on primary school teachers, by subregion (and by region) and year, is MONE’s National Education Statistics. Estimates of number
of children aged 6-13 by sub-region (and region) and year, come from Census 1985, 1990, and
2000; for inter-census years, these data are interpolated assuming a linear trend.
The ever married sample provides retrospective data on birth and fertility histories,
including number of pregnancies, number of children born, first birth interval (age at first birth
minus age at first marriage, measured in months), number of children who died before age 1,
number of children who died before age 5, ever had a stillbirth, ever had a miscarriage, ever had
induced abortion, and whether the respondent uses a modern family planning method. We use
8

The responses to the question are: Turkish, Kurdish, Arabic, and other.
There are 12 regions in Turkey: Istanbul, West Marmara, Aegean, East Marmara, West Anatolia, Mediterranean,
Central Anatolia, West Black Sea, East Black Sea, North-eastern Anatolia, Central-eastern Anatolia, and Southeastern Anatolia.
10
The respondents are asked the region where they spent most of the time until they were 12.
11
Turkstat divides the country in 26 sub-regions. We merge 6 small sub-regions with other geographically
contiguous sub-regions within the same region to ensure that all sub-regions have at least 100 observations. The 20
sub-regions we use are: Istanbul, West Marmara, Đzmir & Aydın, Manisa, Bursa, Kocaeli, West Anatolia, Antalya,
Adana, Hatay, Central Anatolia, Zongulda & Kastamonu, Samsun, Trabzon, North-eastern Anatolia, Malatya, Van,
Gaziantep, Şanlıurfa, and Mardin.
9

11

data on marriage and fertility histories to construct outcome variables on age at first marriage
and age at first birth and we use data on birth and fertility histories to create the outcome
variables relating to child mortality and mother’s fertility outcomes. Specifically, we study the
following measures of child mortality: number of children deceased before the first month after
birth, number of children deceased during 1-12 months after birth, number of children deceased
before age 1, and number of children deceased before age 5; and the following measures of
women’s fertility: number of total births, number of pregnancies, use of contraceptives, and
whether the woman has knowledge of her ovulation cycle.
We use responses to the following questions in the ever-married sample to study the
effect of education on attitudes towards women’s empowerment and gender equality: Does the
respondent agree/disagree that men are wiser? Does the respondent agree/disagree that a boy’s
education is preferable to a girl’s education? Does the respondent agree/disagree if all family
decisions should be made by men?12 And finally, we study responses to a set of questions on
whether wife beating is justified if she (i) wastes money, (ii) neglects children, (iii) argues with
husband, and (iv) refuses sex. Appendix 1 provides means of these variables for ever married
women aged 18-22 and 23-29 in 2003 and 2008.

Research Design
Effect of Compulsory Education on Schooling
Our objective is to study the effect of mother’s schooling on a range of outcomes
measuring child mortality and women’s empowerment. Education is endogenous to these
outcomes and we use an instrumental variables methodology to address this issue. Equation (1)
12

There is a difference in the language used for this question in the 2003 and 2008 surveys. The question in the 2003
TDHS is: “Important family decisions should be made by men” and in 2008: “All important family decisions should
be made only by men.”

12

describes the baseline first stage regression model to be estimated on a sample of ever married
women aged 18-29 using the 2008 TDHS data:
(1) Edu i = η c + η j + λT Teacher jτ * Young + λ Teacher jτ + ∆X + ρ * Pj1996 * Cohort + eijt

Edui denotes the education of woman i. We use two separate measures of education: a
continuous variable indicating the respondent’s years of schooling and a dichotomous variable
indicating whether she has eight or more years of schooling. Edui is modeled as a function of the
respondent’s cohort of childhood (ηc - a dummy variable for the year respondent turned 11),
region of childhood ( η j region where the respondent lived at age 11), and family endowments
(X) namely parental education13, mother-tongue (dummy variables indicating whether the
mother-tongue is: Turkish, Kurdish, Arabic, and other), and whether she lived in a rural area in
childhood (at age 11). The argument for including parents’ schooling is that they may be affect
own schooling and be correlated with program intensity. The argument for excluding parents’
schooling is that they may be correlated with the some unobservable factor that is correlated with
own schooling. In the empirical analysis, we run models with and without these controls.
Estimates were similar from the two sets of models, and for brevity, we have opted to present
findings with the controls.14
The variable Young is equal to 1 if the respondent was born during 1986-1990, and
therefore was bound by the Compulsory Education Law to complete eight years of mandatory
schooling, otherwise 0. Women born during 1979-1985 are the category of comparison.
Teacherjτ denotes the number of primary school teachers as a proportion to primary school age

13

Seven dummy variables, for each parent, indicating the following categories: no education, primary drop out,
primary (5 years of schooling), middle school (5-<8 years of schooling), lower secondary (8-<11 years), upper
secondary (11 years), >11 years of schooling, and unknown schooling.
14
Estimates without controls for parents’ schooling are available upon request.

13

children (aged 6-13) in the region of childhood j in year τ ( τ = year of birth + 11), and is a
measure of the intensity of education reform by region and year.
The cohort-of-childhood dummy variables control for the national trends in schooling not
related to the 1997 education reform and the region-of-childhood dummy variables control for
cohort invariant region-specific unmeasured factors affecting the schooling outcome (e.g.
differences across regions due to social and economic development). Parameter λ estimates the
association between Teacherjτ and schooling for the comparison group and λ + λT measures the
same for the treatment group (Young). The comparison group was not subject to the Compulsory
Education Law, therefore, λ measures the effect on education of other time-varying factors
correlated with the reform intensity variable - Teacherjτ . Assuming that these other time-varying
factors correlated with the reform intensity variable had the same effect on the treatment and
comparison groups, λT (= λ + λT - λ ) would estimate the effect of the Compulsory Education
Law on the schooling outcome of the treatment group (Young).
Equation (1) also includes a full set of interactions of the cohort of birth dummy variables
with the gross enrollment rate in grades 6-8 ( Pj1996 ) in 1996, a year prior to the implementation
of the Education Reform Law. The intensity of reform was likely to be greater in regions that
were lagging in education in the pre-reform period (e.g. Northeast Anatolia, Central East
Anatolia, and Southeast Anatolia). Inclusion of the interaction term allows us to explicitly
control for variation in intensity of the reform associated with enrollment in the pre-reform
period.
The outcome variables in equation (1) are measured as of 2008. Thus one source of
difference between the outcomes for the treatment and the comparison groups could be the
difference in their ages. The identifying assumption for equation (1) is that in the absence of
14

education reform, time-varying factors correlated with the variable Teacherjτ would have the
same effect on the treatment and comparison groups. Because the outcome variables are sensitive
to age, this is a limiting assumption and the resulting estimates are likely to be biased. We adopt
a difference-in-difference methodology to address this issue. To implement this strategy, the first
stage regression is estimated on a combined sample of ever married women aged 18-29 in the
TDHS 2003 and 2008 data using the following model:

~
~
Edu ijt = η~a + η~c + η~ j + λT Teacher jτ * Young * Yr 2008 + λ y Teacher jτ * Young +
(2)
~
~
λ Teacher jτ + ρ~ * Pj1996 * Cohort + ∆ X + ~
eijt
In equation (2), the symbol ~ is used to distinguish the parameters from equation (1). Equation
(2) differs from equation (1) in two respects. First, the former equation controls for a full set of
age effects, denoted by η~a , a dummy variable for each year of age. Equation (2) also includes
cohort fixed effects. Thus, age-fixed effects control for nationwide trends in schooling and
cohort effects control for nationwide changes specific to cohorts (e.g. the 2002 change in civil
code that raised minimum marriage age for women and affected all cohorts born after 1985).
Note that the 1981-1985 cohorts-of-birth appear both in the 2003 and 2008 data. These women
were not covered by education reform and thus provide the counter-factual: changes in
educational attainment (in the absence of education reform) during the study period.15
Second, equation (2) includes a three-way interaction term between Teacher jτ , Young
and a dummy variable for TDHS 2008. Thus, inclusion of the 2003 data allows estimating the
effect of education reforms after controlling for age-specific (young versus older women) time~
varying factors that may be correlated with the reform intensity variable. In equation (2), λ
captures the effect of time-varying factors correlated with the intensity of the reform on
15

Note that these controls are critical for the second stage outcomes discussed in the next section.

15

~

schooling and λy allows these effects to be different for the younger and older cohorts. The
parameter of interest is λ~T that estimates the effect of an exogenous increase in investment in
primary school teachers resulting from the Compulsory Education Law on the schooling
variables of Young ever-married women.
We estimate equation (2) with two alternative definitions of the geographical unit. The
first is the region of childhood as specified above and the second is the sub-region of childhood.
In the latter case Teacherjτ is measured at the sub-region of childhood residence, Pj1996 , is gross
enrollment rate in grades 6-8 at the sub-regional level in 1996,16 and the analysis includes a full
set of dummy variables for the 20 sub-regions. The advantage of the regional specification is that
estimates are based on a fairly large number of children in each region. The disadvantage is that
there are only 12 regions. Our design requires standard errors of regression coefficients to be
obtained by clustering on the geographical unit of residence (Huber, 1967). Standard errors tend
to be understated if the number of clusters on which they are based is as small as 12 (Angrist &
Pischke, 2009).
The advantage of the sub-regional specification is that the number of clusters increases
from 12 to 20. Betrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) and Angrist & Pischke (2009) argue
that between 42 and 50 clusters are required to obtain consistent estimates of standard errors that
account for clustering. But Bertrand and her colleagues and Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller
(2008) actually show that the rate of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is true is smaller when
there are 20 clusters than when there are 50. That suggests that 20 clusters, rather than 42 or 50,

16

Gross enrollment rate in grades 6-8 is defined as number of students enrolled in grades 6-8 in 1996 in region (or
sub-region) of childhood divided by the total population of children aged 11-13 in the region (sub-region). In
additional work (not presented, but available upon request), we also did the analysis with Pj1996 defined as primary
school (1-8 grades) enrollment rate and the estimates were similar to those reported.

16

are sufficient. In our case, the disadvantage of the sub-regional model is that the estimates are
based on smaller sample sizes in the geographical units than in the regional model.

Mother’s Education and Child Mortality
To study the effect of mother’s schooling on child mortality, we adopt an equation
similar to (2), with two modifications: one, now the dependent variable is a measure of child
mortality17 , and two, predicted value of schooling from equation (2) replaces the three-way
interaction term Teacherjτ * Young * Yr 2008 . The second stage regression has all the other
controls of the first stage and thus the identification of the coefficient for predicted schooling
depends entirely on the exclusion of the interaction term from the second-stage regression. As
long as primary school teacher-child ratio ( Teacher jτ ) does not affect child health except through
its effect on schooling, the IV estimate will provide the causal effect of schooling on child
mortality. We estimate the structural form equations using ordinary least squares and two-stage
least squares models. Throughout, standard errors are obtained by clustering on region of
residence in the region level analysis (Huber 1967). In the sub-regional analysis, standard errors
are obtained by clustering on sub-region of residence.

Education, Age at Marriage and First Birth, Fertility Behaviors and Gender Equality
Our second objective is to study the effect of women’s education on their age at marriage,
fertility and attitudes towards gender equality. A methodology similar to that discussed for child
mortality outcomes is applied here. We study the following outcomes: (i) age at first marriage
and age at first birth, (ii) fertility behavior such as number of pregnancies, number of children
17

We have used the term child mortality for convenience. The actual measures are number of deceased children per
ever married women with at least one child birth.

17

born, knowledge and utilization of family planning methods, and (iii) attitudes towards gender
equality. Our research methodology does not allow us to test if education affected child mortality
through any of these channels e.g. via its impact on age at first marriage, age at child birth,
knowledge and use of family planning methods or attitudes towards gender equality. However,
we can, and do, test if education influenced any of the aforementioned outcomes and draw
inferences about the possible existence of these channels. For instance, if mother’s education did
not alter attitudes towards gender equality that would be evidence that changes in child outcomes
that we find could not be due to changes in attitudes towards gender equality. Or if we did not
find that education affected use of contraceptives, it would be unlikely that education affected
the health outcomes of children, in our data, via improvement in use of contraceptives.

Results
Effect of Compulsory Education Reform on Schooling
We begin the analysis by examining the descriptive data on the educational outcomes of
the younger (aged 18-22) and older (aged 23-29) cohorts of the ever married sample of women in
2003 and 2008 (Table 1). In 2008, 34% of the older cohort (aged 23-29) had at least eight years
of schooling. The members of the older cohort were born in 1985 or earlier and therefore they
did not have to comply with the law on mandatory eight years of schooling. Among the younger
cohort (aged 18-22), who had to comply with mandatory increase in schooling, 53% had eight
years of schooling in 2008. The 19 percentage-points difference in the schooling variable for the
two cohorts could be due to the Compulsory Schooling Law or due to other factors that caused
the educational attainment of the younger and older cohorts to be different.

18

For a rough and crude estimate of the effect of these other factors, we compare the
educational attainment of similar cohorts in the pre-policy period: in 2003, 27% of the younger
cohort and 32% of the older cohort had eight years of schooling. Assuming that in the absence of
the compulsory schooling law, the gap in the education outcome of the younger and older
cohorts in 2008 would have been the same as in 2003, we subtract the difference in the schooling
outcome between the younger and older cohorts in 2003 from the difference for the two groups
in 2008 to arrive at a crude difference-in-difference estimate of the effect of the Compulsory
Education Law on the education outcome of the younger cohort. Our crude difference-indifference estimate is a 24 percentage-point increase in the proportion of ever married mothers
with eight years of schooling. Table 1 also computes the difference-in-difference estimate of
years of schooling, which is 0.83 years or a 15% increase over the mean for the younger group in
2003, the pre-policy period.
These crude difference-in-difference estimates assume that any increase in years of
schooling of the younger cohort over-and-above the difference between the younger and older
cohorts in 2003 is on account of the Compulsory Education Law. This may not be true. Indeed,
there were social and economic trends correlated with the reform that may have caused increased
schooling of the younger cohort. In the regression analysis that follows we control for these
factors by estimating the effect of the intensity of the education reform, which differed across
regions (and sub-regions) and years as specified in equation (2) and include a complete set of
cohort-of-childhood dummy variables and age effects. These estimates are presented in Table 2.
Panel 1 presents the analysis at the regional level and panel 2 at the sub-regional level.
The intensity of the policy is measured by the number of teachers as a proportion to the number
of children aged 6-13 (or teacher-child ratio) by region in panel 1 and by sub-region in panel 2.

19

All models, in panel 1, control for respondent’s age (a dummy variable for each year of age),
region of residence in childhood, and cohort of childhood effects, cohort of childhood interacted
with the gross enrollment rate in grades 6-8 in the region of residence in childhood in1996, year
of observation, teacher-child ratio at age 11, the interaction of the Young dummy variable with
teacher-child ratio at 11, and the triple interaction term of the Young dummy variable, teacherchild ratio and the dummy variable for year 2008. Further controls are added sequentially in
Models 2-4: Model 2 includes additional controls for the education of respondents’ parents,
Model 3 adds respondent’s mother tongue, and Model 4 adds mother tongue and a variable for
whether the respondent lived in a rural area during childhood, in addition to the controls in
Model 2. Panel 2 has all the controls of panel 1, but the geographic variables and controls are at
the sub-regional level. Standard errors in parenthesis adjust for clustering by region where the
respondent lived in childhood in panel 1 and by the sub-region of residence in childhood in the
panel 2.
Estimates in Table 2, model 1 suggest that a 1 percentage point increase in teacher-to
child ratio resulted in a 16% percentage-point increase in the proportion of younger ever married
women with eight or more years of schooling. Additional controls in Models 2-4 yield similar
results: a 1 percentage point increase in teacher-to-child ratio raised the proportion with at least
eight years of schooling by 17 percentage points (Model 4, panel 1). In the first five years after
the policy reform, the period relevant for this study, nationally the average teacher-child ratio
increased by 0.8 percentage points. Thus, on average, the Compulsory Schooling Law raised the
proportion of ever married women with at least eight years of schooling by 14 (=17 multiplied
with 0.8) percentage points. This is a 41% increase over the mean for the younger cohort in
2003, before the Compulsory Education law was passed. The partial F-stat for the three-way

20

interaction term (instrumental variable) is 14 for Model 4 (panel 1). Estimates in the bottom
panel are similar, but somewhat less precisely estimated. Here the F-stat for the three-way
interaction term is 8.53 (Model 4, panel 2). Estimates in Panel 2 (model 4) indicate that the
Compulsory Schooling law raised the proportion of ever married women with at least eight years
of schooling by 11 percentage points (=13.3 multiplied by 0.8).
Table 2 also presents the first stage estimates with years of schooling as the dependent
variable. Estimated effects are positive and mostly statistically significant. These estimates
suggest that a 1 percentage point increase in teacher-child ratio resulted in an increase in
schooling by approximately 0.7 to 0.8 years. The partial F-stat for the instrumental variable for
Model 4 is 7. Comparing the results from Tables 1 and 2 reveals that the simple difference-indifference estimate that does not control for national trends in schooling over-estimates the effect
of the Compulsory Schooling Law on both the schooling outcomes. Further, it appears from the
F-stat estimates that we have a much better chance of detecting the effect of the dichotomous
variable on eight years of schooling than the effect of the continuous variable on years of
schooling on the second stage outcomes. Therefore, henceforth the analysis is restricted to
estimating the effect of schooling measured as a dichotomous variable.
Next, we estimate equation 2 with 1 modification: the three way interaction term between
Young, teacher-child ratio and year 2008 is replaced by 12 different interactions replacing
Young with a dummy variable indicating the age of the respondent for the 12 age categories. In
Figures 3a and 3b, we plot the estimated coefficients from the 12 three-way interactions. The
point estimates are close to 0 for women ages 23-29 and turn positive and statistically significant
for women ages 18-22. These results provide empirical justification for our construction of the
treatment (Young) and comparison (Older) groups.

21

To test the validity of the instrument, following Duflo (2001) and Chou et al. (2010), we
run regressions using equation (2) on a set of dichotomous dependent variables defined as equal
to 1 if the respondent has at least “m” years of schooling, otherwise 0. In all, we run Model 4 in
Table 2 for 16 different outcomes allowing “m” to vary from 1 to 16. The sample of analysis is
ever married women aged 18-29, the same as in Tables 1 and 2. Figure 4a presents the point
estimates with regional level analysis and Figure 4b presents point estimates with analysis at the
sub-regional level.
The point estimates and the 95th confidence intervals of the three way interaction term,
displayed in Figures 4a and 4b, show a sharp increase in the proportion of ever married women
with six, seven, and eight years of schooling. As expected, the Compulsory Schooling Law has
no effect on the proportion of women with five or fewer years of schooling; estimated
coefficients for dependent variables with 9 or more years of schooling to 16 or more years of
schooling are also modest and statistically insignificant. This is evidence that our instrumental
variable, teacher-child ratio, is not capturing the effect of factors that raised education at all
levels. If that were the case, the estimated coefficients for middle to secondary education or 1-5
years of schooling would have been positive and statistically significant. That the estimated
effects on higher and lower levels of education are modest and statistically insignificant provides
some evidence that our instrumental variable is valid.

Effect of Compulsory Education Reform on Fertility and Child Mortality
Table 3 presents the ordinary least squares (OLS) and the two stage least squares (IV)
estimates of the effect of mother’s education on fertility and child mortality and the reduced form
estimates of the effect of the teacher-child ratio on these outcomes. Estimates in panel 1 are

22

based on region level analysis and estimates in panel 2 are from sub-regional analysis. The OLS
estimates show that ever married women aged 18 to 22 with at least eight years of schooling had
0.5 fewer pregnancies, 0.4 fewer children, and 0.03 fewer deceased children (under age 5) than
women with less than eight years of schooling. Further, eight years of schooling is also
associated with a reduced risk of child mortality based on the following measures: number of
deceased children in the first month after birth, number of deceased children during 1-12 months
after birth, and before age 1.
The IV estimates are larger (in absolute levels) than the OLS estimates and suggest that a
10 percentage point increase in proportion with eight years of schooling lowers number of
pregnancies per ever-married woman by approximately 0.13 and number of children by between
0.11 and 0.16. Further, it lowers number of deceased children before age 5 by 0.02 (24% decline
over the mean of 0.07) and most of the decline is in the first month after child-birth - however,
for these measures the estimates are statistically insignificant in the sub-region-level analysis.
Thus, it is likely that our analyses with fewer clusters (12 clusters in the regional analysis) underestimate the standard errors and our sub-regional analysis (with 20 clusters) is more reliable
(Angrisr & Pischke, 2009; Cameron, Gelbach, & Miller, 2008). Reduced form estimates also
lead to the same conclusion that increased schooling resulting from the Compulsory Education
Law caused a decline in fertility and lowered child mortality.
Table 3 also reports the Wooldridge test statistic for the test of endogeneity. We report
the Wooldridge test statistic, instead of the Wu-Hausman test, as the former is recommended for
TSLS estimates with the cluster robust option for computing standard errors. The Wooldridge
test statistic is often statistically significant for the region-level analysis suggesting that the OLS

23

estimator of the same equation would yield inconsistent estimates and that the instrumental
variables technique is required.
The combined evidence from the regional and sub-regional level analyses thus suggests
that a 10 percentage-points increase in the proportion of ever married women with eight years of
schooling lowered number of pregnancies per ever-married woman by approximately 0.13 and
number of children per ever-married woman by between 0.11 to 0.16, and there is some weak
evidence that mother’s education lowered child mortality.

Effect of Compulsory Education Reform on Age at First Marriage, Age at First Birth, and
Fertility Behaviors
Next, we investigate the effect of women’s schooling on age at first marriage and age at
first birth. Models similar to those in Table 3 are applied and the results are presented in Table 4.
The OLS estimates show that a 10 percentage points increase in the proportion of women with
eight years of schooling raised age at first marriage and age at first birth by about 2 months
(0.15*12). The IV estimates are similar sized and statistically significant in panel 1 but
statistically insignificant in panel 2.
The last two columns of Table 4 show the effect of women’s education on use of family
planning methods and knowledge of their ovulation cycle. The two outcomes we study are:
whether the respondent uses modern family planning methods and whether she understands her
ovulation cycle. In 2003, only 27% of the young ever-married women aged 18-22 used modern
family planning methods and an even smaller proportion, 18%, had knowledge of their ovulation
cycle. Thus, one potential channel through which education could affect fertility and child
mortality is via educating women on family planning.

24

The OLS estimates show that a 10% increase in the proportion of women with eight years
of schooling raised the proportion that used modern family planning methods by 0.5% and of
those with knowledge of their ovulation cycle by 1.6%. The IV estimates are much larger and
suggest that a 10% increase in the proportion with eight years of schooling raised the proportion
that used modern family planning methods by eight to nine percent and those with the
knowledge of their ovulation cycle by five to seven percent. Reduced form estimates are also
large and statistically significant. The Wooldridge test statistic is statistically insignificant except
for the last outcome (dichotomous variable indicating whether the respondent has knowledge of
the ovulation cycle) indicating the OLS estimate is consistent for the other three outcomes, but
the IV technique is required for the last measure.

Effect of Compulsory Education Reform on Women’s Attitudes towards Gender Equality
Our final objective is to study if increase in education resulting from the Compulsory
Education Law changed women’s attitudes towards gender equality. Models similar to those in
Tables 3 and 4 are applied and results are presented in Table 5. The OLS estimates show that
more educated women are more likely to believe in women’s equality on all measures. However,
the IV estimates are all statistically insignificant. The Wooldridge test statistic is statistically
insignificant except for the last outcome (dichotomous variable indicating that the respondent
disagrees that wife beating is justified if she refuses sex indicating the OLS estimate is consistent
for most outcomes.
The reduced form estimates are also modest and statistically insignificant. This suggests
that increases in schooling did not change women’s attitudes towards gender equality in any
substantial manner during our study period. From this we infer that the decline in fertility and

25

child mortality observed in Table 3 could not be on account of a change in women’s attitudes
towards gender inequality. On the other hand, estimates in Table 4 suggest an increase in
women’s education caused an increase in age at marriage and age at first birth. We also find that
increased schooling improved women’s use of modern contraceptive methods as well as
knowledge of their ovulation cycle. Thus it is more likely that the decline in fertility and child
mortality that we observe are on account of these factors along with increase in age at first
marriage and the related age at first childbirth.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have used a natural experiment in Turkey to study the effect of
education on women’s fertility, empowerment, and their children’s health. In 1997, Turkey
passed the Compulsory Education Law that increased compulsory formal schooling from five to
eight years. Individuals born after 1985 (who were 11 or less in 1997) were the target of the law.
To accommodate the expected increase in enrollment, the government devoted additional
resources on school infrastructure and in hiring new teachers and these investments varied across
the sub-regions (and regions) of Turkey. We use the number of primary school teachers per child
(aged 6-13) in the sub-region (or region) of childhood at age 11 as an instrumental variable to
predict the educational attainment of young women. The predicted education variable is then
used to estimate the causal effect of education on a range of outcomes relating to child mortality,
women’s reproductive health, and measures of empowerment, including age at first marriage,
age at first child birth, use of contraceptives, fertility outcomes, and attitudes towards gender
equality.

26

First stage regressions, from the sub-regional analysis, show that the Compulsory
Schooling Law raised the proportion of ever married women with at least eight years of
schooling by 11 percentage points, which is a 32% increase over the mean in the pre-education
reform period.
Estimates from the instrumental variables analysis suggest that a 10 percentage point
increase in proportion of ever married women with eight years of schooling lowered number of
pregnancies per ever-married woman by approximately 0.13 and number of children by 0.11.
There is also some evidence of a decline in child mortality, caused by mother’s education, but
estimated effects turn statistically insignificant in our preferred models (sub-regional analysis).
Further, our analysis shows that a 10 percentage-points increase in the proportion with eight
years of schooling raised the proportion of women using modern family planning methods by
eight to nine percent and the proportion of women with knowledge of their ovulation cycle by
five to seven percent. However, we find little evidence that schooling changed women’s
attitudes towards gender equality.
From this we infer that the decline in fertility and child mortality (in some models) that
we observe could not be on account of changes in women’s attitudes towards gender inequality
resulting from increased education. It is more likely that the decline in fertility and child
mortality that we observe are on account increases in age at first marriage, age at first childbirth
or increased use of contraceptive methods and improvements in women’s understanding of their
ovulation cycle. It might be that attitudes are slow to change and that the content of education in
classrooms is an important factor when it comes to changing attitudes.

27

References
Adler, Nancy E., and Katherine Newman. 2002. “Socioeconomic Disparities in Health: Pathways
and Policies.” Health Affairs, 21(2), 60-76.
Altınay, Ayşe Gül, and Yeşim Arat. 2009. Violence Against Women in Turkey: a Nationwide
Survey. Istanbul: Punto.
Andalon, Mabel, Grossman, Michael, & Williams, Jenny. 2013. “The Effect of Schooling on
Contraceptive Knowledge and Use in Mexico.” Retrieved from:
https://crawford.anu.edu.au/acde/events/adew-2013/papers/Andalon,M_D1.pdf.
Angrist, Joshua D., and William N. Evans. 1998. “Children and Their Parents' Labor Supply:
Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size.” American Economic Review, 88(3), 450477.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Becker, Gary S., and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. “On the Interaction between the Quantity and
Quality of Children.” Journal of Political Economy, 81(2), S279-S288.
Behrman, Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2002. “Does Increasing Women's Schooling Raise
the Schooling of the Next Generation?” American Economic Review, 92 (1),323-334.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimation?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1), 249275.
Black, Sandra E. & Paul J.Devereux. 2011. “Recent Developments in Intergenerational
Mobility,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4B (16), 1487-1541.
Breierova, Lucia, and Esther Duflo. 2004. “The Impact of Education on Fertility and Child
Mortality: Do Fathers Really Matter Less than Mothers?” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No.10513.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-based
Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3),
414-427.
Card, David. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” Handbook of Labor
Economics, 3, 1801-1863.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Theodore J. Joyce. 2010. “Parental
Education and Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1), 33-61.
28

Cohen, Joel E., Øystein Kravdal, and Nico Keilman. 2011. “Childbearing Impeded Education
more than Education Impeded Childbearing among Norwegian Women.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 108 (29), 11830–11835
Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti. 2003. “Mother's Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(4), 1495-1532.
Duflo, Esther. 2001. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment.” American Economic Review, 91(4),
795-813.
Dulger, Ilhan. 2004. “Case Study on Turkey Rapid Coverage for Compulsory Education
Program.” Paper presented at the Conference on Scaling Up Poverty Reduction, Shanghai,
China.
Fuchs, Victor R. 1982. “Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study.” In Economic
Aspects of Health, ed. by V.R. Fuchs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 93-120.
Grossman, Michael. 2000. “The Human Capital Model.” In Handbook of Health Economics,
Vol. 1A, eds. Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse, 347–408. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science..
Grossman, Michael. 2006. Education and Nonmarket Outcomes. In Handbook of the Economics
of Education, Vol. 1, ed. Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch, 577–633. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science..
Görmez, Yüksel, and Serkan Yiğit. 2010. “Monetary Policy under Stress: Lessons from Turkey.”
In Monetary policy during economic crises: A Comparative and Historical Perspective, 192.
Gulesci, Selim, and Erik Meyersson. 2012. “For the Love of the Republic’ Education, Religion,
and Empowerment in Turkey.” Retrieved from http://goo.gl/Vncpq.
Hausmann, Ricardo, L. Tyson, and Saadia Zahidi. 2012. The Global Gender Report 2012. In
World Economic Forum, Geneva.
Huber, Peter J. 1967, "The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates under Nonstandard
Conditions." In Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and
Probability,1(1) 221-233. .
Kan, Kamhon., Lee, Myoung-jae. 2012. “The Effects of Education on Fertility and Child
Health.” Retrieved from http://econ.ccu.edu.tw/manage/1369723123_a.pdf.
Kaushal, Neeraj. “Inter-generational Payoffs of Education,” Future of Children, Forthcoming.

29

Kırdar, Murat, Dayıoğlu Tayfur, Meltem, and Koç, Đsmet. 2011. “The Effect of Compulsory
Schooling Laws on Teenage Marriage and Births in Turkey.” Retrieved from
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1906190
Lindeboom, Maarten, Ana Llena-Nozal, and Bas van Der Klaauw. 2009. “Parental Education
and Child Health: Evidence from a Schooling Reform.” Journal of Health Economics, 28(1),
109-131.
McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer. 2011. “The Effects of Female Education on Fertility and
Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth.” American
Economic Review, 101, 158-195.
Mocan, Naci H., and Colin Cannonier. 2012. “Empowering Women Through Education:
Evidence from Sierra Leone.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18016.
Osili, Una Okonkwo, and Bridget Terry Long. 2008. “Does Female Schooling Reduce Fertility?
Evidence from Nigeria.” Journal of Development Economics, 87(1), 57-75.
Rosenzweig, Mark R., and T. Paul Schultz. 1989. “Schooling, information and nonmarket
productivity: contraceptive use and its effectiveness.” International Economic Review, 457-477.
State Institute of Statistics. 1999. National Education Statistics Formal Education, 1996-1997.
Ankara: Prime Ministry, Republic of Turkey.
Turkish Statistical Institute. 2006. National Education Statistics Formal Education 2003 / '04.
Ankara: Prime Ministry, Republic of Turkey.
United Nations Development Programme. 2005. The Arab Human Development Report. New
York: United Nations.
United Nations Development Programme. 2011. Human Development Report 2011. New York:
United Nations.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1995. “Score Diagnostics for Linear Models Estimated by Two Stage
Least Squares.” In Advances in Econometrics and Quantitative Economics: Essays in Honor of
Professor C. R. Rao, ed. G. S. Maddala, P. C. B. Phillips, and T. N. Srinivasan, 66-87. Oxford:
Blackwell.
World Bank. 2009. “Female Labor Force Participation in Turkey: Trends, Determinants and
Policy Framework.” Human Development Sector Unit Europe and Central Asia Region Report
No 48508-TR, Trans.
World Health Organization. 1995. World health report 1995: Bridging the Gaps. World Health
Organization.

30

Zhang, Shuang. 2012. Mother’s Education and Infant Health: Evidence from Closure of High
Schools in China. Retrieved from
http://www.econ.yale.edu/conference/neudc11/papers/paper_176.pdf.

31

Figure 1a:Number of Primary School (grade 1-8) Teachers
390
370

Thousands

350
330
310
290
270
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

Figure 1b: Primary School Teachers per Child
(Number of grade 1-8 teachers divided by number of children aged 6-13)
0.036
0.034
0.032
0.030
0.028
0.026
0.024
0.022
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

32

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Figure 2: Gross Enrollment Rate in Grades 6-8
(Number of students enrolled in grades 6-8 divided by
population of children aged 11-13 )
100
95
90
85

%

80
75
70
65
60
55
50
1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

33

Figure 3a: Coefficients of the Interactions between Age, Program Intensity in the Region of Childhood at age
11, and DHS 2008 (Analysis based on 12-regions of residence in childhood)

Point estimates and 95 % confidence
intervals

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
29

-10

28

27

26

25

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

-20
-30

Age in 2008

Figure 3b: Coefficients of the Interactions between Age, Program Intensity in the Region of Childhood at Age
11, and DHS 2008 (Analysis based on 20 sub-regions of residence in childhood)

Point estimates and 95 % confidence intervals

50

40

30

20

10

0
29

28

27

26

25

24

23

-10

-20

Age in 2008

22

21

20

19

18

Figure 4a: Association between the Probability of Completing at least “m” years of Schooling and Turkey’s
1997 Compulsory Education Law
(Analysis based on 12-regions of residence in childhood)

Point estimates and 95% confidence intervals

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

-5
-10
-15

Completed years of schooling

Figure 4b: Association between the Probability of Completing at least “m” years of Schooling and Turkey’s
1997 Compulsory Education Law
(Analysis based on 20 sub-regions of residence in childhood)

Point estimates and 95 % confidecne intervals

25
20
15
10
5
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

-5
-10

Completed years of schooling

35

12

13

14

15

16

Table 1. Difference-in-differences Estimates of the Association between Compulsory Education Law and Schooling of Ever Married Mothers

At least eight years of schooling

Years of schooling
N

2008
Young
0.53
(0.02)

Older
0.34
(0.01)

Difference 1
0.19***
(0.02)

2003
Young
0.27
(0.02)

Older
0.32
(0.01)

Difference 2
-0.05**
(0.02)

Difference-indifference
0.24***
(0.03)

6.70
(0.16)
611

6.68
(0.09)
1794

0.02
(0.18)
2405

5.65
(0.13)
795

6.46
(0.08)
2033

-0.81***
(0.16)
2828

0.83***
(0.24)
5233

Note: The sample of analysis is ever married women aged 18-29 in the 2003 and 2008 Turkey Demographic and Health Surveys. Women aged 18-22 are defined
as Young and women aged 23-29 are defined as Older. *0.05 < p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 < p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01.

Table 2: Estimates of the Effect of Compulsory years of Schooling on Ever Married Women’s Education
Schooling= Eight years or more
Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

16.33**
(5.96)
7.51

16.68***
(4.80)
12.08

17.62***
(4.80)
13.48

15.63***
(4.22)
13.69

12.81***
(4.37)
8.58

Mean of the dependent variable

0.34

Mean of teachers child ratio (at age 11)
Model controls for :
Mother’s and father’s education
Mother tongue
Childhood place of residence (rural/urban)
N

Panel 1:Analysis at the level of 12 regions
Young*Teachers to child ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008
F-ratio

Panel 2: Analysis at the level of 20 sub-regions
Young*Teachers to child ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008
F-ratio

Model 1

Years of schooling
Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

17.19***
(4.65)
13.67

62.88
(41.42)
2.30

70.47*
(33.86)
4.33

85.52**
(31.74)
7.26

82.36**
(31.08)
7.02

13.83***
(4.39)
9.92

13.30***
(4.55)
8.53

82.93**
(30.66)
7.29

59.10**
(27.39)
4.67

75.50***
(26.30)
8.24

71.74**
(26.82)
7.13

0.34

0.34

0.34

6.44

6.44

6.44

6.44

0.026

0.026

0.026

0.026

0.026

0.026

0.026

0.026

No
No
No
5,161

Yes
No
No
5,149

Yes
Yes
No
5,149

Yes
Yes
Yes
5,147

No
No
No
5,161

Yes
No
No
5,149

Yes
Yes
No
5,149

Yes
Yes
Yes
5,147

Notes: Each cell in panels 1 and 2 is based on a separate regression with respondent’s schooling outcome listed in the column heading as the dependent variable.
The sample of analysis is ever married women aged 18-29 in the 2003 and 2008 TDHS. Women aged 18-22 are defined as Young. Standard errors clustered on
the region of childhood residence are in parenthesis in Panel 1 and on the sub-region of childhood residence are in parenthesis in Panel 2. F-ratios are F-statistics
of the test of significance of the excluded instrument (the three-way interaction terms listed in table). In addition to the controls listed in the table, each regression
controls for respondent’s age (a dummy variable for each year of age), respondent’s year of birth, teachers to child ratio at age 11, region of residence at age 11,
year of childhood (age 11) interacted with 6-8 grade gross enrollment rate in 1996 in the region of childhood, and an interaction of the Young dummy variable
with teachers to child ratio in region of residence at age 11. Regressions in Panel 2 are the same as in Panel 1 with one difference: all geographic variables (and
controls) are measured at the sub-regional level. Teachers to child ratio is measured by region of childhood in panel 1 and by sub-region of childhood in panel 2.
Means of the teachers-child ratio at regional and sub-regional levels are the same at 3 decimal digits.
*0.05 < p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 < p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01.

37

Table 3: Estimates of the Effect of Mother’s Education on Fertility and Child Mortality
Number of
pregnancies

Panel 1: Analysis at the level of 12 regions
OLS Estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Reduced form estimates
Young*Teachers to child
ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008
IV estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Wooldridge test statistic
Panel 2: Analysis at the level of 20 sub-regions
OLS Estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Reduced form estimates
Young*Teachers to child
ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008
IV estimates
Schooling=8 years or more

Number of
children born

Number of
children
deceased
before age 1

Number of
children
deceased
before age 5

Number of
children
deceased in 1st
month after
birth

Number of
children
deceased in 112 months after
birth

-0.52***
(0.05)

-0.43***
(0.03)

-0.03**
(0.01)

-0.03**
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.01***
(0.00)

-23.25***
(5.46)

-27.13***
(6.35)

-2.02
(1.15)

-3.16**
(1.35)

-2.24**
(0.83)

0.67
(0.90)

-1.35***
(0.46)
5.92**

-1.58***
(0.50)
9.84***

-0.11
(0.07)
1.25

-0.17*
(0.10)
2.82

-0.12*
(0.07)
3.81*

0.04
(0.06)
1.14

-0.51***
(0.04)

-0.43***
(0.04)

-0.03*
(0.01)

-0.03*
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.01)

-0.01***
(0.00)

-17.28**
(7.45)

-14.61*
(7.57)

-1.92
(1.70)

-3.07
(2.00)

-1.91*
(0.91)

0.47
(1.19)

-1.30**
-1.10**
-0.13
-0.21
-0.13
0.03
(0.63)
(0.50)
(0.12)
(0.16)
(0.09)
(0.08)
Wooldridge test statistic
1.96
1.61
0.77
1.75
3.52*
0.33
Mean of the dependent variable
1.81
1.52
0.06
0.07
0.03
0.02
N
5,147
5,147
4,228
4,228
4,228
4,228
Notes: Figures in each cell of Panels 1 and 2 are based on separate regressions with column heading as the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered on the
region of childhood residence are in parenthesis in Panel 1 and on the sub-region of childhood residence are in parenthesis in Panel 2. The sample of analysis is
ever married women aged 18-29 in the 2003 and 2008 TDHS. Women aged 18-22 are defined as Young. All regressions in panel 1 control for respondent’s age
(a dummy variable for each year of age), respondent’s year of birth, region of residence at age 11, parents’ education, respondent’s mother tongue and place of
residence (urban/rural) at age 11, year of childhood interacted with 6-8 grade gross enrollment in the region of residence in childhood in1996, teachers-to-child
ratio, and an interaction of the Young dummy variable with teachers to child ratio. The instrumental variables in the IV estimates is the three way interaction
between Young*Teachers to child ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008. Regressions in Panel 2 are the same as in Panel 1 with one difference: all geographic variables
(and controls) are measured at the sub-regional level. *0.05 < p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 < p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01.

38

Table 4: Estimates of the Effect of Mother’s Education on Age at First Marriage, Age at First birth and Knowledge/ Use of Family Planning Methods

Panel 1: Analysis at the level of 12 regions
OLS Estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Reduced form estimates
Young*Teachers to child
ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008
IV estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Wooldridge test statistic
Panel 2: Analysis at the level of 20 sub- regions
OLS Estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Reduced form estimates
Young*Teachers to child
ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008

Age at first marriage

Age at first birth

Use of modern family
planning methods

Knowledge of ovulation
cycle

1.49***
(0.11)

1.40***
(0.11)

0.05**
(0.02)

0.16***
(0.02)

26.90
(17.41)

29.35**
(12.72)

13.92*
(7.45)

8.39**
(2.97)

1.56**
(0.75)
0.01

1.61***
(0.59)
0.13

0.81**
(0.36)
3.19

0.48**
(0.20)
3.22

1.49***
(0.10)

1.40***
(0.09)

0.05***
(0.02)

0.16***
(0.02)

27.53
(19.13)

19.72
(17.94)

12.53
(7.40)

9.51***
(2.85)

IV estimates
Schooling=8 years or more

2.07
1.33
0.94*
0.71**
(1.27)
(1.07)
(0.49)
(0.29)
Wooldridge test statistic
0.19
0.005
2.67
6.00**
Mean of the dependent variable
19.59
20.64
0.39
0.25
N
5,147
4,228
5,147
5,142
Notes: Figures in each cell of Panels 1 and 2 are based on separate regressions with column heading as the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered on the
region of childhood residence are in parenthesis in Panel 1 and on the sub-region of childhood residence are in parenthesis in Panel 2. The sample of analysis is
ever married women aged 18-29 in the 2003 and 2008 TDHS. Women aged 18-22 are defined as Young. All regressions in panel 1 control for respondent’s age
(a dummy variable for each year of age), respondent’s year of birth, region of residence at age 11, parents’ education, respondent’s mother tongue and place of
residence (urban/rural) at age 11, year of childhood interacted with 6-8 grade gross enrollment in the region of residence in childhood in1996, teachers-to-child
ratio, and an interaction of the Young dummy variable with teachers to child ratio. The instrumental variables in the IV estimates is the three way interaction
between Young*Teachers to child ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008. Regressions in Panel 2 are the same as in Panel 1 with one difference: all geographic variables
(and controls) are measured at the sub-regional level. *0.05 < p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 < p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01.

39

Table 5: Estimates of the Effect of Women’s Education on Her Attitudes Towards Gender Equality

Panel 1: Analysis at the level of 12 regions
OLS Estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Reduced form estimates
Young*Teachers to child
ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008
IV estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Wooldridge test statistic
Panel 2: Analysis at the level of 20 sub- regions
OLS Estimates
Schooling=8 years or more
Reduced form estimates
Young*Teachers to child
ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008
IV estimates
Schooling=8 years or more

Disagrees:
men are
wiser than
women

Disagrees:
boys
education is
more
important
than girls

Disagrees:
men should
make
decisions

Disagrees:
wife beating
is justified if
she wastes
money

Disagrees:
wife beating
is justified if
she neglects
children

Disagrees:
wife beating
is justified if
she argues
with
husband

Disagrees:
wife beating
is justified if
she refuses
sex

0.15***
(0.01)

0.10***
(0.02)

0.16***
(0.01)

0.12***
(0.01)

0.10***
(0.01)

0.11***
(0.01)

0.06***
(0.01)

1.82
(5.77)

4.65
(5.42)

5.33
(5.82)

0.86
(3.58)

5.28
(4.42)

4.34
(2.78)

-4.76
(2.88)

0.11
(0.31)
0.01

0.27
(0.26)
0.33

0.31
(0.31)
0.20

0.05
(0.19)
0.13

0.31
(0.23)
0.74

0.25
(0.16)
0.75

-0.28
(0.22)
4.53*

0.15***
(0.02)

0.10***
(0.02)

0.16***
(0.01)

0.11***
(0.01)

0.09***
(0.01)

0.11***
(0.01)

0.06***
(0.01)

3.35
(5.56)

6.07
(4.24)

5.63
(5.12)

-1.95
(4.58)

0.23
(3.44)

3.01
(2.46)

-2.85
(2.03)

0.25
0.46
0.42
-0.15
0.02
0.23
-0.21
(0.37)
(0.30)
(0.37)
(0.36)
(0.25)
(0.17)
(0.20)
Wooldridge test statistic
0.07
1.33
0.48
0.63
0.10
0.43
3.66*
Mean of the dependent variable
0.81
0.86
0.76
0.79
0.81
0.78
0.90
N
5,139
5,141
5,142
5,142
5,142
5,140
5,140
Notes: Figures in each cell of Panels 1 and 2 are based on separate regressions with column heading as the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered on the
region of childhood residence are in parenthesis in Panel 1 and on the sub-region of childhood residence are in parenthesis in Panel 2. The sample of analysis is
ever married women aged 18-29 in the 2003 and 2008 TDHS. Women aged 18-22 are defined as Young. All regressions in panel 1 control for respondent’s age
(a dummy variable for each year of age), respondent’s year of birth, region of residence at age 11, parents’ education, respondent’s mother tongue and place of
residence (urban/rural) at age 11, year of childhood interacted with 6-8 grade gross enrollment in the region of residence in childhood in1996, teachers-to-child
ratio, and an interaction of the Young dummy variable with teachers to child ratio. The instrumental variables in the IV estimates is the three way interaction
between Young*Teachers to child ratio (at age 11)* Year 2008. Regressions in Panel 2 are the same as in Panel 1 with one difference: all geographic variables
(and controls) are measured at the sub-regional level. *0.05 < p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 < p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01.

40

Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
TDHS 2003
Older cohort

Younger cohort

Age=23-29
N

TDHS 2008

Age=18-22

Mean

N.

Older cohort

Younger cohort

Age=23-29

Mean

N.

Age=18-22

Mean

N

Mean

Age at first marriage

2033

19.81

795

18.19

1794

20.40

611

18.21

Age at first birth

1805

20.97

540

18.96

1550

21.25

402

18.98

Number of pregnancies

2033

2.17

795

1.17

1794

1.97

611

0.98

Number of children born

2033

1.81

795

0.99

1794

1.64

611

0.84

Number of children deceased before age 1

1805

0.07

540

0.06

1550

0.05

402

0.01

Number of children deceased before age 5

1805

0.08

540

0.07

1550

0.06

402

0.01

Number of children deceased in first month after birth

1805

0.04

540

0.03

1550

0.03

402

0.01

Number of children deceased in 1-12 months after birth

1805

0.03

540

0.03

1550

0.02

402

0.00

Use of modern family planning methods

2033

0.43

795

0.27

1794

0.44

611

0.30

Knowledge of ovulatory cycle

2032

0.29

795

0.18

1791

0.27

609

0.18

Disagrees: men are wiser than women

2030

0.78

795

0.74

1790

0.86

610

0.85

Disagrees: boys education is more important than girls

2030

0.85

795

0.80

1792

0.91

610

0.87

Disagrees: men should make decisions

2030

0.72

795

0.60

1793

0.85

610

0.81

Disagrees: wife beating is justified if she wastes money

2030

0.76

795

0.67

1793

0.88

610

0.83

Disagrees: wife beating is justified if she neglects children

2030

0.78

795

0.70

1793

0.87

610

0.86

Disagrees: wife beating is justified if she argues with husband

2029

0.73

795

0.60

1793

0.89

609

0.86

Disagrees: wife beating is justified if she refuses sex

2030

0.86

795

0.82

1791

0.95

610

0.95

41

