                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IS THERE A CASE FOR A "SECOND DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION"? THREE
        DISTINCTIVE FEATURES OF THE POST-1960 U.S. FERTILITY DECLINE

                                           Martha J. Bailey
                                           Melanie E. Guldi
                                           Brad J. Hershbein

                                         Working Paper 19599
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19599


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2013




We thank George Alter, John Bound, John DiNardo, Richard Easterlin, Melissa Kearney, Lisa Neidert,
Paul Rhode, and Elyce Rotella, as well as the festschrift organizers, Leah Boustan, Carola Frydman,
and Bob Margo. We also thank all participants for their helpful comments and suggestions. We are
also grateful to two anonymous reviewers. The authors gratefully acknowledge use of the services
and facilities of the Population Studies Center at the University of Michigan, funded by NICHD Center
Grant R24 HD041028. Financial assistance was provided by the University of Michigan’s Population
Studies Center Eva Mueller Fund, the University of Michigan’s Institute of Social Research’s Graduate
Student Research Assistant Tuition Support Grant, the University of Michigan Rackham Research
Grant, and an NICHD Population Studies Center Trainee Grant (T32 HD0007339). Anna Erickson,
Sayeh Nikpay, and Johannes Norling provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Martha J. Bailey, Melanie E. Guldi, and Brad J. Hershbein. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is There A Case for a "Second Demographic Transition"? Three Distinctive Features of the
Post-1960 U.S. Fertility Decline
Martha J. Bailey, Melanie E. Guldi, and Brad J. Hershbein
NBER Working Paper No. 19599
October 2013, Revised February 2014
JEL No. J01,J1,J11,J12,J13,N3,N32

                                              ABSTRACT

Dramatic fertility swings over the last 100 years have been the subject of large literatures in demography
and economics. Recent research has claimed that the post-1960 fertility decline is exceptional enough
to constitute a “Second Demographic Transition.” The empirical case for a Second Demographic Transition,
however, rests largely on comparisons of the post-1960 period with the baby boom era, which was
itself exceptional in many ways. Our analysis of the U.S. instead compares the fertility decline in the
1960s and 1970s to the earlier 20th century fertility decline, especially the 1920s and 1930s.

Our findings affirm that both periods experienced similar declines in fertility rates and that the affected
cohorts averaged the same number of children born over their lifetimes. In contrast to conventional
wisdom, the mean age of household formation (by marriage or non-marital cohabitation) and first
birth are almost identical for women reaching childbearing age in the 1920s and 1930s and today.

Three features, however, distinguish the post-1960 period: (1) the convergence in the distribution of
completed childbearing around a two-child mode and a decrease in childlessness; (2) the decoupling
of marriage and motherhood; and (3) a transformation in the relationship between the educational
attainment of mothers and childbearing outcomes. These three features of the 20th century fertility
decline have implications for children’s opportunities, children’s educational achievement, and widening
inequality in U.S. labor markets.


Martha J. Bailey                                     Brad J. Hershbein
University of Michigan                               W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research
Department of Economics                              hershbein@upjohn.org
611 Tappan Street
207 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
baileymj@umich.edu

Melanie E. Guldi
University of Central Florida
Department of Economics
4000 Central Florida Blvd.
Orlando, FL 32816-1400
mguldi@bus.ucf.edu
         Over the course of the last 100 years, American childbearing has changed dramatically. American

women reaching childbearing age around 1890 averaged 4.2 live births during their reproductive years.

For women reaching childbearing age a century later, this number had fallen to a stable 2, just below

replacement levels.1 The U.S. baby boom temporarily reversed this trend. Between 1940 and 1960, the

general and total fertility rates rose by 60 percent and cohort measures of completed fertility rates rose by

45 percent.

         The causes of these dramatic fertility swings have been the subject of large literatures in

economics and demography. The economics literature has largely focused on demand-side explanations—

changes in preferences, income, and the shadow price of children that affect how many children couples

choose to have.2 This literature generally assumes that fertility decline was driven by the same forces

before and after the baby boom. The demographic literature has modeled the fertility decline as part of a

larger “demographic transition” (Kirk 1996). More recently, Lesthaeghe and van de Kaa (1986) argue that

the diffusion of “the Pill” and the women’s rights revolution beginning in the 1960s sparked a “Second

Demographic Transition,” or SDT. This argument builds on Ryder and Westoff’s (1971) claim that the

“contraceptive revolution” had a large effect on women’s childbearing, so large that Westoff’s 1975

Presidential Address to the Population Association of America asserted that, “the entire [emphasis added]

decline in births within marriage across the decade of the ‘sixties’ can be attributed to the improvement in

the control of fertility.” 3

         An obvious counterargument to these claims is that the period looks more like mean reversion

rather than a distinct transition in its own right. Becker’s Treatise on the Family (1981) challenges Ryder

1
  These statistics use completed childbearing from the U.S. Census (for 1890) and the June Current Population Survey (for 1990)
and are close to calculations of the U.S. total fertility rate (TFR). In 1890, the TFR was approximately 3.9 (Haines 1989) and had
fallen in half to 1.9 by 2010—just below replacement levels (Martin et al. 2012).
2
  Economists generally model the decline in childbearing as a by-product of rising wages, which increase the opportunity cost of
children, or of rising incomes, which induce substitution away from the quantity of children toward child quality (Becker and
Lewis 1973). Economic models treat the baby boom as a price shock (Barro and Becker 1989, Greenwood et al. 2005, Albanesi
and Olivetti 2009, Doepke et al. 2008) or income shock (Easterlin 1966, 1971, 1980).
3
  Economists have also noted the potential importance of the supply side (Easterlin 1975; Michael and Willis 1976; Easterlin,
Pollak, and Wachter 1980; Easterlin and Crimmins 1985; and Hotz and Miller 1988). For empirical papers on the role of greater
access to reliable medical contraceptives, see Goldin and Katz (2002); Bailey (2006); Guldi (2008); Kearney and Levine (2009);
Bailey (2010); Bailey, Hershbein, and Miller (2012); and Bailey (2012).




                                          Second Demographic Transition – 1
and Westoff’s claim of post-1960s exceptionalism, noting that the decline in childbearing in the 1920s—

before the availability of the Pill—was almost as rapid. In an often-cited response to Lesthaeghe and van

de Kaa, Cliquet (1991) argues that the trends they emphasize “already existed before the sixties [for

Council of Europe member states]; in fact, most of them emerged with the … demographic transition

around the turn of the century” (p. 72). In another prominent article, Coleman (2004, p. 14) criticizes the

SDT literature as ahistorical: “A graph truncated at [the 1950s and 1960s] gives a false impression of an

inexorable downward slide coinciding with the onset of the [second demographic transition], while in fact

in most countries the real decline was forty years earlier. The 1950s and the 1960s are a deceptive

aberration in fertility history” (p. 18).

        An important open question is whether the case for a SDT remains after comparing the post-1960

period with changes in childbearing during the early 20th century. Our paper investigates this question for

the U.S., and we compare features of the post-1960 fertility decline (roughly 1960 to 1990) with features

of the early 20th century fertility decline (roughly 1900 to 1930), rather than the baby boom era. To this

end, our analysis compiles evidence from many datasets including the decennial censuses, the June

Current Population Surveys (CPS), Vital Statistics, and the National Surveys of Family Growth (NSFG).

        Our findings affirm many critiques of the SDT literature. Both the early and later periods

experienced similar declines in fertility rates, and the affected cohorts averaged the same number of live

births over their lifetimes. In contrast to conventional wisdom, the mean ages of household formation (by

marriage or non-marital cohabitation) and first birth for women today are nearly identical to those of

women reaching childbearing age in the 1920s and 1930s. Yet three distinct features of the post-1960

period stand out.

        Feature 1. The emergence of a two-child norm and reduction in childlessness. Among cohorts

reaching childbearing age after 1960, the two-child family became more universal and the variance in the

number of children born fell significantly from its level in the early 20th century. Recent cohorts were also

significantly less likely to be childless. These empirical patterns are consistent with the predictions of a

simple economic framework that includes a supply-side characterized by changes in contraceptive


                                     Second Demographic Transition – 2
technology. One key prediction within this framework is that the greater availability of reliable and lower

marginal cost contraception should reduce the dispersion in childbearing outcomes by reducing both

precautionary undershooting and unintended pregnancy.

        Feature 2. The decoupling of marriage and motherhood. Age at first union (historically through

marriage, more recently through cohabitation) and age at first birth had a strong positive association in the

early 20th century, but this inter-relationship broke down among women after 1960. Recent cohorts

formed their first households at similar ages to cohorts born earlier in the century but more often

cohabited before marriage. Age at first union and age at first intercourse have become less predictive of

motherhood timing, as many women give birth outside of marriage. Among women marrying before

having children, the interval between first marriage and motherhood has increased.

        Feature 3. A transformation in the relationship between mothers’ education and childbearing.

When comparing highly and less educated women, completed childbearing, childlessness, and the

likelihood of marriage are much more similar today than in the early 20th century. Despite these

similarities, age at first household formation, age at first birth, and non-marital childbearing diverged after

1960 by mothers’ education, with more educated mothers more likely to delay household formation,

motherhood, and childbearing within marriage.

        It is unclear whether these changes are significant enough to constitute a SDT or are simply the

most recent stage in the ongoing first demographic transition (Lee and Reher 2011). Continued shifts in

the demand for children due to, for instance, rising wages (Becker 1965) and incomes (Easterlin 1966,

1971, 1980; Becker and Lewis 1973; Willis 1973) are key to understanding the longer-term narrative of

U.S. fertility decline. In the absence of important shifts in the demand for children, the contraceptive

revolution may have mattered little.

        This analysis describes three distinctive features of the post-1960 period that are consistent with

the contraceptive revolution playing an important role in fertility decline—a role that complements (but

does not supplant) shifts in the demand for children. This suggestive evidence extends a growing

empirical literature on the Pill that likely understates its broader significance (Goldin and Katz 2002;


                                    Second Demographic Transition – 3
Bailey 2006; Guldi 2008; Bailey 2010; Bailey, Hershbein, and Miller 2012; Bailey 2012) by virtue of the

fact that the research designs may difference out spill-over and general equilibrium effects.

        Of particular importance is that these features suggest that the contraceptive revolution has

exacerbated economic inequality among children. The decoupling of marriage and motherhood and the

changing relationship of women’s education with childbearing is consistent with class-based polarization

in children’s resources (McLanahan 2004). The fact that trends in non-marital childbearing and age at

first birth have not stabilized suggests a continued, if not increasing, polarization in these resources in

years to come. The late 20th century fertility decline, therefore, has implications for the evolution of

children’s opportunities, their educational achievement, and the widening inequality in U.S. labor

markets.


                      I.       THE 20TH CENTURY U.S. FERTILITY TRANSITION
        “Fertility transitions” are generally defined by population scientists as “long-term declines in the

number of children from four or more per woman to two or fewer” (Mason 1997). Until recently, U.S.

(marital) fertility decline was believed to have begun in the late 18th century, almost 75 years before

marital fertility rates began to decline in most other nations (France excepted; Haines 2000 and Binion

2001). Using new estimates of 19th century mortality and newly available census microdata, Hacker

(2003) shows that it is likely that the longer-term decline in U.S. fertility began closer to the mid-19th

century. Furthermore, among white women, his estimates suggest that the decline in marital fertility did

not begin until after the Civil War. Although the features and timing of demographic transitions vary

considerably across places (Guinnane 2011, Lee and Reher 2011), the longer-term demographic transition

in the U.S. was characterized by declines in infant and child mortality, the disappearance of the

Malthusian pattern of late marriage, and the emergence of birth-order specific fertility control.

        The American fertility transition presents a fascinating challenge to scholars—particularly among

those who desire an integrated model of demographic change. The early fertility decline took place in the

absence of modern contraception and is believed to have been driven by changes in the demand for




                                    Second Demographic Transition – 4
children. The baby boom took place in the context of increasing income, urbanization, educational

attainment, and women’s labor force participation—all trends that are associated with declining fertility in

the early 20th century. Adding to the puzzle is that the post-1960 period saw falling fertility rates even as

incomes, urbanization, educational attainment, and women’s labor-force participation continued to rise.

                      A. Models of Fertility Decline in Economics and Demography

        The challenge of explaining U.S. fertility transition has led to the development of two main

schools of thought in economics. One cornerstone of the literature has been Richard Easterlin’s “relative

income hypothesis” (1966, 1971, 1980). Easterlin argues that the importance of a cohort’s perceived

“earnings potential” relative to its “material aspirations” is critical in the formation of adult preferences

for material goods and children. In this view, children who grew up in the Great Depression during the

1930s formed modest material aspirations that were surpassed by their actual experience as young adults

in the 1940s and 1950s. When these children of the Depression found that they could afford more of

everything, they consumed more and had more children. Children growing up in the more affluent 1940s

and 1950s had the reverse experience and, consequently, had fewer children. This led to subsequent

fertility declines. Problematic for this theory is that fertility rates have not cycled since the baby boom.

        Another cornerstone of the literature has been Gary Becker’s neoclassical theory (1960, 1965,

with Greg Lewis 1973). This school of thought pushes Easterlin’s endogenous preference formation into

the background and emphasizes the importance of prices and absolute incomes. Becker explains the

negative association between childbearing and income as reflecting the difference in the opportunity cost

of childbearing (higher wage rates for higher income individuals) as well as the greater income elasticity

of child quality (compared to the quantity of children). Becker, in collaboration with Robert Barro, has

extended the reach of the neoclassical school to macroeconomics with two joint articles (Becker and

Barro 1988, Barro and Becker 1989). These articles reformulated Becker’s initially static theory of

fertility to extend across generations. This reformulation models decision-makers as altruistic parents who

care about the utility of their children and, therefore, incorporate their children’s utility into their own




                                    Second Demographic Transition – 5
utility function. The Barro-Becker framework has led to the development of a new subfield in economics

called “family macro,” which has created several alternative theories of the baby boom (see Greenwood et

al. 2005; Doepke et al. 2008; and Albanesi and Olivetti 2009). With slightly different formulations of the

problem, each of these models examines a different potential price change (as suggested in Barro and

Becker’s articles) that could have produced the baby boom. In the spirit of Becker (1965), these models

rely upon the increasing opportunity cost of childrearing (primarily due to the growth in women’s wages)

to generate the longer-term decline in U.S. childbearing. Problematic for these models is that when

calibrated to match the baby boom, they have difficulty generating the speed of the post-1960 U.S.

fertility decline.

         Much of the demographic literature has maintained a different focus in explaining the post-1960

fertility decline. Citing newly-collected national surveys documenting increased use of the Pill, Ryder and

Westoff (1971) heralded the 1960s as a period of “contraceptive revolution.” Building on this claim,

Lesthaeghe and van de Kaa (1986) hypothesize that the arrival of the contraceptive, sexual, and women’s

rights revolutions of the 1960s engendered a distinct demographic transition—a period exceptional

enough to be called the “Second Demographic Transition” (SDT). Their initial work focuses on Europe,

but recent work by Lesthaeghe and Neidert (2006) argues that a SDT is underway in the U.S. as well. The

distinctive characteristics of the SDT, they argue, are persistently low-fertility rates, substantially delayed

marriage and childbearing, increases in non-marital cohabitation and childbearing, and high divorce

rates.4 Even as demographers have stressed these changes, the demand-side formulations of both the

Easterlin and Becker schools of thought have continued to shape the theoretical and empirical literature

on childbearing in economics.




4
 In some formulations, the rise in women’s labor-force participation is also attributed to the SDT. We omit discussion of
women’s labor-force participation rates here because this is covered in Olivetti’s chapter.




                                       Second Demographic Transition – 6
                         B. Integrating the Neoclassical Model with a Supply Side

         Augmenting demand-based economic models of childbearing with a “supply” side is one way to

operationalize the hypotheses of Ryder and Westoff (1971) and Lesthaeghe and van de Kaa (1986). To

this end, the pioneering work of Michael and Willis (1976) provides a useful bridge between the

neoclassical demand for children (Becker 1960, 1965; Willis 1973; Becker and Lewis 1973) and the

“supply side” stressed elsewhere (Coale 1973; Sheps 1964; Sheps and Perrin 1964; Westoff 1975;

Easterlin, Pollak, and Wachter 1980). Their framework relaxes two assumptions in neoclassical models:

(1) that childbearing is deliberately determined and (2) that regulating fertility is costless. In their model,

the number of children is a random variable, and couples choose a contraceptive strategy to reduce the

monthly probability of conception. In addition, fertility regulation has a price. Each contraceptive

strategy—the adoption of behaviors or use of contraceptives—is associated with a fixed and marginal cost

and yields an expected number of children. Couples maximize utility by weighing the marginal costs of

averting births against the marginal benefit of attaining an ex ante distribution of childbearing. That is,

couples optimize by choosing a distribution of possible childbearing with mean, *, to maximize utility

net of the costs of fertility regulation, or max U()-C().

         Within this framework, Ryder and Westoff’s “contraceptive revolution” is simply the claim that

shifts in C() became much more important in the determination of childbearing outcomes in the post-

1960 period. Lesthaeghe and van de Kaa’s (1986) distinction between the first and second demographic

transitions is summarized by saying that the first transition was driven by shifts in U() whereas the SDT

was driven by changes in C(). This framework also provides a starting point for conceptualizing why

standard demand-side models in economics may fail to capture important features of the post-1960

fertility decline.

                            Effects on the Mean Number of Children Born
         The framework of Michael and Willis provides testable predictions regarding how the

introduction of modern contraceptives like the Pill could have changed the distribution of children ever

born. The model’s insight about the effect of modern contraception on the mean number of children ever


                                    Second Demographic Transition – 7
born is straightforward. Michael and Willis consider a simple division of costs of attaining a fertility

distribution, , using contraceptive strategy, j, into a fixed cost, j, and a marginal cost, j. The cost of

using strategy j to attain an ex ante birth distribution, , is given by cj = j +  j (N−), where N indexes

the expected distribution of children born in the absence of any contraceptive method. The term N− is,

therefore, the expected number of births averted. The (constant) marginal cost of averting a birth, j,

might be a behavioral cost (abstinence or withdrawal), the inconvenience or discomfort of birth control

use (barrier methods), or the necessity of purchasing supplies (as with condoms or the birth control pill).

Fixed costs include the price of searching for a supplier, learning about a method, and perhaps side effects

as well. The total cost function includes only the lowest cost option for achieving an expected number of

births, or C()=minj{j + j (N -)}.

        Modern contraceptive methods (such as the Pill or IUD) can be modeled as reducing the marginal

costs of preventing births, because no interruption, effort, or discomfort at the time of intimacy is

required. Thus, modern methods would reduce  for some range of births averted. Holding the demand

for births constant, reducing the marginal costs of preventing births would normally lead to a reduction in

the number of children born per woman. But because the effectiveness of these methods also reduced the

uncertainty surrounding childbearing outcomes, there is potential for offsetting theoretical effects.

Michael and Willis point out that more reliable contraception may, somewhat counter to intuition,

increase the number of children born by eliminating precautionary undershooting. This effect may be

small but it makes the theoretical impact of modern contraception ambiguous.

                             Effects on the Distribution of Children Born
        The Michael and Willis model also provides straightforward predictions of how different

contraceptive methods affect the distribution of children ever born. Michael and Willis present figures

that show how the expected number of children and variance in the number of children change with

contraceptive technique (1976, table 2). Techniques with lower contraceptive efficiency (for example, the

rhythm method) tend to have higher mean and variance (5.11, 2.15) than do techniques with higher

contraceptive efficacy (for example, condoms: 2.33 and 1.64, or the Pill: 0.19 and 0.18), but this


                                    Second Demographic Transition – 8
relationship is not monotonic. In particular, the use of no method at all (or reduced frequency of sex)

produces a high number of children in expectation but small variance. The intuition for this is that most

women achieve near their natural biological fertility without using any method, and that this varies

relatively little across women. Less effective methods, while reducing the mean, still fail frequently

enough that many women have more children than intended, increasing the variance.5 Thus, for women

in the early 20th century, the methods of fertility control readily available to them would be expected to

reduce the mean without reducing the variance, which might rise with the use of such methods. In

contrast, as women in the latter half of the 20th century began to use more effective methods in greater

proportion, both the mean number of children and the variance should fall, assuming the distribution of

preferences, prices, and income remained constant.

          Thus, the Michael and Willis framework of fertility choice provides a simple, mathematically

tractable bridge between economic and socio-demographic models. It explicitly models the importance of

the “supply side” as technologies affecting the marginal costs of averting births in the spirit of Easterlin

(1975) and Easterlin, Pollak, and Wachter (1980): the model’s birth production function separates natural

fertility, N, from targeted childbearing, *, in a stochastic framework with costs of fertility control.

Finally, it formalizes Coale’s (1973) conceptual framework: “ready” is captured by the formal calculus;

“willing” is captured by the utility function, prices, and income; and “able” enters as the technology and

cost of contraception based upon the mathematical demography of Sheps (1964) and Sheps and Perrin

(1964).

          For our purposes (and those of other empirical researchers wishing to examine the

appropriateness of different theories), another valuable feature of the Michael and Willis (1976) model is

that it provides a richer set of testable predictions than does theory based solely on changes in the number

of children. Although Michael and Willis’s insights about changes in the dispersion of outcomes do not


5
  The nonmonotonic relationship between the mean and the variance in the Michael-Willis model rests—in part—on their
assumption that childbirth is a Markov renewal process, or that intervals between childbearing can be assumed to be independent
and identically distributed.




                                         Second Demographic Transition – 9
cover other features of Ryder and Westoff’s (1971) contraceptive revolution or Lesthaeghe and van de

Kaa’s (1986) SDT, they provide an additional moment of the distribution (the variance) that can be used

to test claims of post-1960 exceptionalism.


                           II.      HOW DIFFERENT IS THE POST-1960 PERIOD?
         The case for the exceptionalism of the post-1960 fertility decline rests on the claim that there are

meaningful differences from the pre-baby-boom fertility decline. The implicit hypothesis is that the

longer-term forces leading fertility rates to decline in the early 20th century are the same forces (e.g., the

opportunity cost of childbearing or substitution toward child quality) that contributed to fertility decline in

the post-1960 period. To examine the similarities across periods, our analysis compares outcomes across

birth cohorts. For the early 20th century transition, we focus on women born from 1880 to 1910 who

reached the age of 20 from 1900 to 1930. We often refer to the cohorts born between 1900 and 1910 as

the early 20th century or (following the demographic literature) the “low-fertility” cohorts. For the later

20th century transition, we focus on the 1940 to 1970 cohorts, who reached the age of 20 from 1960 to

1990. We often refer to these cohorts as the later or mid 20th century cohorts.

                    A. Similarities in Early and Later 20th Century Period Fertility Rates

         Figure 1 presents the general fertility rate (GFR) by year and cohort-based measures of mean

“children ever born” (live births excluding miscarriages and still births) to women ages 41 to 70 from the

decennial census and the June Current Population Survey (CPS).6 For the mean number of children born,

we have advanced the series 25 years (approximating the period when the birth cohort was having

children) to correspond to the GFR. The pattern of the cohort-based measure corresponds closely to the

period measures. Women born in 1875 (linked to 1900 in figure 1) averaged 3.3 births over their

lifetimes, whereas women in the early 20th century cohorts averaged 2.3 births over their lifetimes. This



6
  Because the census stopped asking about children ever born after 1990, we use the June Current Population Survey (CPS) to
extend these figures to 2010 (birth cohort of 1969). Changes in age restrictions and regression-based age-at-observation
adjustments alter these figures very little.




                                       Second Demographic Transition – 10
number rose sharply to over 3 children for the cohorts reaching childbearing age during the baby boom

(born between 1915 and 1935), and then fell to around 2 births for the 1945 to 1970 cohorts.7 A second

series shows that the addition of never-married women (first asked about their childbearing in 1970) alters

the overall pattern very little except to reduce the levels of childbearing. Consistent with the literature,

figure 1 shows that the decline in the mean number of live births was almost identical for the early and

late 20th century cohorts.8

         Two kinds of survival bias may influence these estimates. First, income is positively associated

with life expectancy, so lower-income women—who also tend to have more children—may be less likely

to survive to answer census questions about their childbearing. Because we observe earlier cohorts at

older ages, this differential mortality would be more pronounced for the earlier cohorts. Second, women

having more children face greater risk of death from childbirth and are, therefore, less likely to be

enumerated later. Both of these sources of survival bias should lead live births to be understated for the

older cohorts. As a result, the speed of fertility decline in the early 20th century will be understated.

         To gauge the importance of the first factor, we limit our sample to women ages 41 to 50, but this

has a negligible effect on our estimates. This implies that the mean number of children ever born to

women surviving to ages 41 to 50 versus those who survive to ages 51 to 70 are not appreciably different.

Assessing the importance of differential maternal mortality is more difficult, and we can provide only a

crude adjustment. Extrapolating average annual maternal mortality rates from Albanesi and Olivetti

(2009, figure 1), we determine that approximately 1 in 100 live births resulted in the mother’s death. If we

assume that mortality risk is equally probable across birth parity and maternal cohorts (which, admittedly,

is a big simplification), the probability that a woman survives giving birth to n children is p = 0.99n.


7
  Child survival rates to age 10 were historically much lower than today, so—while holding constant the demand for surviving
children—increases in survival provide one reason for the reduction in children ever born over the last 100 years. Unfortunately,
because the census after 1910 did not ask about children surviving, we cannot use these data to investigate the role of child
survival on completed fertility. That said, because infant and child mortality rates were higher for the early fertility cohorts,
differences in surviving children would tend to make the early and later cohorts look even more similar.
8
  The decline is slightly faster for the late cohorts at 0.04 versus 0.036 births per year for the early 20th century cohorts. The
average annual rate of decline in the general fertility rate (GFR) in the 1960s was 2.2 births per 1000 women of childbearing age
per year, only slightly faster than that in the 1920s (approximately 2 births per 1000 women of childbearing age per year).




                                         Second Demographic Transition – 11
Dividing by this factor across the entire distribution of children born to pre-1900 maternal cohorts leads

the mean number of children born to be approximately 0.1 higher for women born in 1870. Correcting for

these sources of bias tends to increase the rate of fertility decline among the early cohorts and, thus, tends

to make the fertility declines for earlier and later cohorts more similar. Neither adjustment, however,

alters the broad conclusion that the decline in the mean number of live births was similar in magnitude

during the early 20th century and after 1960.

         Compositional changes in the U.S. population, especially those due to urbanization and

immigration, may also influence our findings. Potentially important for our conclusions about the speed

of the early fertility decline is that the representation of these groups in the U.S. population shifted during

the 20th century. As shown in figure 2 (and noted in Easterlin 1961), both the levels and changes in

completed childbearing differed across native and foreign-born women as well as women residing in

urban and rural areas. Racial differences were also large. To account for these compositional changes, we

reweight the individuals within each birth cohort using inverse propensity score weighting (Dinardo,

Fortin, and Lemieux 1996). This procedure adjusts the distribution of each cohort’s characteristics—the

share of the population in urban areas, share of immigrants from different source countries, race and

ethnicity, and age composition—to resemble the distribution of characteristics among the cohorts of 1920

to 1929.9 Figure 1 also plots this reweighted series (the cohorts of 1920 to 1929 corresponds to the years

1945 to 1954). This reweighting has a negligible impact for more recent cohorts and a small (but more

noticeable) impact on the early 20th century cohorts. After reweighting, mean completed childbearing

declined by 0.9 births between cohorts born in 1875 and 1910. Without reweighting, the decline is

roughly similar. This also underscores the argument that—in both the early 20th century and post-1960

period—fertility decline was driven by within-group (behavioral) changes rather than changes in

population composition.


9
  The specific covariates used to construct the propensity weights include a dummy for whether the woman lives in an urban area,
a set of 11 dummies for region of the world (country groups) of birth, a dummy for whether the woman is white, a dummy for
whether she is Hispanic, and a set of 5 dummies for her 5-year age group at time of observation.




                                        Second Demographic Transition – 12
        B. Similarities in Mean Age at First Union and Birth in the Early and Later 20th Century

        According to Lesthaeghe and van de Kaa (1986), two further hallmarks of the SDT are delayed

marriage and childbearing. This section assesses this claim in historical perspective by comparing

outcomes for the cohorts reaching childbearing ages during each period: the low-fertility cohorts (cohorts

born from 1900 to 1910 who reached childbearing age in the 1920s and 1930s) and the cohorts born from

1940 to 1950 (who reached childbearing age in the 1960s and 1970s).

        Figure 3 shows a remarkable correspondence in the age at first union (either through marriage or

cohabitation) for the low-fertility cohorts and cohorts reaching childbearing age in the 1960s and 1970s.

During the early 20th century fertility decline, average age at marriage remained very stable. Even as

completed childbearing fell fairly linearly from 3.4 for the birth cohort of 1875 to 2.3 for the birth cohort

of 1915, mean age at first marriage hovered around 22 and nudged upward only slightly for the low-

fertility cohorts. It is unlikely that the stability in marriage age reflects selection into marriage. Figure 3

also shows that the share of women ever marrying for these cohorts stayed relatively constant at around

90 percent.

        The baby boom disrupted these patterns. The share of women ever marrying increased from

around 90 percent to 95 percent, and the mean age at first marriage for the 1935 cohort fell by almost two

years to 20.7 (figure 3). Increases in childbearing during the baby boom were accompanied by earlier,

more universal marriage and childbearing. The share of women with their own child in the household rose

sharply for cohorts born in the 1930s.

        Women reaching childbearing age after 1960 did not delay marriage or shy away from it

altogether. The mean age at first marriage remained stable for the 1935 to 1945 birth cohorts and began to

rise for women born after 1945. Similarly, the share who ever married did not begin to fall until after the

1945 cohort. The mean age at first marriage for the cohort of 1910 (conditional upon being married before

age 35) was 22.5. During the baby boom, when completed childbearing was at its 50-year peak and very

few women never married, the mean age at first marriage was lower and more concentrated around age

21. Yet, as the baby boom ended and completed fertility rates fell for cohorts born in the 1940s, early


                                    Second Demographic Transition – 13
marriage persisted. The mean age at first marriage remained low at 20.6 for the cohort of 1940 and 21.3

for the cohort of 1950.

          Age at first marriage rose rapidly for cohorts born after 1950 and surpassed the mean of the low-

fertility cohorts. The rise in non-marital cohabitation, however, makes these trends misleading statistics

for the age at first household formation—what we will call “age at first union.” For instance, if women

born in the 1950s who would have married at younger ages in the past began substituting toward non-

marital cohabitation, the rise in mean age at first marriage may overstate the actual rise in the age at

household formation. It also implies that differential selection into marriage by age 35 in the lower

fertility and later cohorts could bias these comparisons. Figure 4 shows that only 78 percent had married

by age 35 for the most recent cohort we can measure versus 87 percent for the low-fertility cohorts.

          Information from the 1988 to 2010 NSFG allows us to investigate how much of the trend toward

later marriage has been due to pre-marital cohabitation—a change in the “label” and definition of a long-

term relationship rather than household formation. Assuming that non-marital cohabitation rates were

historically low (or were reported as “marriages” in the census), figure 3 shows that—after accounting for

non-marital cohabitation—the current mean age at first union is identical to the mean in the early 20th

century (22.5) and that the post-baby-boom increase in age at first household formation is much more

gradual. It also shows that the decline in the fraction ever married is completely offset by rising non-

marital cohabitation. Figure 4 shows the evolving distribution in age at first union and underscores the

similarity in the distribution today with the distribution earlier in the century. Only 20 percent of women

born in 1970 had married by age 20, but 35 percent had cohabited. By age 25, 55 percent of the same

cohort had married, but over 70 percent had cohabited.10 Marriage plus cohabitation trends seem to have




10
  Appendix figure 1A shows the distribution of age at first marriage for select birth cohorts. Appendix figure 1B shows the effect
of including non-marital cohabitation to this distribution for two recent cohorts. Whereas cohabitation alters the distribution for
the birth cohort of 1950 negligibly, it significantly revises the distribution for women born in 1970 to look more like the 1950
distribution.




                                         Second Demographic Transition – 14
stabilized around the historical level of age at first union for cohorts born after 1960, and women in their

30s may even be slightly more likely to have married or cohabited than women of the past.

         Presuming non-marital cohabitation was rare in the early 20th century, combining these non-

marital cohabitation and marriage rates suggests a surprising similarity in the age at first union in the

early and later 20th century. The apparent “delay in marriage” is an artifact of the rise in non-marital

cohabitation, and the share of women married or cohabiting by age 35 is higher today than it was earlier

in the 20th century (the share was around 87 percent before the 1915 birth cohort and rose to around 95

percent for cohorts born in the 1930s, where it has remained).

         Changes in the mean age at first birth today are also similar to their early 20th century mean.

Although the June CPS does not provide information on older cohorts’ ages at first birth (so they cannot

be included in figure 3), figure 5 uses census data to track the share of women with their own child in the

household for the birth cohorts of 1875 to 1990 across several ages.11 Consistent with age at first birth

rising and birth spacing increasing, the low-fertility cohorts experienced modest reductions in the share of

women with children at home by age 20 (2 percentage points), age 22 (6 percentage points), age 25 (5

percentage points), and age 30 (6 percentage points), and a 6 percentage point increase in the share at age

35.

         Unlike the low-fertility cohorts, the timing of marriage and age at first birth diverged sharply for

cohorts reaching childbearing age after 1960. Figure 3 shows that the mean age at first birth was

approximately 25 for the low-fertility cohorts, whereas it was 22.4 for the birth cohort of 1940 and about

one year older at 23.5 for the cohort of 1950. Although their age at first marriage and age at first birth

were both lower than the low-fertility cohorts, most of the women born in or after the late 1940s would go

on to have just two or fewer children in their lifetimes—fewer than the low-fertility cohorts. For instance,

42 percent of the 1947 birth cohort had a child by age 22, whereas only 32 percent of the 1907 cohort did



11
   The census allows us to identify that a child belongs to a particular mother in the household, but we cannot identify whether
that child was born to the woman, adopted by her, or is a step-child.




                                        Second Demographic Transition – 15
so (figure 5). For the low-fertility cohorts, motherhood delay was not just at very early ages but continued

into older ages. By age 30, 72 percent of the 1949 birth cohort had a child whereas only 59 percent of the

1909 birth cohort did.12 In fact, in terms of levels, motherhood timing among women born in the 1940s

looks more similar to that of baby-boom mothers than to that of the low-fertility cohorts. Only recently

has motherhood delay reached and then surpassed levels observed in the early 20th century.13 The cohorts

born in the late 1970s were just as likely to be mothers at age 30 as women born 70 years earlier.

          In summary, our analysis of completed childbearing, age at first marriage, and age at first birth

affirms the findings of other studies. The early and later 20th century cohorts both achieved low mean

levels of completed childbearing (2.3 and 1.9, respectively), and the speed of fertility decline was

comparable for period and cohort-based measures. Lesthaeghe and van de Kaa (1986) argue that today’s

low rates of childbearing are a hallmark of the SDT, but U.S. fertility rates in the post-1960 period do not

appear exceptional relative to the early 20th century. In addition, comparing today’s cohorts to the low-

fertility cohorts shows small differences in the mean age at first union after accounting for increases in

non-marital cohabitation. They are also similar in terms of the mean age at first birth. Based on means

alone, one might agree with Cliquet (1991), who argues that the hallmarks of the SDT existed before the

baby boom and emerged around the turn of the century (p. 72). These similarities also motivate Becker’s

argument that “the ‘contraceptive revolution’ … ushered in by the pill has probably not been a major

cause of the sharp drop in fertility in recent decades… [W]omen in the United States born between 1900

and 1910 had quite small families without the pill by using other contraceptives, abstinence, and induced

abortions” (1981: p. 101–102).



12
   This can also be seen in appendix figure 2, which plots the distribution of age at first birth for these cohorts using data from the
June CPS and NSFG.
13
   See appendix figure 3. During the early 20th century, women in their early twenties had the highest birth rates, followed by
women in their late twenties, early thirties, late thirties, and then by teens and older women. Consistent with substantial delays in
motherhood today, women in their late twenties now have the highest birth rates. In 2010, birth rates to women in their early
thirties exceeded those among women in their early twenties for the first time in 90 years (Linder and Grove 1947, Grove and
Hetzel 1968, Martin et al. 2012). Age-specific birth rates also show that the levels of teen birth rates today are closer to those of
the early 20th century than they have been since the 1930s. Given frequently cited concerns about high rates of teen childbearing
in the U.S., only in the last few years have teen birth rates dipped to 90-year lows (i.e., lower than rates recorded in 1918).




                                           Second Demographic Transition – 16
         As the next sections will show, these similarities in means mask important changes in the

underlying distribution of children ever born (feature 1), the distributions of age at first marriage and age

at first birth, and the interrelationship between marriage and childbearing (feature 2). They also mask the

transformation in the relationship between women’s education and childbearing outcomes (feature 3).


     III.     THE EMERGENCE OF THE TWO-CHILD FAMILY AND FALLING CHILDLESSNESS
         An important part of our story is that the earlier and later cohorts reduced their fertility in

strikingly different ways. For instance, the distribution of live births for the 1850 birth cohort looks

almost uniform between 0 and 6 live births, as roughly 8 to 10 percent of women each achieved exactly

one of those numbers (figure 6). For the 1850 cohort, the share having each of 7 to 11 children ranges

from 7 to 3 percent, respectively.

         Becker (1981: p. 100) shows that the number of children one could expect to have, n, can be

written as n=E/(C+S), where E is the number of months one is at risk of becoming pregnant (the interval

from first coitus to when one is no longer fecund), and C+S represents the average number of months

between births, often called spacing. He argues that fertility rates could be reduced by almost 25 percent

by delaying marriage (and thus reducing E) but that they could also be reduced by greater spacing

(increasing C+S). The reduction in childbearing between the cohorts of 1850 and 1910 is consistent with

using these types of strategies to reduce completed childbearing. During the late 19th/early 20th century

period of fertility decline, each generation of women substituted toward fewer children. As we

subsequently show, changes in the age at first marriage seem much less important than spacing and

stopping in this period of U.S. history. Two thirds of women in the cohort of 1910 achieved two or fewer

children. A striking 23 percent of this birth cohort were childless at ages 41 to 70, another 20 percent had

only one child, and 23 percent had exactly two children—thus, the commonly used label, the “low-

fertility cohorts.”

         A similar share of women born from 1940 to 1970 had two or fewer children, yet these cohorts

are different in two (related) ways. First, the post-1960 cohorts realized the “two-child norm.” Figure 6




                                     Second Demographic Transition – 17
shows this as a collapse of the childbearing distribution about the two child mode. Furthermore, a

substantially larger share of the later cohorts achieved exactly two children. In contrast to the fairly equal

division of mass between zero, one, and two children for the cohort of 1910, 17 percent of the 1950

cohort had no children at ages 41 to 70. Another 17 percent had one child, and over 35 percent had

exactly two children. Moreover, a significantly greater share of the later cohort had three children (19

percent versus 14 percent in the cohort of 1910), though fewer had 4 or more children. The distributions

for the 1960 and 1969 cohorts from the June CPS are almost identical to the 1950 distribution; they are

difficult to make out in figure 6 because they lie almost exactly on top of one another. The only

discernible difference is a very small rise in the share of women remaining childless: from 17 percent for

the cohort of 1950 to 18 percent for the cohort of 1969. In contrast to the fairly large changes every

twenty years since the 1850s, the distribution of children ever born has been remarkably stable among

women completing their childbearing in the last 20 years.

         Second, the post-1960 cohorts experienced dramatic declines in within-cohort dispersion, in

terms of both standard deviation (and range) and the coefficient of variation, which normalizes the

standard deviation by the falling mean.14 For the birth cohorts of 1880 through 1910, the coefficient of

variation suggests that within-cohort dispersion grew during the early 20th century fertility decline, as

certain groups (such as foreign-born white women) decreased their childbearing to native levels while the

childbearing of other groups (such as rural women and non-white native women) remained much higher

(figure 2). The within-cohort dispersion in live births was highest for women born from 1900 to 1910—

the cohorts experiencing the lowest pre-baby-boom levels of completed childbearing.

         During the baby boom, however, dispersion in childbearing fell, as groups with previously falling

fertility rates changed course to have more children. This reversal reduced within-cohort differences in

childbearing, and the coefficient of variation reached a 100-year nadir for cohorts born in the mid-


14
  The coefficient of variation (the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean) provides a succinct, scale-invariant summary of
within-cohort differences. Scale invariance is desirable in this context because the mean number of children born falls so
dramatically across cohorts, mechanically reducing the variance and standard deviation.




                                        Second Demographic Transition – 18
1930s—those giving birth to the largest number of children during the baby boom. For cohorts reaching

childbearing age after 1960, the strong negative relationship between the mean and dispersion in

childbearing disappeared. As completed childbearing fell to 1.9 for the later cohorts and the two-child

family became far more universal, the coefficient of variation grew only slightly, from 0.66 to 0.73.

          These two findings challenge the conventional wisdom about the recent period as well as

assertions of exceptional and increasing rates of childlessness. It is true that childlessness rates for the

most recent cohort we can measure (born 1969) are 6 to 7 percentage points higher than those for cohorts

30 to 40 years older (born 1930 to 1940), but they are 6 percentage points lower (17 versus 23 percent)

than the low-fertility cohorts. Similarly, a smaller share of recent cohorts had exactly one child relative to

the low-fertility cohorts. Consistent with Michael and Willis’s model that better contraception reduces

precautionary undershooting, more recent cohorts are less likely to have fewer than two children. This

finding may be surprising given qualitative evidence and media accounts of women having overestimated

their ability to get pregnant at older ages. Taking these accounts at face value, however, suggests that

childlessness rates may fall even further if younger cohorts of women adapt their behavior to minimize

the risk of subfecundity or if medical technology increasingly facilitates births to older women. The two

child mode, decreasing childlessness, and reduced variance in number of children suggest that women

have been better able to reach their desired number of children since 1960 than in the 1920s and 1930s.15

          Both patterns in marriage and childbearing suggest that spacing between births and perhaps

stopping at the desired number of children within marriage played major roles in the fertility decline of

the early 20th century. During this period, a large market developed for devices and nostrums to limit

childbearing, and knowledge—some factual and some quackery—diffused quickly in the late 19th century

(Tone 2001). Many of the advertised “contraceptives” were highly ineffective, and couples relied largely

on natural methods like rhythm and abstinence to achieve their desired numbers (Brodie 1997).


15
   Using data on the “ideal” (or desired) number of children for each woman in the NSFG, we have verified that the distribution
of actual children born changed substantially more than did the distribution of ideal children between the earlier and later cohorts.
This can be seen in Appendix figures 4A and 4B.




                                          Second Demographic Transition – 19
        The low-fertility cohorts were not limiting childbearing by delaying intercourse and marriage

(shortening the period of exposure to the risk of pregnancy) but were limiting childbearing within

marriage (David and Sanderson 1987). The shift in figure 6 from a more diffuse distribution of children

ever born for the birth cohort of 1870 to a distribution with a high concentration of 2 or fewer births for

the birth cohort of 1910 was achieved within marriage. Women achieved much smaller families in the

early 20th century by spacing children as in figure 5, or by increasing the denominator in n=E/(C+S).

        One fascinating pattern of the later 20th century fertility decline is that it occurred despite a

younger (and stable) age at first union and, initially, a younger age at first birth. As with the low-fertility

cohorts, women reaching childbearing age after 1960 achieved low completed childbearing without

delaying marriage. Yet, completed fertility ended up being lower for women born after 1945 than for the

low-fertility cohorts despite considerably earlier and more universal marriage. In addition, the mean age

at first birth for women born in 1945 was lower than that of many of the baby-boom mothers. This

pattern, together with the sharp reduction in the variance of childbearing, hints that women were able to

stop much more easily at their desired number of children.


                    IV.     THE DECOUPLING OF MARRIAGE AND MOTHERHOOD
        Historically, decisions about whether and when to marry were strongly related to the age at first

birth and completed childbearing. They were also tightly connected through their relationships to age at

first intercourse. The shift to non-marital cohabitation, however, foreshadows one of the most distinctive

shifts in childbearing since 1960: its disassociation with marriage. The relationship between age at first

marriage, sex, and motherhood changed dramatically over the 20th century and became much weaker

during the second half.

        Figure 3 shows that the mean age at first marriage and the mean age at first birth have become

increasingly similar—separated by less than one year for cohorts born in 1970. This convergence could

mean that marriage increasingly signals that couples are ready to have children, but in reality the reverse

is the case. Marriage and childbearing have become less—not more—interrelated in recent years.




                                    Second Demographic Transition – 20
         The overall narrowing in the mean age at first birth and the mean age at first marriage is closely

related to changes in the interval between first marriage and first birth. Among those who married and

gave birth by age 35 (but not in a particular order), 57 percent of the 1910 cohort first gave birth within

two years after marriage, 45 percent of the 1950 and 1960 cohorts did so, and only 35 percent of the 1970

cohort did so. The mean length of the interval between marriage and motherhood fell from 2.2 years for

the cohort of 1910 to 1.5 years for the cohort of 1940 before rising back to 2.0 years for the 1950 cohort.

For younger cohorts, the interval between marriage and motherhood fell again, to 1.7 for the 1960 cohort

and to 0.9 for the 1970 cohort. This pattern conflates two opposing trends. Among women who married

before giving birth, the interval from first marriage to first birth increased from 2.8 years for the 1950

cohort to 3.2 for the 1970 cohort. Aggregate declines in the interval are driven by an increasing number of

women marrying after the birth of their first child—a negative interval between first marriage and first

birth.

         Figure 7 quantifies what many have referred to as the “sexual revolution.” The share of women

who first had intercourse in their teens increased sharply for cohorts born in the late 1940s. Although the

distribution of age at first intercourse appears relatively stable from the calendar years 1955 to 1965

(calendar year series suppressed for brevity; figure 7 shows statistics by cohort), the mean age at first

intercourse began to fall rapidly starting in the late 1960s. This strong period effect, less evident in our

cohort figure, is consistent with cohorts being affected at different ages. The birth cohort of 1948 was 18

in 1966, and the share having intercourse by 18 rose for subsequent cohorts. Similarly, the birth cohort of

1950 was 16 in 1966, and the share having intercourse by age 16 rose rapidly for subsequent cohorts. We

cannot construct similar statistics for the early cohorts, but all of our analysis thus far suggests that the

baby-boom period should have led to earlier first intercourse (along with earlier first marriage and birth)




                                    Second Demographic Transition – 21
relative to the low-fertility cohorts.16 In short, age at first intercourse fell during the 1960s and 1970s as

both age at first marriage and age at first birth rose.

         The post-1960 period has also witnessed a rise in births to unmarried women (figure 8). As pre-

marital sex increased, so did the proportion of births that were non-marital—especially among teens.17 For

cohorts born between 1940 and 1960, non-marital teen births rose from approximately 14 percent to

almost 40 percent of all births. Similarly, the same cohorts experienced a noticeable rise in non-marital

births during their early 20s. As completed fertility for the youngest cohorts has stabilized, the non-

marital share of births has risen dramatically. Older women have also seen rising non-marital birth rates,

although the increase is more muted. In 2011, over 40 percent of all births were to unmarried women.

         These numbers do not imply that pre-marital sex or pre-marital pregnancies were uncommon in

the U.S. before 1960. Smith and Hindus (1975) argue that in the late 1800s and early 1900s as many as 10

to 15 percent of brides gave birth within 6 to 8 months of marriage. In the past, however, non-marital

births occurred far less frequently because non-marital conceptions more often resulted in (“shotgun”)

marriages.18 A distinctive feature of the post-1960 period fertility decline is that marriage and motherhood

became decoupled—motherhood more frequently occurred before marriage and many married couples

increasingly delayed childbearing until later ages in marriage.

V.        THE CHANGING RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MOTHERS’ EDUCATION AND CHILDBEARING
         A third distinctive feature of the post-1960 period is the changing predictive importance of

mothers’ education. On the one hand, more and less educated women have converged in terms of the

likelihood of marriage and childlessness as well as the number of children they have. On the other, they




16
   We expect that data on age at first intercourse for these earlier cohorts of women would show that even fewer had sex as teens
(rather than more). Using the baby boom cohorts as our starting point, therefore, should lead us to understate the increase in
sexual activity among younger teens.
17
   We do not intend to convey a causal direction with the ordering of this statement. Non-marital sex may have increased because
more women desired children but not husbands.
18
   Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz (1996) provide an economic bargaining model that relates availability of abortion and modern
contraception to the decline in “shotgun” marriages.




                                         Second Demographic Transition – 22
have diverged, often sharply, in terms of their age at first union, their age at first birth, and non-marital

childbearing.

         This section presents trends in women’s childbearing outcomes by relative educational attainment

because education serves as a consistent proxy for socio-economic status over the 20th century. It is

related to a woman’s family earnings (own and spouse’s) and her husband’s education. Moreover, each

woman’s education is observed in the census even when we do not observe her earnings, occupation, or

her spouse’s earnings. Our analysis uses a relative measure of education because the share of women with

a given absolute level of education has changed dramatically over the 20th century.19 Women whose

educational attainment is below the 25th percentile for their cohort are grouped with the “lower quartile”

and those above the 75th percentile are grouped with the “higher quartile.”

         Our analysis summarizes trends across birth cohorts in six outcomes associated with the

distinctive features of the post-1960 period: (1) mean children ever born, (2) childlessness (the share of

women who have not given birth), (3) the share of women ever married or cohabiting by age 35, (4) age

at first marriage, (5) age at first birth, and (6) the share of women whose first birth was non-marital. In the

first two cases, we restrict the sample to women at least 41 years of age for comparison with the trends in

figures 1 and 2. For the other four, we use women at least 36 years of age in order to balance the need to

preserve sample size (the analysis relies on the smaller samples of the NSFG for the more recent cohorts)

and consistency across cohorts.20

         Figure 9 documents changes in childbearing for women in the upper and lower quantiles of the

education distribution. It is well known that women with less education have tended to have more

children than women with more education. Less well known is that the most educated women in the low-


19
   We employ a quantile regression of an individual woman’s years of schooling on birth year dummies and a quartic in age
interacted with dummies for 20-year birth cohort intervals (1880-1899, 1900-1919, etc.). Predicted values from the quantile
regression (either at the 25th or 75th percentiles) are then compared with actual values for each woman. Because there is
significant heaping in the education distribution (particularly at 12 and 16 years) we first “smooth” actual education values by
adding a stochastic noise term drawn from a uniform distribution of width 1, centered at 0. This procedure preserves the cohort
quantiles while alleviating composition changes due to heaping in the education distribution.
20
   We have calculated the trends for outcomes (3) through (6) using women at least 41 years of age. Although noisy, they are
qualitatively similar to the figures we present.




                                        Second Demographic Transition – 23
fertility cohorts were having approximately 1.6 children over their lifetimes—fewer, on average, than

today. After reaching a nadir at a mean of 1.5 children for the 1950 cohort, the more educated women

increased the number of children they had to approximately 1.7 for the cohort of 1970. In contrast, the

less educated women have far fewer children today than did the low-fertility cohorts, reaching a 90-year

low of 2.2 for the 1970 cohort. The result is that inequality in completed childbearing between these two

groups of mothers is also at a 90-year low. The overall narrowing in the education gap in childbearing has

been driven not just by falling completed fertility among the less educated but also by an increase in

childbearing among the more educated women.

        Similarly, childlessness is much lower among the more educated women today than it was for the

low-fertility cohorts and cohorts born in the 1950s. Figure 10 shows that childlessness rates have tended

to be higher among the more educated women (a relationship that almost disappeared during the baby

boom). The more educated women in cohorts reaching childbearing age in the 1970s had roughly the

same rates of childlessness as the early 20th century cohorts (around 29 percent) but, in more recent

cohorts, childlessness has fallen. Only 21 percent of the more educated women born in 1969 were

childless by age 41. Similarly, childlessness rates among the less educated are lower for recent cohorts

compared to the early 20th century cohorts.

        Marital decisions have changed differentially by education group as well. Figure 11 shows that

among women born at the turn of the 20th century, the less educated were 10 to 15 percentage points more

likely to have married by age 35. Unlike the other series we present, the education gap began

disappearing for women in the low-fertility cohorts—before the baby boom began. Between the cohorts

of 1900 and 1920, the likelihood of ever marrying trended upward among the more educated women. For

women born over the next 20 years (the mothers of the baby boom), the likelihood of marriage reached

parity for both education groups. The education gap re-emerged for the 1940s and 1950s birth cohorts, but




                                  Second Demographic Transition – 24
has since reversed. Today, the more educated women appear slightly more likely to marry than do the less

educated women, although the NSFG data are too noisy to conclude this definitively.21

          For these first three series (mean completed childbearing, childlessness, and the likelihood of

marriage or cohabitation by age 35), the more educated women today appear more similar to their less

educated counterparts than do women in the low-fertility cohorts. That is, women’s education has become

a less important predictor of these outcomes. The reverse is true for age at first union, age at first birth,

and non-marital childbearing.

          Age at first union (either through marriage or cohabitation, figure 12) for the less educated

women is lower today than it was for women born at the beginning of the 20th century and higher than it

was during the baby boom. Excluding cohabitation, on the other hand, age at first marriage is higher than

that of the low-fertility cohorts and 3.5 years higher than during the baby boom. The pattern for more

educated women is qualitatively similar although the swings have been somewhat larger. As a result, the

education gap in age at first union is about one year larger today than it was for the low-fertility cohorts.22

          Age at first birth (figure 13) and non-marital childbearing (figure 14) have shown the most

dramatic changes by education since 1960. In the early 20th century, the gap in age at first birth between

more and less educated women was around 3.5 years. After falling by about 0.5 years during the baby

boom, as mean age at first marriage fell faster for the more educated women, the gap has expanded to

almost 7 years in the post-1960 period—roughly twice the size of the education gap for the 1910 cohort.

The more educated women born around 1970 waited two years longer to first give birth than did their

counterparts 55 years earlier, whereas the less educated gave birth 1 to 1.5 years earlier than they did

historically—leading to an overall mean that is nearly identical for the 1910 and 1970 cohorts.




21
  This conclusion is unaltered if we restrict the sample to women at least age 41.
22
   The education gap is about half a year smaller if one looks strictly at marriage. This smaller gap, however, emerged only for
cohorts born in the late 1960s. The education gap in marriage age was larger than that for the low-fertility cohorts as recently as
the 1968 cohort.




                                         Second Demographic Transition – 25
Interestingly, the mean age at first birth for the less educated has remained essentially the same since the

baby boom.

        As the age at first birth of the less educated mothers remained at 60-year lows, their rate of non-

marital childbearing grew rapidly. Following a period of stability during the baby boom, at around 11 to

13 percent for the less educated mothers and 4 to 6 percent for the more educated mothers, the gap in non-

marital births exploded for cohorts born after 1950. Non-marital childbearing grew across the education

distribution, but relatively slowly for the top quartile. Among women born in the late 1960s, the share of

non-marital childbearing reached three times the historic average for the more educated women and over

four times the historically higher average among the less educated women. For the most recent cohorts,

54 percent of first births among the less educated are non-marital.

        This growing divergence indicates that the second distinctive feature of the post-1960 period—

the decoupling of marriage and motherhood—has taken place along class lines. Whereas trends in

children ever born, childlessness, marriage age and rates, non-marital childbearing, and age at first birth

moved in tandem across the educational distribution during the early 20th century fertility decline, the

latter three outcomes diverged for the more and less educated women after 1960.


                  VI.     CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR HUMAN CAPITAL
        At first glance, the U.S. fertility decline in the post-1960 period does not appear to be a

significant departure from the one in the early 20th century. Aggregate fertility fell at similar rates in both

periods and this similarity reinforces just how different the 1940s and 1950s were. In each series

presented, the 1940 to 1960 period (or the 1915 to 1935 cohorts) exhibits a substantial departure from

earlier and later trends. Changes in sexual behavior within marriage—a behavioral revolution before the

contraceptive revolution—may in part explain the decoupling of marriage from birth rates in the early 20th

century. The low-fertility cohorts in the U.S. were successful in limiting childbearing through increased

spacing and stopping—especially given the relatively stable age at first marriage during the period. Thus,

our analysis presents evidence that Coleman’s (2004) argument holds in the U.S.: many trends in




                                   Second Demographic Transition – 26
reproductive and relational behavior “already existed before the sixties; in fact, most of them emerged

with the … demographic transition around the turn of the century” (p. 72).

        Yet distinctive features of the post-1960 U.S. fertility decline should give pause to scholars who

wish to argue that the two 20th century fertility declines are identical. After 1960, women were

significantly more likely to have exactly two children and were less likely to remain childless. Although

women reaching childbearing age in the 1930s and 1970s had similar numbers of children on average,

these cohorts achieved these means in very different ways. Most economic models simplify childbearing

decisions to the number of children and proxy for this theoretical concept in empirical work by using the

mean number of live births (or a measure of period fertility). Our analysis shows that this single moment

of the childbearing distribution misses empirical regularities that enhance our understanding of the

motivations and constraints individuals faced over the 20th century—regularities that could help

distinguish between theories of childbearing.

        After 1960, marriage and motherhood became increasingly disassociated as more children were

born outside of marriage. Consistent with Goldin’s (2004) claim that recent cohorts are more likely to

“have it all” (i.e., achieve career and motherhood), completed childbearing, childlessness, and the

likelihood of eventual marriage are more similar across educational groups of mothers today than in the

early 20th century. On the other hand, age at first union, age at first birth, and non-marital childbearing

have diverged sharply across educational groups. The decoupling of marriage and childbearing and the

changing predictive importance of mothers’ education hint that a larger demographic and economic

transition is underway. The fact that these patterns have not stabilized suggests that the current fertility

transition, perhaps part of a larger gender (Goldscheider 2012) and cultural revolution, is still on-going.

        It is unclear whether these changes are large enough to constitute a “Second Demographic

Transition.” A different way to think about this debate is in terms of which forces drove fertility decline

in the early and later 20th century—specifically, the relative importance of shifts in the demand or supply

(the reliability and cost of preventing pregnancy) for children in both periods. Our argument is not that

either supply or demand mattered, but that both matter and have mattered differently at different points in


                                   Second Demographic Transition – 27
time. The reduction in childbearing during the early 20th century surely reflected large shifts in the

demand for children. And reduced childbearing was realized at great cost, as individuals reduced the

frequency of intercourse with their partners, used dangerous or debilitating contraceptive techniques,23

attempted often lethal abortions, and missed their targeted number of children due to precautionary

undershooting.24 Shifts in the demand for children certainly played a role during the baby boom as well as

in the post-1960 period.

          Yet it is hard to ignore the contraceptive revolution (the supply side) of the 1960s, especially as a

growing literature in economics—started by Goldin and Katz (2002)—has built an empirical case for its

importance. Goldin and Katz (2002) argue that availability of modern and effective contraception (such as

the birth control pill) to younger, unmarried women relaxed the constraints on their marital and human

capital investment decisions. Bailey (2010) shows that faster diffusion of the Pill in states without pre-

existing Comstock bans on the sales of contraceptives led to a more rapid decline in fertility rates. The

consequence was that younger women delayed their marriages, increased their educational attainment,

and pursued previously male-dominated careers (Goldin and Katz 2002; Hock 2008). Modern birth

control also increased women’s labor-force attachment and wages (Bailey 2006; Bailey, Hershbein and

Miller 2012).

          Christensen (2011) also suggests that early access to the Pill affected decisions to cohabit before

marriage, which in turn may have directly and indirectly altered women’s incentives to specialize in

household production. Greater cohabitation rates imply important changes in matching between men and

women as well as changes in women’s bargaining power within marriage. The greater rise in age at first

marriage among more educated women means that they have more time to search for a mate, increasing



23
   One letter to Margaret Sanger read, “I am the mother of two lovely little girls. I have been married fifteen years. I married at
the age of fifteen to escape a home that was overcrowded with unloved and unwanted children, where there was never clothing or
food enough to divide among the eight of us…I have been pregnant 15 times, most of the time doing things myself to get out of it
and no one knows how I have suffered from the effect of it, but I would rather die than bring as many children into the world as
my mother did and have nothing to offer them” (Sanger 1923).
24
   In the Low Fertility Cohorts Study (Ridley 1978), for instance, 14 percent of women indicated that they desired fewer than two
children, but 39 percent had fewer than two.




                                         Second Demographic Transition – 28
both the quality of their matches and, potentially, the earnings of their households. The rise in

cohabitation may also imply substantial changes in matching between men and women as well as in

traditional gendered forms of household/labor-force specialization. It also implies a shift in the meaning

and/or implications of “marriage.” For instance, marriage may have increasingly become a status symbol

(McLanahan and Watson 2011) or motivated by consumption (rather than production) complementarities

(Stevenson and Wolfers 2007).

        The distinctive features of the post-1960 period suggest that the contraceptive revolution may

have had broader effects on the U.S. economy and may signal longer-term changes. Standard economic

models predict that increases in women’s human capital, their wages (an important component of the

opportunity cost of childbearing), their ages at marriage, and their incomes would tend to increase

investments in each child. Modern contraception may also directly reduce the relative price of child

“quality” and thereby increase investments in the average child ceteris paribus (Becker and Lewis 1973).

These hypothesized effects are consistent with recent evidence by Ananat and Hungerman (2012) and

Bailey, Malkova, and McLaren (2013) showing that increased access to contraception increases the

economic resources of children. Bailey (2013) also provides evidence that these investments may have

affected the economic resources of these children 30 to 40 years later.

        The decoupling of marriage and motherhood and the changing role of women’s education may

have distributional implications as well. The recently growing educational gap in age at first birth and

non-marital childbearing anticipates a growing divergence in the resources available to children in

households of lower and higher socio-economic status. Consistent with this recent trend, the distribution

of resources to children is becoming increasingly polarized—the destinies of higher and lower socio-

economic status children are diverging. McLanahan (2004), for instance, summarizes the empirical

support for the idea that a child’s environment has become more closely determined by socio-economic

factors. Mothers with higher relative education are more likely to be married, are more likely to work,

give birth at older ages, and live in higher income households. Children who have a college-educated

father spend more time with him than children who do not. Similarly, studies using data from the


                                   Second Demographic Transition – 29
American Time Use Surveys have found that more educated mothers not only spend more time on all

forms of child care than do less-educated mothers (Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney 2008) but that they are

also more likely to change the type of child care based on children’s developmental needs (Kalil, Ryan,

and Corey 2012). Ramey and Ramey (2010) argue that the objective of more educated parents to get their

children into competitive colleges has further exacerbated gaps in parental investments.25 Future research

should consider how characteristics of the later 20th century fertility transition relate to children’s

opportunities, educational achievement, and widening inequality in U.S. labor markets.


                                                VII.      BIBLIOGRAPHY
Akerlof, George A., Janet L. Yellen, and Michael L. Katz. 1996. “An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock
         Childbearing in the United States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2): 277–317.
Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2009. “Medical Progress, Fertility and Women's Work in the
         Twentieth Century.” Boston University Department of Economics Working Paper.
Ananat, Elizabeth, and Daniel Hungerman. 2012. “The Power of the Pill for the Next Generation: Oral
         Contraception's Effects on Fertility, Abortion, and Maternal and Child Characteristics.” Review of
         Economics and Statistics 94 (1): 37–51.
Bailey, Martha J. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women's
         Lifecycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 289–320.
-----. 2010. “Momma’s Got the Pill: How Anthony Comstock and Griswold v. Connecticut Shaped U.S
         Childbearing.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 98–129.
-----. 2012. “Reexamining the Impact of U.S. Family Planning Programs on Fertility: Evidence from the
         War on Poverty and the Early Years of Title X.” American Economic Journal-Applied Economics
         4 (2): 62-97.
-----. 2013. “Fifty Years of U.S. Family Planning: Evidence on the Long-Run Effects of Increasing
         Access to Contraception.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Spring: 341–409.
-----, Brad J. Hershbein and Amalia R. Miller. 2012. “The Opt-In Revolution? Contraception and the
         Gender Gap in Wages.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (3): 225–254.
-----, Olga Malkova, and Zoe McLaren. 2013. “The Long-term Effects of Family Planning Programs on
         Children’s Resources.” University of Michigan working paper.
Barro, Robert J., and Gary S. Becker. 1989. “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic Growth.”
         Econometrica 57 (2): 481–501.
Becker, Gary. 1960. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility.” In Demographic and Economic Change in
         Developed Countries, Conference of the Universities-National Bureau Committee for Economic
         Research, a Report of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
         University Press: 209-40.
-----. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal 75 (299): 493–517.
-----. 1981. A Treatise on the Family, enlarged edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.




25
  To the extent that some of this behavior may be status-seeking signaling rather than productivity-enhancing investment, it may
not affect outcomes much among the children of the more educated if the behavior is near universal among them.




                                        Second Demographic Transition – 30
-----, and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. “On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of Children.”
         Journal of Political Economy 81 (2): S279–S288.
-----, and Robert J. Barro. 1988. “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of Fertility.” Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 103 (1): 1–25.
Binion, R. 2001. “Marianne in the Home: Political Revolution and Fertility Transition in France and the
         United States.” Population: An English Selection 13 (2): 165–188.
Brodie, Janet Farrell. 1997. Contraception and Abortion in Nineteenth-Century America. Ithaca: Cornell
         University Press.
Christensen, Finn. 2011. “The Pill and Partnerships: The Impact of the Birth Control Pill on
         Cohabitation.” Journal of Populations Economics 25 (1): 29–52.
Cliquet, Robert L. 1991. The Second Demographic Transition: Fact or Fiction? Population Studies 23.
         Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Coale, Ansley J. 1973. “The Demographic Transition Reconsidered.” International Population Conference
         (International Union for the Scientific Study of Population, Liege): 53–72.
Coleman, David. 2004. “Why We Don't Have to Believe without Doubting in the ‘Second Demographic
         Transition’—Some Agnostic Comments.” Vienna Yearbook of Population Research 2: 11–24.
David, Paul A., and Warren C. Sanderson. 1987. “The Emergence of a Two-Child Norm among
         American Birth Controllers.” Population and Development Review 13 (1): 1–41.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the
         Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Analysis.” Econometrica 64 (5): 1001–
         1044.
Doepke, Matthias, Moshe Hazan, and Yishay Maoz. 2008. “The Baby Boom and World War II: A
         Macroeconomic Analysis.” CEPR Discussion Paper 6628.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1961. “The American Baby Boom in Historical Perspective.” American Economic
         Review 51 (5): 869–911.
-----. 1966. “Economic-Demographic Interactions and Long Swings in Economic Growth.” American
         Economic Review 56 (5): 1063–1104.
-----. 1971. “Does Human Fertility Adjust to the Environment?” American Economic Review 61 (2): 399–
         407.
-----. 1975. “An Economic Framework for Fertility Analysis.” Studies in Family Planning 6 (3): 54–63.
-----. 1980. Birth and Fortune. Chicago: Basic Books.
-----, and Eileen M. Crimmins. 1985. The Fertility Revolution: A Supply-Demand Analysis. Chicago:
         University of Chicago Press.
-----, Robert Pollak, and Michael Wachter. 1980. “Toward a More General Economic Model of Fertility
         Determination: Endogenous Preferences and Natural Fertility.” In R.A. Easterlin, ed., Population
         and Economic Change in Developing Countries. Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 81–149.
Goldin, Claudia. 2004. “The Long Road to the Fast Track: Career and Family.” Annals of the American
         Academy of Political and Social Science 596 (1): 20–35.
-----, and Lawrence Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career and
         Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 110 (4): 730–770.
Goldscheider, Frances. 2012. “The Gender Revolution and the Second Demographic Transition:
         Understanding Recent Family Trends in Industrialized Societies.” Keynote Address for the 2012
         European Population Conference, Stockhold, Sweden, June 13.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2005. “The Baby Boom and Baby
         Bust.” American Economic Review 95 (1): 183–207.
Grove, Robert D., and Alice M. Hetzel. 1968. Vital Statistics Rates in the United States 1940–
         1960.Washington, DC: U.S. National Center for Health Statistics.
Guinnane, Timothy W. 2011. “The Historical Fertility Transition: A Guide for Economists.” Journal of
         Economic Literature 49 (3): 589–614.
Guldi, Melanie. 2008. “Fertility Effects of Abortion and Pill Access for Minors.” Demography 45 (4):
         817–827.


                                 Second Demographic Transition – 31
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Parental Education and Parental Time
         With Children.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (3): 23–46.
Hacker, J. David. 2003. “Rethinking the ‘Early’ Decline of Marital Fertility in the United States.”
         Demography 40 (4): 605–620.
Haines, Michael R. 1989. “American Fertility in Transition: New Estimates of Birth Rates in the United
         States, 1900–1910.” Demography 26 (1): 137–148.
-----. 2000. “The White Population of the United States, 1790–1920.” In M.R. Haines and R.H. Steckel,
         eds., A Population History of North America. New York: Cambridge University Press: 305–369.
Hock, Heinrich. 2008. “The Pill and the College Attainment of American Women and Men.” Florida
         State University Working Paper.
Hotz, V. Joseph, and Robert A. Miller. 1988. “An Empirical Analysis of Life Cycle Fertility and Female
         Labor Supply.” Econometrica 56 (1): 91–118.
June Current Population Surveys. 1995–2010. National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at:
         http://www.nber.org/data/current-population-survey-data.html
Kalil, Ariel, Rebecca Ryan, and Michael Corey. 2012. “Diverging Destinies: Maternal Education and the
         Developmental Gradient in Time With Children.” Demography 49 (4): 1361–1383.
Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. 2009. “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and Sexual
         Behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (1): 137–151.
Kirk, Dudley. 1996. “Demographic Transition Theory.” Population Studies 50 (3): 361–387.
Lee, Ronald D. and David S. Reher. 2011. “Introduction: The Landscape of Demographic Transition and
         Its Aftermath.” Population and Development Review 37 (1): 1–7.
Lesthaeghe, Ron J., and Lisa Neidert. 2006. “The Second Demographic Transition in the United States:
         Exception or Textbook Example?” Population and Development Review 32 (4): 669–698.
-----, and D.J. van de Kaa. 1986. “Twee Demografische Transities.” In R.J. Lesthaeghe and D.J. van de
         Kaa, eds., Bevolking, Groei en Krimp. Deventer: Van Loghum Slaterus: 19–68.
Linder, Forrest E., and Robert D. Grove. 1947. Vital Statistics Rates in the United States 1900-1940.
         Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Martin, Joyce A., Brady E. Hamilton, Paul D. Sutton, Stephanie J. Ventura, Fay Menacker, Sharon
         Kirmeyer, and Martha L. Munson. 2007. “Births: Final Data for 2005.” National Vital Statistics
         Reports 56 (6).
Martin, Joyce A., Brady E. Hamilton, Stephanie J. Ventura, Michelle J.K. Osterman, Elizabeth C. Wilson,
         and T.J. Mathews. 2012. “Births: Final Data for 2010.” National Vital Statistics Reports 61 (1).
Mason, Karen Oppenheim. 1997. “Explaining Fertility Transitions.” Demography 34 (4): 443–454.
McLanahan, Sara. 2004. “Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring Under the Second Demographic
         Transition.” Demography 41 (4): 607–627.
-----, and Tara Watson. 2011. “Marriage Meets the Joneses: Relative Income, Identity, and Marital
         Status.” Journal of Human Resources 46 (3): 482–517.
Michael, Robert T., and Robert J. Willis. 1976. “Contraception and Fertility: Household Production under
         Uncertainty.” In Demographic Behavior of the Household. Cambridge: National Bureau of
         Economic Research.
Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A. Ramey. 2010. “The Rug Rat Race: Comments and Discussion.” Brookings
         Papers on Economic Activity Spring: 129–176.
Ridley, Jeanne C. 1978. Low-Fertility Cohorts Study: A Survey of White, Ever-Married Women
         Belonging to the 1901–1910 United States Birth Cohorts. ICPSR04698-v1. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-
         university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2007-08-13.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
         Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable
         database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2010.
Ryder, Norman, and Charles F. Westoff. 1971. The Contraceptive Revolution. Princeton: Princeton
         University Press.



                                 Second Demographic Transition – 32
Sanger, Margaret. 1923. “Prevention or Abortion—Which? Letters Showing the Dilemma Faced by Many
         Mothers.” Birth Control Review 7 (7): 181–2.
Sheps, Mindel C. 1964. “On the Time Required for Conception.” Population Studies 19 (3): 85–97.
-----, and Edward B. Perrin. 1964. “The Distribution of Birth Intervals under a Class of Stochastic
         Fertility Models.” Population Studies 17 (3): 321–331.
Smith, Daniel S., and Michael S. Hindus. 1975. “Premarital Pregnancy in America, 1640–1971: An
         Overview and Interpretation.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 5 (4): 537–570.
Smock, Pamela J., Peter Granda, and Lynette Hoelter. Integrated Fertility Survey Series [Machine-
         readable database]. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2007. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving Forces.”
         Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2): 27–52.
Tone, Andrea. 2001. Devices and Desires: A History of Contraceptives in America. New York: Hill and
         Wang.
Ventura, Stephanie J., and Christine A. Bachrach. 2000. “Nonmarital Childbearing in the United States,
         1940–99.” National Vital Statistics Reports 48 (16).
Westoff, Charles F. 1975. “The Yield of the Imperfect: The 1970 National Fertility Study.” Demography
         12 (4): 573–580.
Willis, Robert J. 1973. “A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Behavior.” Journal of
         Political Economy 81 (2): S14–S64.




                                Second Demographic Transition – 33
                               Figure 1. U.S. General Fertility Rate (GFR) and Completed Childbearing, 1895-1995
180                                                                                                                                                      5


160                                                                                                                                                      4.5

140
                                                                                                                                                         4
                                              130
120                                                                                                122.9
                                                                                                                                                         3.5
                                              3.4
                                                                                               3.3
100
                                               3.1                                                                                                       3
                                                                          76.3
  80
                                                                                                                  65                            63.2
                                                                         2.3                                                                             2.5
  60
                 GFR White women                                   2.2                                                               2.1                 2
  40             GFR all women                                                                                                       1.9
                 Census: Mean live births, all women ages 41-70; reweighted to resemble 1920-29 cohorts
                 Census: Mean live births, all women ages 41-70
  20                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                 Census: Mean live births, ever-married women ages 41-70
                 June CPS: Mean live births, women ages 41+
                 June CPS: Mean live births, ever-married women ages 41+
   0                                                                                                                                                     1
    1860      1870     1880     1890     1900        1910   1920     1930      1940    1950      1960      1970    1980     1990      2000     2010
Notes: The general fertility rate (GFR) (right vertical axis) is the number of births per 1000 women (all or white women only) ages 15 to 44 in the population
from Vital Statistics. Mean live births (left vertical axis) is the mean self-reported number of children ever born for each birth cohort as measured between the
ages of 41 and 70 (indexed to year by adding 25 years to mother’s year of birth; e.g. mean children ever born to the birth cohort of 1870 corresponds to the year
1895 on the graph’s horizontal axis). In addition, we include rates for never married women as measured in the 1970-1990 Censuses. Computations use
population weights.
Sources: Fertility rates are from Historical Statistics, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statab/t001x01.pdf. Mean live births are computed using the 1940-1990
decennial census IPUMS samples (Ruggles et al. 2010) and the 1995-2010 June CPS.




                                                            Second Demographic Transition – 34
                            Figure 2. Completed Childbearing by Group and Birth Cohort, 1870-1970
   5.0

                                                                                                         All Women
   4.5                                                                                                   Native-born White Women
                                                                                                         Native-born Non-White Women
   4.0                                                                                                   Foreign-born White Women
                                                                                                         Urban Women
   3.5                                                                                                   Rural Women


   3.0


   2.5


   2.0


   1.5
         1870        1880          1890          1900          1910 1920       1930         1940        1950        1960        1970
                                                                Birth Cohort
The figure plots the mean number of live births among women aged 41 to 70, by birth cohort, for the Census (1870 through 1948
cohorts) and the same statistic for women aged 41 to 44 in the June CPS (1949 through 1969 cohorts). The native born include women
who were born in the 50 U.S. states (including the time in which they were territories) and the District of Columbia. Non-Whites
include all races other than White. Urban/rural is based on the “urban” variable for 1960, 1970, and 1990 Censuses and on the “metro”
variable for the 1940, 1950, and 1980 Censuses, as well as the June CPS (urban if in a metro area, rural if outside a metro area). All
computations use the recommended population weights and the CPS series are 3-cohort moving averages. Sources: See figure 1.

Figure 3. Mean Age at First Marriage/Cohabitation and First Birth and Share Ever Marrying, by Birth Cohort
         Age at first marriage, household formation, birth                                                Fraction ever married
 30                                                                                                                                  1.0


                                                        0.90
 28       0.91                                                                                                                       0.9


 26
                                                                 25.0
                                                                                                                             24.8    0.8

 24

         22.3                                                                                22.4                           22.5
                                                           22.5                                                                      0.7
 22


                                                                                                                                     0.6
 20
                 Census, age at first marriage                 NSFG, age at first marriage          NSFG, age at first union
                 June CPS, age at first birth                  NSFG, age at first birth             Census, ever married by 40
                 Census, ever married by 45                    NSFG, ever married by 40             NSFG, ever marry/cohabit by 40
 18                                                                                                                                   0.5
      1870       1880          1890         1900         1910    1920          1930         1940        1950        1960        1970
                                                            Birth Cohort
The figure plots the mean age at first marriage (conditional on ever married by age 39), first household formation or union (the
younger of first marriage or first non-marital cohabitation), first birth (left vertical axis), and share ever married (right vertical axis)
against single year-of-birth cohort. NSFG and CPS trends are based on 3-year cohort moving averages. Sources: 1940-1980 decennial
census IPUMS samples (Ruggles et al. 2010); 1979-1995 June CPS; 1982-2010 NSFG.
                                                    Second Demographic Transition – 35
                       Figure 4. Share of Women Ever Married or Cohabiting by Age and Birth Cohort
   1.0

   0.9

   0.8

   0.7

   0.6

   0.5

   0.4

   0.3

   0.2
                           By age 20                  By age 25
   0.1
                           By age 30                  By age 35
   0.0
         1870               1890               1910                1930                1950                 1970                 1990
                                                              Birth Cohort
The solid series represent the share of women ever married by the indicated age and is based on current marital status being any
category other than never married in the Census. The lighter, dashed lines represent the share of women ever married or cohabiting by
the indicated age from the NSFG, and are smoothed using 3-cohort moving averages. Sources: 1900-2000 decennial census IPUMS
samples and 2006-2010 ACS (Ruggles et al. 2010); 1988-2010 NSFG.


                       Figure 5. Share of Women with Own Child in their Household, by Age and Cohort
 1.0

 0.9

 0.8

 0.7                                                                                                                        35

 0.6                                                                                                                        30
 0.5
                                                                                                                            25
 0.4
                                                                                                                            22
 0.3

 0.2                                                                                                                        20

 0.1
                                                                                                                            18
 0.0
    1870        1880     1890   1900    1910     1920      1930    1940      1950     1960     1970     1980       1990   2000
                                                           Birth Cohort
The series show the share of all women with at least one own (but not necessarily biological) child in their household at the indicated
age. Sources: 1900-2000 decennial census IPUMS samples and 2006-2010 ACS (Ruggles et al. 2010).



                                               Second Demographic Transition – 36
                      Figure 6. Distribution of Completed Childbearing by Birth Cohort, 1850-1969
   40

   35
                                                                                                       1850
                                                                                                       1870
   30
                                                                                                       1890
                                                                                                       1910
   25
                                                                                                       1930
   20                                                                                                  1940 (CPS)
                                                                                                       1950 (CPS)
   15                                                                                                  1960 (CPS)
                                                                                                       1969 (CPS)
   10

    5

    0
         0       1            2          3     4         5        6        7      8                9      10        11           12
                                                     Number of Children Ever Born
The figure plots the percent of women ages 41 to 70 who report having each number of children. We include never-married women in
the 1970 to 1990 Censuses and June CPS when available so that figures include the recent rise in non-marital childbearing. Children
ever born is top-coded at 12 in the Census and 10 in the CPS. Differences between the CPS and Census in overlapping cohorts were
trivial (see figure 1), so seaming issues between surveys should be minimal. Source: 1850 to 1930 cohorts use the 1900, 1910, 1940-
1990 decennial census IPUMS samples (Ruggles et al. 2010); 1940 to 1969 cohorts use the 1981 through 2010 June CPS.


                        Figure 7. Fraction of Women Having First Sex, by Age and Birth Cohort
   1.0
                      By 14         By 15           By 16        By 17        By 18        By 19         By 20           By 22
   0.9

   0.8

   0.7

   0.6

   0.5

   0.4

   0.3

   0.2

   0.1

   0.0
         1940        1945         1950       1955           1960       1965       1970        1975        1980         1985
                                                               Birth Cohort
The series show the fraction of women having had vaginal intercourse with a man by the specified ages across birth cohorts. Trends
are smoothed using 3-cohort moving averages. Source: 1982-2010 NSFG.

                                              Second Demographic Transition – 37
                              Figure 8. Percentage of Births to Unmarried Women, by Birth Cohort
   80
                               Age 15-19            Age 20-24            Age 25-29
   70
                               Age 30-34            Age 35-39            Age 40-44                                                 67.1

   60

   50
                                                                                                                                   44.7
   40

   30
                                                                                                                                   23.5
   20                                                                                                                              19.6
                                            13.5                                                                                   17
   10

    0
            1910     1915     1920    1925     1930        1935   1940      1945     1950   1955   1960     1965   1970     1975
                                                                  Birth Cohort
The series are the percentage of births to unmarried women for the indicated age groups for each cohort (x-axis). The births are
reported for five-year age groups, and we assume the start of the age group for the five year band. For example, 13.5 percent of births
to women born between 1921 and 1925 between the ages of 15 and 19 were born to unmarried women. Source: National Vital
Statistics Reports (Ventura and Bachrach 2000; Martin et al. 2007, 2012).


                            Figure 9. Children Ever Born, by Education Quantile and Birth Cohort
     5.0

                                                                  Lower quartile (Census)           Lower quartile (CPS)
             4.50
     4.5
                                                                  Upper quartile (Census)           Upper quartile (CPS)

     4.0
                                                                            3.63

     3.5


     3.0                                            2.87
                                                                             2.76
              2.47
     2.5                                                                                               2.43
                                                                                                                            2.21

     2.0
                                             1.62                                                                           1.70
                                                                                                     1.54
     1.5
           1880        1890          1900           1910  1920        1930          1940         1950        1960           1970
                                                             Birth Cohort
The figure plots the mean number of live births among women ages 41+, by birth cohort, for the Census (1880 through 1935 cohorts)
and the same statistic for women in the June CPS (1920 through 1969 cohorts). See text for education group definitions. All
computations use the recommended population weights, and the CPS series are 3-cohort moving averages. Sources: 1940-1990
decennial census IPUMS samples (Ruggles et al. 2010) and 1979-2010 June CPS.
                                                    Second Demographic Transition – 38
                            Figure 10. Childlessness, by Education Quantile and Birth Cohort
     35


     30                                        28.8                                                         28.5


     25 24.3
                                                                                                                         21.4
                                               19.6
     20

                                                                                                                         14.9
     15     13.9                                                                 13.4


     10                                                                                 8.2


      5              Lower quartile (Census)              Lower quartile (CPS)

                     Upper quartile (Census)              Upper quartile (CPS)
      0
          1880      1890         1900          1910        1920        1930         1940          1950        1960         1970
                                                             Birth Cohort
The figure plots the percentage of women ages 41+ who have not had a live birth, by birth cohort, for the Census (1880 through 1935
cohorts) and the same statistic for women in the June CPS (1920 through 1969 cohorts). See notes and sources for figure 9.

                      Figure 11. Ever Married by age 35, by Education Quantile and Birth Cohort
    100


      95
            92.1                                                     92.3

                                                88.50
      90


      85

                                                  83.70
            78.8
      80
                                                                                                             80.6

                                                                                                                           77.7
      75
                                               Lower quartile (Census)              Lower quartile (NSFG)
                                               Upper quartile (Census)              Upper quartile (NSFG)
      70
           1880      1890        1900          1910        1920        1930       1940        1950          1960         1970
                                                              Birth Cohort
The figure plots the percentage of women ever married by age 35 among women ages 36+, by birth cohort, for the Census (1880
through 1943 cohorts) and the same statistic for women in the NSFG (1940 through 1970 cohorts). See text for education group
definitions. All computations use the recommended population weights and the NSFG series are 5-cohort moving averages. Sources:
1940-1980 decennial census IPUMS samples (Ruggles et al. 2010) and 1982-2010 NSFG.

                                               Second Demographic Transition – 39
             Figure 12. Age at First Marriage and Cohabitation, by Education Quantile and Birth Cohort
     27                                                                                                          26.6

     26
                                           25.4
           25.1
     25                                                                                                                           25.5
                                                                                                   24.1
     24                                                                                                                    23.8

     23                                                                                                                    22.8
           22.0                                   22.1
     22                                                                             22.1

     21
                      Lower quartile (Census)                                                                                     20.0
     20               Lower quartile (NSFG)                                                19.4
                      Upper quartile (Census)
     19               Upper quartile (NSFG)
                      Lower quartile + cohabit (NSFG)
                      Upper quartile + cohabit (NSFG)
     18
          1880       1890          1900           1910        1920         1930        1940         1950         1960         1970
                                                                Birth Cohort
The figure plots age at first marriage among ever-married women ages 36+ by birth cohort using the Census (1880 through 1943
cohorts) and the NSFG (1940 through 1970 cohorts). For the NSFG cohorts, there are also series plotted for the younger of age at first
marriage or age at first cohabitation (conditional on one of these events occurring by age 35). See text for education group definitions.
All computations use the recommended population weights and the NSFG series are 5-cohort moving averages. Sources: 1940-1980
decennial census IPUMS samples (Ruggles et al. 2010) and 1982-2010 NSFG.

                          Figure 13. Age at First Birth, by Education Quantile and Birth Cohort
     30
                         Lower quartile (CPS)                    Lower quartile (NSFG)
     29
                         Upper quartile (CPS)                    Upper quartile (NSFG)
     28
                                                                                                                             28.3
     27      26.6

     26

     25
                                                            24.2
     24

     23
            23.1
     22                                                                                                                        21.5

     21                                                   21.6

     20
          1910              1920                  1930            1940                1950             1960               1970
                                                              Birth Cohort
The figure plots age at first birth among women ages 36+, by birth cohort, for the June CPS (1910 through 1959 cohorts) and the same
statistic for women in the NSFG (1957 through 1970 cohorts). See text for education group definitions. All computations use the
recommended population weights. The June CPS series use 3-cohort moving averages and NSFG series are 5-cohort moving averages.
Sources: 1979-1995 June CPS and 1995-2010 NSFG.

                                                  Second Demographic Transition – 40
              Figure 14. Non-Marital Childbearing at First Birth, by Education Quantile and Birth Cohort
     60
                                                                                                                           53.9
                                    Lower quartile (CPS)
     50                             Lower quartile (NSFG)
                                    Upper quartile (CPS)
                                    Upper quartile (NSFG)
     40



     30



     20                                                                                                                     17.6
                                                                        13.1
            10.4
     10
            4.5                                                                   5.2


       0
           1910            1920               1930                    1940           1950               1960                1970
                                                                 Birth Cohort
The figure plots the percentage of first births that are non-marital among women ages 36+, by birth cohort, for the June CPS (1910
through 1959 cohorts) and the same statistic for women in the NSFG (1957 through 1970 cohorts). See text for education group
definitions. All computations use the recommended population weights. The June CPS series use 3-cohort moving averages and
NSFG series are 5-cohort moving averages. Sources: 1979-1995 June CPS and 1995-2010 NSFG.




                                              Second Demographic Transition – 41
          Appendix Figure 1. Percentage of Women First Marrying or Cohabiting at Each Age, by Birth Cohort

                                            A.        Distribution of Age at First Marriage
    16

    14                                                                           1880             1900             1910

    12                                                                           1930             1950             1970

    10

      8

      6

      4

      2

      0
            14   15   16   17     18   19        20   21   22   23    24   25   26   27     28   29   30   31   32    33    34
                                                                     Age

                             B.        Distribution of Age at First Marriage or First Cohabitation
    16

    14                                                                               1950                   1970

    12
                                                                                     1950: Cohabit          1970: Cohabit

    10

      8

      6

      4

      2

      0
            14   15   16   17     18   19        20   21   22   23    24   25   26   27     28   29   30   31   32   33     34
                                                                     Age
The figure shows the percentage of women in the indicated single-year-of-birth cohort who had married (panel A), or who had
married or cohabited (panel B), by the age on the horizontal axis among those who had married or cohabited by age 34. Distributions
for 1950 to 1970 are from the NSFG and are based on 3-cohort moving averages. For example, the 1950 birth cohort is an average of
the 1949, 1950, and 1951 cohorts. Sources: 1900 through 1940 cohorts use the 1940-1980 decennial census IPUMS samples (Ruggles
et al. 2010) and 1950 and 1970 cohorts use the 1988-2010 NSFG.




                                                  Second Demographic Transition – 42
                Appendix Figure 2. Percentage of Women First Giving Birth at Each Age, by Birth Cohort
     14
                                                                    1910        1930             1950        1960           1970
     12


     10


      8


      6


      4


      2


      0
           14     15    16    17    18     19   20     21   22     23   24 25   26     27   28    29    30   31   32   33    34    35
                                                                        Age
The series show the percentage of women having their first birth at the indicated age (x-axis) conditional upon giving birth by age 35
and being at least age 36 at time of observation. Distributions from the NSFG are based on 3-cohort moving averages; thus the 1960
birth cohort is an average of the 1959, 1960, and 1961 cohorts. Sources: 1979 to 1995 June CPS (1910 through 1950 cohorts); 1995
through 2010 NSFG (1960 and 1970 cohorts).

                                         Appendix Figure 3. Age-Specific Birth Rates, by Year

     300



     250                                                                                     15-19                  20-24
                                                                                             25-29                  30-34
                                                                                             35-39                  40-44
     200



     150



     100



      50



       0
        1915           1925        1935         1945        1955   1965       1975      1985         1995       2005       2015
                                                                   Year
The series plot the number of births per 1,000 women in a given age group by the year that the births occurred (not mother’s birth
cohort). Sources: National Vital Statistics Reports (Linder and Grove, 1947; Grove and Hetzel, 1968; Martin et al, 2012).


                                                     Second Demographic Transition – 43
    Appendix Figure 4. Percentage of Women with Desired and Actual Children Born, by Decadal Birth Cohort

                                  A.       Distribution of Desired Childbearing, Women ages 35+
      50
                                                                              Born 1900-1909              Born 1910-1919
      45                                                                      Born 1920-1929              Born 1930-1939

      40                                                                      Born 1940-1949              Born 1950-1959
                                                                              Born 1960-1969
      35

      30

      25

      20

      15

      10

       5

       0
           0           1           2            3            4          5              6            7            8            9
                                                      Desired Number of Children

                                   B.     Distribution of Actual Childbearing, Women ages 41–70
      50
                                                                         Born 1900-1909                 Born 1910-1919
      45                                                                 Born 1920-1929                 Born 1930-1939

      40                                                                 Born 1940-1949                 Born 1950-1959
                                                                         Born 1960-1969
      35

      30

      25

      20

      15

      10

       5

       0
           0           1            2           3           4           5              6            7            8            9
                                                     Actual Number of Children
The figure shows the percentage of women in the indicated decadal birth cohort who desired the number of children (panel A), or who
had given birth to the number of children (panel B), specified on the horizontal axis. Both series are topcoded at 9 children. The
desired number of children is taken from questions asking about the ideal number of children for the respondent specifically. Sources:
(panel A) 1900–1909 cohorts use the Low-Fertility Cohort Study (Ridley, 1978); the remaining cohorts use the Integrated Fertility
Survey Series (Smock et al.); (panel B) see sources in Figure 6.

                                              Second Demographic Transition – 44
