NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MALARIA AND EARLY AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM THE SICKLE CELL TRAIT
Emilio Depetris-Chauvin
David N. Weil
Working Paper 19603
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19603

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2013

We are grateful to Ronald D. Lee, Andrew Mason, Gordon McCord, Nathan Nunn, and Fred Piel for
sharing data, to Fatima Aqeel, Federico Droller, Daniel Prinz, and Scott Weiner for research assistance,
and to Quamrul Ashraf, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Stelios Michalopoulos and seminar participants at
Boston University, Harvard University, Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies,
Indiana University, New York University, Pennsylvania State University, Princeton University, UCLA,
University of Connecticut, and University of Pennsylvania for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Emilio Depetris-Chauvin and David N. Weil. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Malaria and Early African Development: Evidence from the Sickle Cell Trait
Emilio Depetris-Chauvin and David N. Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 19603
October 2013
JEL No. I15,O15
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of malaria on economic development in Africa over the very long run. Using
data on the prevalence of the mutation that causes sickle cell disease we measure the impact of malaria
on mortality in Africa prior to the period in which formal data were collected. Our estimate is that
in the more afflicted regions, malaria lowered the probability of surviving to adulthood by about ten
percentage points, which is roughly twice the current burden of the disease. The reduction in malaria
mortality has been roughly equal to the reduction in other causes of mortality. We then ask whether
the estimated burden of malaria had an effect on economic development in the period before European
contact. Examining both mortality and morbidity, we do not find evidence that the impact of malaria
would have been very significant. These model-based findings are corroborated by a more statistically-based
approach, which shows little evidence of a negative relationship between malaria ecology and population
density or other measures of development, using data measured at the level ethnic groups.

Emilio Depetris-Chauvin
Department of Economics, Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
edepetris@gmail.com
David N. Weil
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
david_weil@brown.edu

It is impossible to understand the pattern of comparative economic development in the world
today without understanding comparative development in the past. Consider, for example, a
horizon of 500 years. Countries and regions that were highly developed as of the year 1500 are,
for the most part, among the most developed today. Exceptions to this regularity, such as China,
tend to be growing quickly. Taking into account flows of population over the last half
millennium makes this correlation even stronger: Countries populated by people whose
ancestors lived in the most developed countries are most likely to rich today. Looking within
countries, people who are descended from parts of the world that were highly developed in the
year 1500 are on average higher up in the income distribution than people descended from
regions that were not developed.1
Going back further back in time, there is still strong predictive power of past development for
present outcomes. Comin, Easterly, and Gong (2010) show that not only is a country’s level of
technology from 500 years ago predictive of income today, but so is the level of technology
2,000 or 3,000 years ago. Hibbs and Olsson (2004) show that the date at which the transition
from hunting and gathering to settled agriculture took place is predictive of a country’s income
today.
The fact that development in the past is so predictive of development today suggests two
possible theories. First, it may be that the same factors that influenced development in previous
historical eras are still operative in the present. Examples of such factors are genetic attributes of
populations, slowly changing aspects of culture or institutions, and characteristics of geography
or climate.2 Alternatively, it may be that the specific factors that caused past underdevelopment
are no longer relevant today, but that the fact of past underdevelopment itself is causal of current
underdevelopment. For example, it could be that the early development advantage of the
Eurasian land mass arose from the historical presence of plentiful species of large seeded grasses
and domesticable animals, as argued by Diamond (1997), but that the continuation of the
development gap between Eurasia and other regions results from the effect of colonial
institutions that Europeans were able to impose on much of the rest of the world as a result of
this initial advantage.3
Whichever of these theories is correct (and obviously it is possible for both of them to have some
validity), there is clearly much to be learned by looking at the roots of development differences
in the past. In this paper, we examine the historical impact on development of malaria. Malaria
is one of the most significant diseases in the world today in terms of its humanitarian burden.
Malaria’s control is widely studied by biologists and social scientists. Economists actively
debate its role in affecting growth in the modern world.4 However, as the above discussion
makes clear, it would be possible that even if malaria were not important in affecting economic
1

Chanda and Putterman (2007), Putterman and Weil (2010).
See, for example, Ashraf and Galor (2012) and Sachs, Malaney, and Spielman (2004). Spolaore and Wacziarg
(2013) discuss the different possible channels by which characteristics that impact economic outcomes might be
transmitted intergenerationally.
3
See, for example, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) and Nunn (2008). A related argument, stressed by
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013) is that past differences in development are causal for current outcomes because of
barriers to transmission of productivity enhancing innovations among populations with different historical roots.
4
The widely quoted estimate of Gallup and Sachs (2001) is that malaria reduces growth of GDP per capita by 1.3%
per year in the African countries most afflicted. See Weil (2010) for an extensive critique of this literature.
2

1

development today directly, it could nonetheless have been an important determinant of
development historically – and via that channel indirectly affect development today.
In studying the role of malaria in long run development, we are also inevitably studying the long
run development of Africa. Both historically and today, Africa has been the major focus of the
disease. Indeed, malaria was not present in the tropical regions of the new world until it was
accidentally brought there by Europeans (McNeill, 1977). Historians of Africa attribute a large
role to diseases in general, and malaria in particular, in shaping development (Akyeampong,
2006). For example, Webb (2006) describes malaria, along with trypanosomiasis (transmitted by
the tsetse fly) as having profoundly influenced African patterns of settlement as well as culture.
Alsan (2013) also finds a large role for trypanosomiasis in shaping population density in Africa.
The data we analyze below gives us a unique opportunity to assess the role of malaria in shaping
geographic heterogeneity in Africa.5
Analysis of the role played by malaria in shaping historical development is severely hampered by
a lack of data. Biologists only came to understand the nature of the disease in the late nineteenth
century. Accounts from travelers and other historical records provide some evidence of the
impact of the disease going back millennia, but these are hardly sufficient to draw firm
conclusions.6 Even today, trained medical personnel have trouble distinguishing between
malaria and other diseases without the use of microscopy or diagnostic tests. As discussed below,
there do exist data (“malaria ecology”) which measure the extent to which the environment in
different geographical regions is supportive of malaria. One can look at the empirical
relationship between this malaria ecology measure and economic development, either currently
or historically. We discuss such a statistical approach below. However, such an approach faces
severe limitations. One problem is that the malaria ecology variable is not scaled in way that
allows for easy economic interpretation. Further, it is difficult to know whether one has
controlled for correlates of malaria ecology that might independently influence the process of
development. These correlates could be other factors that directly influence output today (either
other diseases, or the tropical climate, which affects agriculture) or they could be the result of
historical processes, for example institutional quality, which Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
(2001) argue was influenced by the disease environment.
In this paper we address the lack of information on malaria’s impact historically by using genetic
data. In the worst afflicted areas, malaria left an imprint on the human genome that can be read
today. Specifically, we look at the prevalence of the gene that causes sickle cell disease.
Carrying one copy of this gene provided individuals with a significant level of protection against
5

Weil (2011) paints a picture of African development in 1500, both relative to the rest of the world and
heterogeneity within the continent itself, using as his indicators population density, urbanization, technological
advancement, and political development. Ignoring North Africa, which was generally part of the Mediterranean
world, the highest levels of development by many indicators are found in Ethiopia and in the broad swathe of West
African countries running from Cameroon and Nigeria eastward along the coast and the Niger river. In this latter
region, the available measures show a level of development just below or sometimes equal to that in the belt of
Eurasia running from Japan and China, through South Asia and the Middle East, into Europe. Depending on the
index used, West Africa was above or below the level of development in the Northern Andes and Mexico. Much of
the rest of Africa was at a significantly lower level of development, although still more advanced than the bulk of
the Americas or Australia.
6
Akyeampong (2006), Mabogunje and Richards (1985).

2

malaria, but people who carried two copies of the gene died before reaching reproductive age.
Thus the degree of selective pressure exerted by malaria determined the equilibrium prevalence
of the gene in the population. By measuring the prevalence of the gene in modern populations,
we can thus back out an estimate of the severity of malaria historically. We compare these
estimates to the burden of malaria today and discuss how the change in malaria mortality has
compared to the change in mortality from other sources.
With estimates of the extent of malaria mortality in hand, we then turn to look at the impact of
the disease on economic development. We take two approaches. The first is statistical: we
present regressions of a number of measures of development within Africa on a “malaria burden”
measure we create based on sickle cell prevalence. Of particular note, we apply our analysis to a
data set measured at the level of ethnic groups as an alternative to more common country-level
analyses. The second approach eschews regressions, instead using the machinery of standard
economic modeling, along the lines of Ashraf, Lester, and Weil (2007). In the current paper, we
focus in particular on quantifying the economic effects of malaria mortality of the magnitude
estimated from our genetic data.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we discuss the biology of the link
between malaria and sickle cell disease. Section 2 presents and applies our model for using the
current level of sickle cell prevalence to estimate the historical burden of malaria, including
comparisons of malaria’s historical burden to its current level and to the historical burden of
other diseases. We then turn to the question of how malaria affected development. Section 3
presents a statistical analysis of the relationship between the malaria burden measure we create
and a number of measures of development within Africa. In Section 4 we take a model-based
approach to evaluating cost of the malaria mortality, and also discuss the effect of malarial
morbidity. Section 5 concludes.
1.

Malaria and Sickle Cell Disease

1.1 Background
Malaria is caused by the plasmodium parasite, which is transmitted to humans through the bite of
a female anopheles mosquito. Early symptoms of malaria include fever, chills, severe headache,
and vomiting. In severe cases these are followed by respiratory distress, severe anemia, or
neurological symptoms (cerebral malaria). Infants are protected from the disease in the first few
months of life by a combination of maternal antibodies and characteristics of the structure of
fetal hemoglobin. In malaria endemic areas, most children have developed substantial immunity
by the age of five.
Africa currently accounts for 85 percent of world malaria cases and 90 percent of world malaria
deaths. The geographical pattern of malaria's severity is largely determined by the climactic
conditions that support mosquito breeding as well as by the mix of mosquito species present.
There are significant differences in the vectorial capacity among the approximately 20 species of
anopheles that transmit malaria, based on factors such as the mosquito's preferred targets, biting
frequency, and lifespan. The most effective vector, Anopheles Gambiae, is the principal vector
in Africa.
3

Several mutations have arisen in human populations that provide resistance to malaria. These
include the mutation causing thalassemia, which is present in Mediterranean, Arab, and Asian
populations; the absence of the Duffy blood group in west Africa; hemoglobin E in Southeast
Asia; and hemoglobin C in West Africa (Allison, 2002; Nelson and Williams, 2006). The most
important such mutation is the one that causes sickle cell disease.
The sickle cell trait is a mutation in the gene the produces hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying
component in red blood cells. Individuals carry two copies of this gene, one received from each
parent. Individuals who carry one normal copy of the gene (referred to as A type) and one copy
with the sickle cell mutation (S type) are carriers of the disease. In individuals of the AS
genotype, a fraction of the hemoglobin in their red blood cells have an abnormal structure. In
individuals who have two copies of the sickle cell gene (SS genotype), almost all hemoglobin
molecules are of the abnormal type.
In conditions of inadequate oxygen supply (hypoxia), hemoglobin produced by the S gene
becomes rigid, leading to a characteristic sickle shape of red blood cells. Carriers of sickle cell
trait generally do not suffer many adverse effects.7 However, there can be negative
consequences from sickling in conditions of low oxygen such as unpressurized airplane flights
and extremely rigorous exercise (Motulsky, 1964). In individuals of the SS genotype, such
sickling of red blood cells is far more common, leading to acute episodes of disease in which
abnormally shaped cells restrict blood flow to organs. Such individuals also suffer from anemia
and reduced resistance to infection. In 1994, life expectancy for SS children in the United States
was 42 years for males and 48 years for females. In the absence of modern medical care,
individuals of the SS genotype are not able to survive to adulthood.
The sickle cell mutation is relevant to malaria because infection of a red blood cell with the
malaria parasite leads to hypoxia. In individuals of the AS genotype such blood cells sickle and
are then eliminated by the body's immune system, lessening the burden of infection. Carriers of
the sickle cell trait are particularly resistant to severe malarial episodes; they are less resistant to
mild cases. The mechanism by which AS carriers are protected from malaria is different than the
acquired immunity that both AA and AS individuals achieve following repeated exposure to the
disease.
The benefit that possessing a single copy of the sickle cell gene conveys counterbalances the
biological cost incurred when homozygous SS children are stricken with sickle cell disease. An
individual of the AS genotype is more likely to reach adulthood than is an individual of the AA
genotype, but the former is also more likely to see his/her child die of sickle cell disease. This is
known as a heterozygote advantage or balanced polymorphism. As shown more formally
below, the stronger is the pressure of malaria on survival, the more advantaged are individuals
who carry the S gene, and in equilibrium, the higher the percentage of the population who will be
carriers. Indeed, it was the correlation of high prevalence of the sickle cell gene and the presence
of malaria that first led scientists to understand the protective role of the sickle cell mutation.

7

Williams et al. (2005) show the absence of any significant effect of carrier status on a wide range of childhood
diseases.

4

As will be seen in the next section, the underlying genetic mechanism by which the sickle cell
trait is transmitted provides a means of mapping sickle cell prevalence into an estimate of the
mortality burden of malaria.
Piel et al. (2010) present a global geo-database of S gene frequency based on comprehensive
electronic search of academic publications presenting S gene frequency figures. Each reference
included in the dataset meets the criterion that the surveyed population was representative of the
indigenous population of a particular location. Piel et al. assign a geographic coordinate to all
samples with the distribution of AS and AA genotypes that meet their strict inclusion criteria.
Using a Bayesian model-based geostatistical framework they then create a continuous map of the
sickle cell gene frequency resulting in 10 km by 10 km resolution global raster grid. It is
important to note that throughout our paper we use the terminology “sickle cell trait prevalence”
(the fraction of people who are carriers of the allele S) instead of sickle cell gene (or S allele)
frequency as in Piel et al (2010). Since very few S homozygotes survive to adulthood, the sickle
cell trait prevalence is very close to 1/2 of the sickle cell gene frequency.
Figure 1 presents the geographic distribution of S gene frequency from Piel et al. The maximum
levels of the mutation are located in West-Central Africa (Gabon and Congo). The west part of
Africa, from Cameroon to Senegal, shows a large heterogeneity in the prevalence of the
mutation, ranging from almost complete absence in some places and very high values (above 20
percent) in others. Medium level frequencies are also located in the proximity of Lake Victoria.
Finally, no mutation is documented in the southern part of the continent.8

2.

Measuring the Historical Burden of Malaria Using Data on the Sickle Cell Trait

2.1 Model

8

Several theories have been proposed regarding the origin of the sickle cell mutation. Most of them deal with its
location while some attempts have been made to estimate its age. A single mutation theory was initially postulated.
Two different places of origin were proposed, Singer (1958) proposed the Rwenzori Mountains in Central Africa
whereas Lehmann (1964) postulated the Arabian Peninsula (which was a fertile plain during Neolithic times).
However, substantial genetic evidence supports the multicentric origin hypothesis today. According to this
hypothesis the sickle cell mutation was the result of independent events happening in at least five different places
(four in Africa and one in Asia). Studies in molecular genetics found that the HbS gene is associated with at least
four different beta-globin haplotypes in Africa, which differ in at least three different genetic markers (in other
words, the mutation presents four or more chromosomes from separate locations) providing evidence of the
multicentric origin of the mutation. The four different haplotypes are referred to as Benin, Senegal, Cameroon, and
Bantu (Central Africa).
Regarding the estimation of the date of the origin for the mutation some scholars have argued that the mutations
probably arose less than 6000 years ago in response to the spread of agriculture. In particular, they argued that the
time of origin coincided with the time malaria became endemic due to the development of slash-and-burn
agriculture (see, for example Wiesenfeld, 1967 and Livingstone, 1958). On the contrary, in the first attempts
applying statistical calculations it was suggested that the mutation developed between 3,000 and 6,000 generations
or approximately between 70,000 and 150,000 years ago (see, for example, Kurnit, 1979 and Soloman, 1979). A
more recent genetic study based on an ethnically well-deﬁned population (lacking of recent admixture and
amalgamation) suggests a much younger age for at least one the original mutations. According to Currat et al
(2002), mutation related to the Senegal haplotype arose less than 3,000 years ago.

5

Our goal is to examine what the prevalence of the sickle cell trait among African populations
tells us about the impact of malaria historically. As described above, every adult carries two
alleles. These can be either sickle cell (S) or normal (A).9 A person with the SS genotype will
develop sickle cell disease and not survive to adulthood. A person who carries the sickle cell
trait (AS) will have a survival advantage against malaria in comparison to someone who doesn’t
(AA).
We consider a simple model in which deaths occur due to either malaria or to other causes. Let
M be the probability of dying of malaria, conditional on not dying of something else. Similarly,
let P be the probability of dying of something else, conditional on not dying from malaria. 10
The deaths that we are concerned with are those between birth and adulthood, which is taken to
be the age at which children are produced. The number of adults from a cohort of newborns will
be given by
Surviving adults = (1-M)(1-P) newborns

(1)

Throughout the analysis, we will assume that the probability of dying from non-malaria causes,
P, is the same for individuals with the AS and AA genotypes. The probabilities of dying from
malaria, differ between AA and AS genotypes. We designate these probabilities
and
.
It is also useful to designate the relative survival rates of these two genotypes, which we call β:
(2)

β is the probability of a non-carrier living into adulthood relative to the probability of a carrier
living into adulthood. The smaller is β , the larger is the advantage of the AS genotype. A value
of β =1 would indicate that there is no advantage to carrying the sickle cell gene.
The values for
and
, and thus for β , will depend on both the disease environment and
the state of medical technology. For example, in a place where there are no malaria mosquitoes,
and
will both be equal to zero, and β will be equal to one. Clearly, the availability of
modern medical care should mean that both
and
are lower today than they were in the
past. However, it is not clear a priori which mortality rate would be reduced by more.
Relative Survival in Modern Populations
Although our main objective is asking what role malaria played historically, it is of interest to
see what information is available about relative survival today. One way to measure relative
9

We ignore other mutations. In the presence of other mutations that also control malaria, the genetic benefit of
carrying the S trait is reduced, but its cost remains the same. Thus our analysis, based only on the S trait, will
understate the full burden of malaria.
10
For the purposes of this part of the analysis, it does not matter whether deaths due to sickle cell disease are
counted as being due to malaria or due to a non-malaria cause. In our analysis below, we include deaths due to
sickle cell disease as part of our measure of malaria burden, because in the absence of the disease, such deaths
would not occur.

6

survival is to compare prevalence among adults to that among newborns. The relevant equation
is

Rearranging this equation:

Morrow and Moss (2006) report on data from the Garki study, conducted in a region of high
malaria transmission in Nigeria in the 1970s. Among adults, 28.96% of the population was AS,
while 70.2% were AA. Among newborns, 23.6% were AS and 73.78% AA. Entering these
figures in the equation above gives a value of =77.5%. More generally, Morrow and Moss
report that the prevalence of the sickle cell trait in West Africa trait rises from 20-24% among
newborns to 26-29% among adults.11
Another approach is to look at survival directly. Motulsky (1964, table 2) examined the relative
survival of over 15,000 children in the Congo in the 1950s, a time and place where modern
treatments for malaria would have been relatively scarce. The study compared families where
one parent was AS and one AA, on the one hand, to families in which both parents were AA, on
the other. Since half of the children in the former group were carriers, compared to none in the
latter, one can back out the relative survival of AS vs. AA children. The study found mortality
from all causes of 24.0% among AS children vs. 27.4% among AA. The implied value of β is
.955. Part of the explanation for the different estimates β in the Congo vs. West Africa may be a
difference in the severity of malaria. In the Congo, the malaria ecology index is 12.1; in West
Africa it is generally in the neighborhood of 20.

2.2

Measuring Relative Survival in Historical Populations

We now turn to our main line of inquiry, which is using observed frequency of the sickle cell
trait to back out the severity of malaria. Let be the fraction of adults in generation t who are
carriers (AS). We assume that no one born with SS lives into adulthood. Thus the fraction of
11

Examining the Baamba of Uganda, who live in extremely high malaria environment, Lehmann and Raper (1956)
report that the fraction of “sicklers” (AS or SS) rises from 30% of those under five years age to 37% among adults.
Using these figures in equation (4), this would imply a value of =73%. This calculation understates the size of the
mortality differential, however, both because those in the under five age group will have already experienced
differential mortality from malaria and because the group of young sicklers presumably includes a larger fraction of
SS individuals than does the adult group.

7

the adult population who are not carriers is
. The fraction of alleles in the adult
generation that are S is simply . Assuming that mating between carriers and non-carriers is
random, the fractions of children born who are of each type are:
AA:
AS:
SS:
The difference equation for π, which relates prevalence among adults in successive generations,
is

We solve for the steady state by setting

:

This has the properties we would expect: the smaller is the β, that is the greater is the survival
advantage of being a carrier, the larger is the equilibrium fraction of the adult population that
will be carriers.
We can turn this equation around to infer the burden of malaria on survival based on the
prevalence of the sickle cell trait among adults:

This equation says that if 20% of the adult population are carriers in a steady state, then
, in other words that people with the AA were only 89% as likely to live to adulthood as
those with AS.

8

Current vs. Historical Prevalence
The analysis above considers a population that is in equilibrium in terms of the selective impact
of malaria and the prevalence of the sickle cell trait. Such a steady state presumably existed in
Africa in the period before European contact. However, the only data on sickle cell prevalence
available comes from observations over the last 60 years.12 One might worry that modern
prevalence rates are not the same as those that held historically, because the health environment
has been changing over time. To address this question, it is straightforward to use equation (5)
to look at how prevalence π changes in response to a change in relative survival (β).
As an example, we consider the case where there is initially a steady state of
, and
correspondingly
. In generation 1, the value of β is set to one, corresponding to the
complete eradication of malaria, or the removal of the population to a place where the disease is
not present. Figure 2 shows the fraction of the population that will be carriers of the sickle cell
trait after a set number of generations. The figure shows that the initial decline is very rapid, but
that there is long tailing off once the prevalence gets sufficiently low.
In principle, one could test this model by looking at how the prevalence of the sickle cell trait
changes in a population that was removed from exposure to malaria at a known time. Although
the data are in practice not sufficient for a formal test, the case of African Americans provides a
rough consistency check. We start by calculating the fraction of adults who are carriers in the
countries that were the source of slaves that came to the United States. Specifically, we
combined two data sources. We used data from Piel et al. (2010) on the prevalence of the sickle
cell trait among adults in modern African countries. We combined these with estimates from
Putterman and Weil (2010, main appendix, part II.3) on the fractions of the slaves who came to
the United States originating in each African country. Multiplying and summing these two
series, we estimate that 16.2% of slaves who came to the United States were carriers of the sickle
cell trait (calculation available on request).
The other piece of information needed is the date on which the ancestors of today’s African
Americans left Africa. Obviously, this took place over several centuries, and we do not know of
an estimate of the average date of departure. As a rough estimate that the average ancestor of
today’s African Americans left Africa around 1750 -- a span of roughly 10 generations.
Starting with 16.2% prevalence and applying equation (5) for ten generations would lead to a
prevalence of 9.0% today. However, one has to deal with the issue of admixture with other
populations. Putterman and Weil (2010, Appendix B) summarize literature on the fraction of
African American heritage that is due to non-Africans, reporting 20% as a rough consensus
figure. That admixture took place at unknown points in time over the last three centuries. The
earlier that admixture took place, the higher would be the prevalence of the trait among African
Americans today. If the entire admixture took place in the last generation, the prevalence today

12

Testing predates modern technology for genetic analysis. Carriers of the sickle cell gene can be reliably diagnosed
by taking a drop of blood and mixing in a reducing agent to induce hypoxia, then examining with a microscope
whether blood cells have sickled.

9

would be 7.2%. By contrast, if the entire admixture took place ten generations ago, our
calculation would yield a prevalence of 7.9% today
In fact, the prevalence of the trait among African Americans today is 8%.13 Thus the model
slightly under-predicts the prevalence of the sickle cell trait among African Americans. One
possible source of this error could be that that African slaves brought to the Americas did not
find themselves in a completely malaria-free environment. For example, McGuire and Coelho
(2011) stress slaves’ immunity to malaria as one of the reasons that southern planters favored
them over indentured servants.
In terms of our use of current prevalence of the sickle cell trait to measure the historical burden
of malaria, it is not clear that this analysis of the dynamics of prevalence matters much, since
there is little reason to believe that contact with Europeans did anything to reduce the impact of
malaria in Africa until the second half of the twentieth century, which is when most of the
measures of sickle cell come from.
2.3

Measuring the Overall Burden of Malaria

Knowing the relative survival of carriers and non-carriers does not tell us the overall effect of
malaria, for two reasons. First, in addition to deaths from malaria, we must take into account the
cost of sickle-cell disease itself. This issue is easily addressed by looking at the fraction of
adults who are carriers, from which we can derive the fraction of children who will suffer from
sickle cell disease. The underlying data on the number of carriers is the same data used to
estimate β.
The second reason that knowing β (relative survival) does not tell us the overall burden of
malaria is because a given value of β could be consistent with different levels of absolute
survival. For example, β =.80 could be consistent with
=20% and
=0, but it could
also be consistent with
=60% and
=50%. Dealing with this issue requires bringing to
bear additional data. Specifically, we need an additional piece of information on
,
, or
their ratio. One can look at modern populations for some information, with the caveat that
modern data on survival is not necessarily informative about survival in Africa prior to European
contact, where both the disease environment and the level of medical care differed from today.
Allison (2002, Table 2) reports results from an examination of 104 child malaria deaths from
different countries in Africa, in which the weighted average prevalence of the sickle cell trait was
21%. Only one child examined had the sickle cell trait, which would suggest that the trait is
almost completely protective against malaria death. However, a different set of investigations
(Allison 2002, Table 1) that looked at severe P. falciparum infections rather than deaths found a
relative incidence of infections in AS that was 46% as high that for AA. Both sets of studies just
described were conducted in the 1950s or very early 1960s. A larger and more recent study (Hill
et al., 1991) examined children in The Gambia. Children who were severely ill with malaria
were compared to a control group. The severely ill children had cerebral malaria or severe
malarial anemia. Without treatment, most of the children in this group would have died.
Among the severe malaria group, the frequency of the AS genotype was 1.2%, while among the
13

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (1996).

10

control group it was 12.9%. This implies that the relative risk of developing severe symptoms
(and presumably dying without medical care) in AS as compared to AA is 0.08.14 A third study
(Williams et al, 2005) concluded that “HbAS was 90% protective against severe or complicated
malaria.” These studies suggest that reasonable bounds on
are zero on the low end, and to
assume that

on the upper end.15

With estimates of
and
, we are in a position to look at the overall costs of malaria.
There are three components to this cost: deaths from malaria among children who are carriers of
the sickle cell trait, death from malaria among children who are not carriers, and deaths from
sickle cell disease. Table 1 shows the fractions of births that fall into each category, the death
rate for each group, and the total fraction of child deaths (from malaria or sickle cell disease) that
are due to each category. The overall fraction of children who die due to malaria and sickle cell
disease is simply the sum of the three terms in the right hand column.
Figure 3 does a more extensive analysis, considering different values of , the prevalence of the
sickle cell trait among the adult population. We consider values ranging from zero to 40%,
which is the highest level observed among specific populations. For each value of , we
calculate the implied value of β, assuming that the prevalence represents a steady state (equation
7). We also show the fraction of newborn children who will die of sickle cell disease and the
malaria death rates for non-carriers under the two different assumptions about the death rate for
carriers discussed above, specifically that
and that
. Finally, we show the
overall burden of malaria and sickle cell disease, once again for the two assumptions about the
death rate for carriers discussed above.
The figure shows that, at least within the range of the two estimates we have available, the
assumption regarding the degree of protection afforded to carriers of the sickle cell mutation is
not very important.
The fraction of the overall burden that takes the form of sickle cell disease rises with prevalence.
For example, when
, roughly one-tenth of the overall burden is in the form of deaths
from sickle cell disease, with the other nine tenths due to malaria cases. When
, sickle
cell deaths account for roughly 20% of the burden. It is also of interest to calculate the net
benefit of the sickle cell mutation, that is, the level of mortality in the presence of the mutation
relative to the case where it is absent. The level of mortality absent the mutation can simply be
read from the line representing MAA , since in this case everyone would have the mortality rate of
non-carriers. For example, in the case of 20% prevalence of the sickle cell trait, overall mortality
due to malaria and sickle cell disease is 10%, but overall mortality due to malaria would be
14

Another study (Greenwood, Marsh, and Snow, 1991) examined children in Kenya, finding that the sickle cell trait
was present in only 1.8% of children with severe malaria anemia but 3.9% of children with uncomplicated malaria.
This finding confirms that the trait is more protective against severe malaria than against mild cases. However,
because no data are given on the prevalence of the trait in the overall population, one cannot back out the relative
risk of AA vs. AS.
15
Given a ratio of malaria mortality in the two groups, along with the equation for β, we can solve the for the group
rates of malaria mortality. These are
and
, where X is the ratio of
to
.

11

11.1% if there were no sickle cell mutation. In areas of high malaria pressure, the value of the
sickle cell mutation was higher. In the worst afflicted areas, the sickle cell trait reduced malaria
related mortality by 20%.
We take sum of malaria and sickle cell deaths as our measure of the overall mortality impact of
the disease, which we call “malaria burden.” In Section 3 we explore the empirical relationship
between the overall malaria burden and different measures of economic development at the
ethnic group level, while in Section 4 we present a quantitative model for evaluating the
expected impact of the malaria mortality burden. Prior to these exercises, however, we first
compare our new measure of malaria burden to an existing measure, malaria ecology, and then
compare our estimates of the historical burden of malaria to the burden today.

2.4 Comparison of Malaria Burden to Malaria Ecology
As mentioned above, our malaria burden index is not the first attempt to construct a systematic
measure of the impact of malaria. The malaria ecology index of Kisezewski et al. (2004) has
been extensively used in the literature. The index takes into account both climactic factors and
the dominant vector species to give an overall measure of how congenial the environment is to
the spread of malaria. It does not take into account public health interventions such as swampdraining or differences among countries in economic development or health care infrastructure.
In other words, it represents the component of malaria variation that is exogenous to human
intervention. The index is calculated for grid squares of 0.5 degree longitude by 0.5 degree
latitude. Figure 4 shows data for the whole world, and Figure 5 shows a close-up of Africa. With
the exception of New Guinea and some areas of southeast Asian, Africa is the only part of the
world in which the index reaches its highest levels. Regions in which malaria played a
significant role historically but has now been eradicated, such as Greece, Southern Italy, and the
American South, are all seen to have relatively low values for the malaria ecology index. Within
Africa, there is substantial variation in the index.
We can similarly construct our measure of malaria burden, starting with data on the prevalence
of the sickle cell mutation among indigenous populations. Specifically, we use the 10 km. by 10
km. resolution global raster grid of S gene prevalence constructed by Piel et al (2010). We
assume that the malaria mortality of AS genotype relative to the AA type
is 0.08. None of
16
the results that follow are qualitatively affected by this assumption. The malaria burden index
is a transformation of the data in Figure 1 and looks very similar to that figure.
In this section we compare the performance of these two indices in explaining malaria
prevalence both in the past and in the present. We focus our analysis in two different levels of
aggregation: first, grid squares of 0.5 degree longitude by 0.5 degree latitude, and second, ethnic
groups mapped by Murdock (1959). We show that regardless of the level of aggregation our
measure explains a larger fraction of the variation of two different measures of malaria
prevalence.

16

Results are available upon request.

12

We use two different dependent variables: (1) a dummy variable for having a highly malarious
environment c.1900, and (2) malaria endemicity in the year 2007. The first measure is
constructed based on Lysenko’s (1968) map categorizing the world at the beginning of the
twentieth century into six classes of malaria transmission intensity in order of severity: no
malaria, epidemic, hypoendemic, mesoendemic, hyperendemic, and holoendemic. We focus in
the two worst malaria environments as “highly malarious,” and construct a measure which is the
fraction of the territory of our unit of analysis (grid cell or ethnic group) in which malaria fell in
this range. The second measure accounts for the average plasmodium falciparum transmission
intensity (parasite rate) in 2007 and comes from Hay et al. (2009).
Table 2 presents the main statistical results at the grid cell level. We adjust standard errors for
two-way spatial autocorrelation with cut-off distance of 5 degrees (approximately 550 km at the
equator). In addition to the point estimates and standard errors we report standardized
coefficients in brackets (i.e, the fraction of standard deviation changes in the dependent variable
due to a one-standard deviation change in the relevant malaria measure). For columns 1 to 3 the
dependent variable is the share of grid cell under highly malarious environment. For columns 4
to 6, the dependent variable is malaria endemicity in 2007. For the two sets of regressions our
measure of malaria burden explains a larger variation of the dependent variable. According to the
results in columns 1 and 2, our measure explains 15 percent more variation of circa 1900 malaria
severity. When running a horserace both independent variables remain highly statistically
significant, although the t-statistic for our measure decreases far less. The same pattern holds
when we look at modern malaria endemicity as dependent variable (columns 4 to 6). Across all
the specifications in Table 2 the standardized coefficients for our measure are consistently larger
than for the case of malaria ecology.
We repeat the exercise focusing our analysis on ethnic groups mapped by Murdock (1959) at the
time of colonization in Africa. We restrict our analysis to the 525 ethnic groups that we include
later on in our study of the relationship between malaria burden and early development. Table 3
presents the main statistical results. We cluster the standard errors at the ethnolinguistic family
level.17 We find the same pattern documented in Table 2: our measure explain more variation of
both highly malarious environment c.1900 and malaria endemicity in the year 2007. In fact, the
difference in the R-squared is much larger than in the grid cell case, with our measure explaining
80 percent more of the variation of malaria severity in early 20th century and almost 50 percent
more of current levels of malaria endemicity.18 Again, the standardized coefficients for our
measure are consistently larger across all the specifications.

17

The statistical significance of these results is not affected if we adjust the standard error for spatial autocorrelation
in the error term. Moreover, the standard errors when clustering at the ethnolinguistic family level tend to be larger
than when adjusting by spatial autocorrelation.
18
We additionally investigated ethnic groups in which the malaria ecology and malaria burden measure give very
different values. The bulk of these have low levels of malaria burden relative to their level of malaria ecology.
They are all highly clustered in three particular places: Burkina Faso and Southern Mali; Southern Chad; and
Eastern Sudan. In addition, these ethnic groups tend to rely more on cereals as their main crop (as opposed to roots
and tree fruits, or no agriculture activity whatsoever). Modern genetic work has documented the low frequency of
sickle cell gene (and other known protective genes) for ethnic groups living in Burkina Faso, where malaria
transmission is very high. These groups have an unexpectedly low susceptibility to falciparum malaria, which
would point out to the possibility that other unknown genetic factors of resistance to malaria might be involved

13

We also experimented other robustness checks.19 Motivated by the possibility that climate
change occurred during late 20th century may be responsible of the relatively weaker
performance of the malaria ecology index in explaining highly malarious environment circa
1900, we repeat the same exercise using a malaria ecology index based on early 20th climate
data.20 We find the same pattern in the data. We also create 1960 population-weighted measures
of both the dependent and the independent variables.21 Again, the same pattern documented in
Table 2 and 3 holds. We obtain similar results when we create an additional measure of malaria
endemicity c.1900 by averaging the six classes of malaria transmission intensity documented in
Lysenko map (recall that each of the six classes listed in order of severity and assigned to an
integer value in a 0 to 5 scale).
Overall, our finding is that the new malaria burden measure is superior to malaria ecology for
predicting the severity of malaria in Africa, although clearly there is more information in the two
indices taken together than in either one separately.22 An additional advantage of the malaria
burden measure that is worth mentioning is that its quantitative interpretation is very simple: it
represents the fraction of children expected to die from malaria or sickle cell disease, conditional
on not dying of something else. By contrast, malaria ecology is an index of the stability of
transmission of the malaria parasite and does not have a simple interpretation in terms of the
human effect of the disease. Using it to assess the importance of malaria for health or economic
outcomes requires scaling the malaria ecology index in a regression framework, as in Sachs
(2003).
2.5

Comparison of Malaria Burden to Modern Malaria Mortality Rates

For the WHO AFRO region, the under-five death rate from malaria is 0.59% per year.
Multiplying this number by five gives an approximation to the probability of dying from malaria
in the first five years of life, which is very close to the probability of dying from malaria before
reproductive age.
The fraction of children who die of malaria is not exactly comparable to what we estimate in the
historical data, because our measure M is the probability of dying of malaria conditional on not
dying of something else. Such a measure is not usually examined in modern data, but it can be
constructed relatively easily. Consider the case of Nigeria, which is a very heavily afflicted
country. The life table for Nigeria for 2006 shows that the probability of woman surviving to
(Modiano, Luoni, Sirima et al, 2001). In fact, we found that those groups tend to present high frequency of
haemoglobin C (HbC). We also found that malaria ecology predicts a highly malarious environment for the Eastern
Sudan cluster whereas we did not find any evidence of that being actually the case (neither for contemporaneous or
historical malaria figures). There are two salient characteristics for this location: (1) low elevation and (2) a high
probability of occurrence for the A. Funestus vector a but not for the A. Gambiae.
19

Results are available upon request.
We thank Gordon McCord for providing this data. This version of the malaria ecology is the average ecology
index for the period 1900 -1905 CE.
21
We create population-weighted averages using estimates of population in 1960 at approximately 0.1 decimal
degree resolutions (approximately 1km at the equator) from the African Population Database Documentation, UNEP
GRID Sioux Falls.
22
Outside of Africa we do not view our measure as a viable alternative to the malaria ecology index because the
sickle cell mutation is not present among many indigenous populations,
20

14

age 25 is approximately 0.75.
historical data, we have:

Taking this age to be the equivalent of adulthood in our

.75 = (1-M)(1-P)

(8)

Annual malaria deaths for children under five are estimated to be 8.8 per thousand, or 0.88%.
This implies that roughly 4.4% of children will die of malaria before their fifth birthday. We
assume that there are no further malaria deaths beyond this age. To incorporate this data into an
estimate, we need to deal with the ambiguity of timing in the simple demographic model with
which we started. Specifically, the model implies that a fraction (1-M)(1-P) of children will
survive both malaria and other conditions, but it is less clear about what those who don't survive
die of.23 If malaria mortality comes before that from other conditions, then a fraction M will die
of malaria and a fraction (1-M)P will die of other causes; if other conditions come first, then a
fraction P will die of other causes and (1-P)M will die of malaria. The truth is obviously
somewhere in the middle – both malaria and non-malaria mortality is highly concentrated among
the very young. For lack of any firm data, we simply assume that deaths due to malaria and
"other" had equal time profiles, which implies
(9)
Solving equations (8) and (9) yields M =.054 and
. To compare the malaria burden,
we can look at the fraction of the Nigerian population who are carriers of the sickle cell trait
today. In the data of Piel et al., 9.8% of adult alleles are of the S type (this is the average over
the area Nigeria, weighted by current population density), implying that roughly 19.6% of adults
are carriers. This in turn implies that slightly less than 10% of children would have died of
malaria before reproductive age, conditional on not dying of something else. Thus the burden of
malaria has fallen by a little less than half. Below we discuss the comparison of the level of
decline in malaria mortality to the decline in mortality from other causes.

3. Assessing the Importance of Malaria to Early African Development
We turn now to an statistical analysis on the importance of malaria to early African development.
We view this analysis as exploratory. In the absence of a source of exogenous variation on
historical malaria burden, it is difficult to identify the precise impact of malaria on development
in the past with any reasonable degree of certainty. Although we attempt to account for several
confounding factors in our analysis, bias due to measurement error in our malaria burden
variable and some degree of reverse causality is likely to be present in the point estimates we
report next. Therefore, our strategy is to simply investigate whether the conditional correlations
between our historical malaria burden variable and several measures of early development are
23

The fraction who die is M+P-MP. This can be rewritten as M(1-P)+P(1-M)+MP, where the first term is children
who died of malaria but would not have died otherwise, the second term is children who died of something else but
would not have died of malaria, and the third term is children who died of one but would have died of the other.

15

consistent with a sizeable and statistically significant negative impact of malaria on early African
development .
3.1 Ethnic Group Analysis
We start our analysis by looking at the statistical association between population density and our
measure of historical burden of malaria. We focus on population density, rather than income, for
the usual Malthusian reasons. Using population figures from Murdock (1967)’s Ethnographic
Atlas (EA) we construct population density figures at the ethnic group level for the colonial
period. The EA is a database on 1,167 ethnic groups of six different regions of the world,
including Sub-Saharan Africa. This database includes a variety of information from the level of
subsistence economy to the degree of political integration of each group. For some of the African
ethnicities, the EA also includes information on population size and year of its estimation. We
identified figures and date for over 250 African ethnic groups. In order to compute the
population density we use total land area for each ethnic group as implied from shape-file from
the digitalized version of the ethnicities’ map in Murdock (1959). Since there is no perfect match
between ethnicity names in Murdock (1967) and Murdock (1959)’s map we were initially able to
locate only 219 ethnicities with population figures. We then follow Fenske (2012) and match 23
additional ethnicities ending with a total of 242 population density observations in our sample.
The date of estimation of population figures varies in the range period 1880-1960. More than
60% of the sample belongs to the first half of the 20th century.
Figure 6 displays the population density for the ethnicities in our sample. We divide the sample
in quintiles of the number of people per square kilometer at the ethnicity level. Ethnic groups
from Central, East and West Africa are more prevalent in our sample whereas only 5 groups
belong to North Africa Except for the cluster of very densely populated groups near Lake
Victoria, the quintiles seem to be evenly distributed across in the Sub-Saharan Africa. A closer
look to West Africa suggests that there is variation in population density even within that region.

3.1.1 The effect of Malaria on Population Density during Colonial Time
In order to assess the effect of malaria environment in our measure of ethnicity prosperity during
the colonial time we estimate several different specifications of the following equation24:
(10)
Where the subscript i denotes ethnic group, P is population density, M is our measure of
historical malaria burden, L is a land quality measure, T is a vector of 8 decade dummies for the
period 1880 -1950, G and I are vectors of geography/climate and external influence controls,
respectively, and
is a collection of 13 ethnographic region dummies from EA (1967). We
describe these controls in detail below. Finally, ε is the error term that is allowed to be
heteroskedastic. Since several ethnic groups share common ancestors and belong to the same
24

We use our malaria burden measure for the case in which AS relative malaria mortality of 0.08 in all the empirical
analysis in this paper. Using a different assumptions regarding the relative protection of AS genotypes does not
affect our statistical results.

16

ethnolinguistic family, the error term is likely to be correlated within an ethnolinguistic family.25
We thus follow Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2011) and cluster the standard errors at the
ethnolininguistic family level.26
Table 4 presents the first statistical results. In column 1 we only control for the decade dummies
and the set of geographic controls. The statistical relationship between geographic factors and
development, either through their direct or indirect causal mechanisms, is well documented in
the empirical literature. Those factors may correlate also with the disease environment. To
account for other diseases environment, we include the share of each ethnic group’s territory
with tropical climate following the Koeppen-Geiger classification.27 To account to the fact that
the presence of water bodies may positively correlate with both population density and malaria
prevalence (such as around Lake Victoria), we also control for the log total area of water bodies
accessible for the ethnic group (note also that humidity tends to be high near rivers facilitating
the availability of breeding sites) and geodesic distance of the centroid of the historical
homeland of each ethnic group from the nearest coastline (the greater the distance to the coast,
the lower the population density). To account to the fact that malaria is more prevalent in less
ecologically diverse areas which also tend to be less densely populated, we include a measure of
ecological diversity from Fenske (2013).28 Finally, we also include mean elevation of terrain to
account for the fact that elevation has a strong negative effect on malaria prevalence and may
also have an independent effect on development.29 Interestingly, the coefficient estimate for β
suggests a positive (albeit statistically insignificant) correlation between our measure of malaria
burden and population density. This striking positive association is also documented in other
works based on modern data at the country level (such as in Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger 1999).
Note, however, that this correlation turns slightly negative (albeit statistically insignificant) when
we add ethnographic region dummies in column 2.30
Several empirical and theoretical studies have identified soil suitability for agriculture as one of
the main drivers of population density. We then pay special attention to difference in land quality
(L) and introduce the mean value of the index of land suitability for agriculture as a control in
column 3. This index was constructed by Ramankutty et al. (2002) and represents the probability
that a particular grid cell (of the size of about 50 x 50 km) may be cultivated.31 The introduction
25

There is an alternative approach of adjusting the standard errors for spatial autocorrelation. Although this method
will account for some of the autocorrelation in the error term, it will not account for situations in which migratory
phenomena (such as the bantu expansion) placed apart two ethnic groups belonging to the same linguistic family.
26
There are 94 ethnolinguistic families in the EA for African societies (the number of clusters in our sample is 80).
27
For instance, malaria environment considerably overlap with the distribution of the Tse-Tse fly which transmits
the parasite causing sleeping sickness. Dengue and yellow fever are also common diseases in tropical Africa.
28
This measure of ecological diversity consists in a Herfindhal index based on the territorial shares of different
ecological types within the boundaries of each ethnic group's homeland.
29
For instance, Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger (1999) shows that population density is greater (lower) at high
altitudes in the tropics (temperate zones).
30
The ethnographic region dummies are African Hunters, South African Bantu, Central Bantu, Northeast Bantu,
Equatorial Bantu, Guinea Coast, Western Sudan, Nigeria Plateau, Eastern Sudan, Upper Nile, Ethiopia/Horn,
Moslem Sudan, Sahara, and North Africa.
31
The authors assume that suitability for cultivation is solely a function of climate (temperature, precipitation, and
potential sunshine hours) and soil properties (total organic components measured by carbon density and nutrient
availability based on soil pH). It is important to note that the index does not account for the productivity of a
particular piece of land, but simply whether the characteristics of the land are favorable for crop cultivation.

17

of this control does not affect the previous results. Another potential bias in the estimation of β
results from the omission of ethnic-group agricultural practices. Using data for 60 communities
in East and West Africa, Wiesenfeld (1967) shows a positive correlation between the prevalence
of the sickle cell trait and the cultivation of crops associated with swidden agriculture. Swidden
agriculture is an extensive method consisting on clearing small areas of forest with slash and
burn practices which multiplies the number of breeding places for the Anopheles Gambiae. Roots
and tree fruits are the main crops associated with this agricultural method and the most important
ones for the African case are yams and bananas. To account for this potential omitted variable,
we add the mean suitability for cultivation of yams and bananas in column 4.32 There is little
effect on our estimate of β.
Our population data belongs to the African colonial time. If some ethnic groups located in places
where the disease environment and other geographic factors handicapped development were also
the most affected by the colonial rule, then not taking into account cross-ethnicity variation in
colonial power might lead to an important bias in the estimates of the effect of malaria on
population density. In column 5 we add dummy variables indicating the colonial power ruling
the land of each ethnic group and three additional variables accounting for external influence in
the development of the ethnic group.33 In particular, we account for the importance of slave
trades for the period 1400-1900 (i.e: log of 1+ total slaves exports normalized by area of
homeland), and two dummy variables indicating if European explorers traveled (between 1768
and 1894), or a historical trade route passed through, the homeland of the ethnic group.34 The
addition of this new set of controls does not affect the significance of the statistical association
between our malaria burden measure and population density, although the size of the point
estimate increases and remains negative.
Finally, we explore the possibility of the existence of heterogeneity in the relationship between
malaria burden and population density. In the last column of Table 4 we add the interaction of
land quality and malaria burden. Although the signs of the relevant coefficients are consistent
with the idea of an heterogeneous effect of malaria burden through land quality, their statistical
significance is null.35 As a further robustness check, we omit ethnic group observations from
North Africa (results not shown). The inclusion of these ethnic groups was not driving the
previous findings.
In sum, we find little evidence of a statistical negative relationship between our measure of
malaria burden and population density.36 In the next section, we exploit additional cross-ethnic

32

We use suitability for cultivation of yams and bananas rather than data on actual cultivation of these crops (which
is available in the Ethnographic Atlas) because the latter is likely to be endogenous. Specifically, Wiesenfeld (1967)
argues that the sickle-cell trait could reduced the environmental limitation of malaria, allowing populations to
embrace slash-and-burn practices that have high yields per unit labor.
33
We classify colonial rule into British, French, Other Colonial Power, and Never Colonized.
34
We acknowledge a potential endogeneity of slave trades. The use of an alternative measure to proxy slave trade,
such as ruggedness of ethnic territory, may help to alleviate these concerns (ongoing work).
35
Note that land quality and malaria burden are not demeaned, thus their point estimates from column 6 are not
directly comparable with the ones from column 5.
36
We also experimented with other specifications including region dummies (i.e: West, East, Central, North, and
South) and country dummies. The results are not substantially affected.

18

variation in a rich set of variables to asses if malaria did hold back economic development in
other dimensions.
3.1.3 Other Measures of Development
We turn now to the relationship between malaria burden on other measures of ethnic
development. Following Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), we exploit a rich source of ethnic
information provided by the EA (1967) and estimate a new version of equation (10) where our
dependent variable is now a given measure of ethnic development. Table 5 presents the main
results. All the specifications include the full set of controls as in column 5 of Table 4.37 Since
we do not longer rely on the availability of population figures, the sample size for each
specification will depend only on the availability of the ethnographic variable for ethnic groups
that can be located in the Murdock’s map (our largest sample consists of 523 ethnic groups).38
The assignment of the decade dummy is based on the year to which the ethnographic data pertain
(Murdock, 1967). Note, however, that adding a time control in our regressions is probably not
crucial for most of these measures of ethnic traits since the political and economic structure of a
given ethnic group was likely to be determined in earlier periods (i.e: pre-colonial times) and
transmitted inter-generationally.
All the dependent variables in Table 5 are binary variables for which 1 indicates a higher
prosperity level (see note in table) and come from EA (except for the variable in column 2 which
is constructed using Bairoch, 1988).39 We first study the statistical relationship between malaria
burden and the mean size of local communities for each ethnic group. The coefficient estimate in
column 1 suggests that the probability for the mean size of the local community having 1,000
people or more is positively and statistically associated to our historical measure of the burden of
malaria. Similar results are obtained in column 2 when considering the probability of at least
one city with population above 20 thousand people located in the homeland of the ethnic group
by 1850. Further, the point estimate in column 3 suggests an statistically significant and positive
association between our measure of malaria burden and the complexity of settlement pattern of
the ethnic group (i.e: whether the ethnic group settlement pattern is either compact and relatively
permanent or complex, as opposed of being fully nomadic or semi sedentary). These results
suggest that malaria did not impose important impediments for the presence of complex
settlement and urbanization.
We next look at the statistical association between our malaria burden and precolonial political
institutions. Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2007), we construct a measure of centralization of
political power that indicates 1 if the ethnic group has any jurisdictional level transcending the
local community (that’s, 0 indicates either “no political authority beyond the community” or just
the existence of “petty chiefdoms”). In line with previous statistical associations, point estimates
from column 4 suggest that ethnic groups located in areas with worst malaria burden tend to have
37

We use the same controls as in the analysis of population density with the addition of total land area of the
homeland of the ethnic group as a geographic control (the results does not depend on the inclusion of this control
though).
38
We follow Fenske (2012) to match ethnicity names in EA (from Murdock 1967) and Murdock (1959)’s map
39
All the results in Table 4 are OLS coefficients. We also estimated probit and ordered probit (for the original
categorical variables) and reached qualitatively similar results. That’s, we do not find evidence of historical malaria
holding back development.

19

more sophisticated political institutions beyond the local communities (i.e: large states in the
highest possible category in the spectrum of sophistication).
We next investigate if malaria burden negatively impact the ability of an ethnic groups to
generate agricultural surpluses. From column 5 in Table 5, malaria burden is not statistically
associated to intensive agriculture being the main contributor of the subsistence economy (as
opposed to gathering, fishing, hunting, pastoralism or casual and extensive agriculture). As
expected, land quality is positively impact the probability of intensive agriculture being the main
economic activity of the ethnic group.
To summarize, we do not find evidence that the impact of malaria would have been very
significant on early African development. We do not find any negative statistically significant
correlation between our measure of malaria burden and population density when we focus on
ethnic groups. We do not find consistent evidence of any negative effect on other measures of
ethnic development and prosperity such as mean size of local communities, settlement patterns,
the degree of subsistence economy, and one measure of sophistication of the political
institutions. On the contrary, we find that high historical malaria burden positively correlates
with most of the aforementioned indicators.

4.
4.1

Model-Based Estimates of the Economic Burden of Malaria
Direct Effect of Malaria Mortality

Current analyses of the burden of disease focus on measures such as years of life lost or
disability free life years lost. From this perspective, the death of a young child is particularly
costly because he or she had so many potential life years. The ethical considerations regarding
the allocation of scarce lifesaving resources, and implicitly the cost of death and disease
experienced at different ages, are quite complex (see Persad, Werthheimer, and Emanuael,
2009). In assessing the role that disease played in affecting development historically, however, it
seems reasonable to take a purely instrumental view of life and health, in which the primary
considerations are how much society has invested in an individual and that individual's potential
to produce services for society in the future.
To formalize this idea, consider a simple model of production and consumption with individuals
of different ages. Let be the consumption of an individual of age i. We assume that there is
no storage of output between periods. Let by the number of people in age group i. The social
budget constraint is

20

Where Y is total output and T is the maximum lifespan. We assume that consumption at each
age is determined by two things: a consumption level of individuals at some benchmark age (for
example, prime age adults), which we call , and some age-varying relative consumption
coefficient .

The values of presumably reflect changing biological needs for consumption over the course
of the life cycle as well as the arrangements by which consumption is divided up among different
groups in society. One would not necessarily expect the pattern of consumption to the same in all
societies at all times. However, as discussed below, available data do not vary all that much.
We assume that output is produced by a fixed quantity of land, X, and labor. Let be the
quantity of labor supplied by an individual of age i, again, relative to some benchmark level. As
with consumption, the pattern of relative labor input across age groups reflects both biological
differences and differences among societies in the economic value of different characterisics (for
example, strength vs. wisdom vs. manual dexterity). Taking the production function to be
Cobb-Douglas, we have

Letting N be the total population and the fraction of the population in age group i, we can
solve for the level of benchmark consumption as a function of population size and demographic
structure:

The first term in parenthesis is the ratio of land to efficiency-adjusted labor. It affects the level of
benchmark consumption for the usual Malthusian reasons. The second term in parentheses can
be thought of as the “demographic efficiency” of the economy. Consumption will be higher in a
society where the population is distributed relatively more toward ages in which people supply
labor relative to ages in which they consume.
We now turn to the determination of population density. Our assumption is that in the historical
period we are examining, Africa was in Malthusian population equilibrium. In such an
equilibrium, as long as the quantity of land is constant and the production technology is fixed,
the growth rate of population is zero and the population size is constant (or, more realistically,
the population size and standard of living are mean reverting in response to stochastic shocks).
The near constancy of human populations over long historical eras suggests that such a
mechanism must have been operating in most places for most of human history (Galor and Weil,
21

2000). Although there are clearly times when Malthusian constraints were lifted (such as the
peopling of the Americas in pre-historic times), a simple analysis of the effect of compounding
shows that most of the time, average population growth rates must have been quite close to zero.
Without a homeostatic model of the Malthusian sort, it is vanishingly unlikely that such near
constancy of population would obtain.
Herbst (2000) argues that the abundant land was a persistent characteristic of African economies,
as a result of which it was the control of people, rather than territory, that was of primary interest
to rulers. In our view, however, historians are too quick to dismiss the Malthusian model
without having another explanation for the near constancy of population over time. It is
conceivable that, rather than land being the binding resource, the role of equilibrating population
size was played by density-dependent disease. This is the view taken by McGuire and Coelho
(2011). One can work through a model with density dependent disease producing results very
similar to those we show here. 40
Following Kremer (1993) and many subsequent papers, we model the Malthusian equilibrium by
assuming that population size adjusts such that the level of consumption (for the benchmark age)
is held constant. In the empirical sections above, the measure of development on which we
focus is population density. Here, rather than looking at the simple population density (that is
N/X) we do a demographic adjustment. The idea is that, just as a society populated by a high
number of working age adults relative to children can produce more output per capita, a society
populated by a high number of working age adults relative to children is also more “dense” for a
given level of population size. We thus scale the number of people by their labor input weights
in defining effective density. That is

For our primary exercise, we consider changes in age structure and density that hold the
benchmark level of consumption constant
40

Several recent studies have argued that higher disease, through its effect on the ratio of population to land, could
raise income in some circumstances – and conversely that health improvements could lower income. Voigtlander
and Voth (2013) argue that in Europe before the industrial revolution, income rose as a result of increased mortality
due to plague, urbanization, and warfare, and that this rise in income was instrumental in knocking the continent
onto the path of industrialization. Acemoglu and Johnson (2009), in their analysis of the worldwide epidemiological
transition of the mid 20th century, find that countries that experienced greater increases in life expectancy saw
slower growth in income per capita. And Young (2005) claims that higher mortality and lower fertility due to HIV
in South Africa will more than compensate for declines in worker productivity due to the disease, so that income per
capita will actually rise as a result of the epidemic. Ashraf, Lester, and Weil (2008) examine the Malthusian channel
as part of a broader analysis of how health improvements affect growth. They find that higher survival indeed
pushes income lower through the Malthusian channel (as well as through capital dilution), although this effect is
more than compensated for in the long run by higher labor productivity due to better health. Such an effect could be
induced in our model as well, if increases in the benchmark level of fertility, , are required to increase fertility in
order to make up for higher mortality. This would be an additional channel (beyond the demographic efficiency that
we examine) by which higher mortality would lower population density.

22

To use this equation to assess the effect of disease mortality on the consumption benchmark, we
need estimates of the consumption and labor input profiles and the exponent on land in the
production function, as well as an estimate of the effect of disease on the age structure of the
population
Consumption and Income profiles
A number of sources provide data on the life cycle profiles of consumption and labor input.
Mueller (1976) synthesizes data from nine societies practicing what she calls “peasant
agriculture,” by which she means agricultural systems which use primarily traditional methods of
cultivation, small landholdings, and low capital inputs. South and Southeast Asia are primarily
what she has in mind. The profiles are shown in Figure 7. Note that Mueller’s data on labor
input apply to production of output as it would appear in measured GDP but exclude home
production. Much of the latter is done by women, so in her data, productivity by prime age
women is only 30% of the level of similarly aged males. Because we are interested in both sorts
of output, we focus on the male profiles. For consumption, Mueller provides two profiles in
which consumption of people at each age (and of each gender) is compared to males aged 20-54.
For the medium consumption profile, children age 0-4 have a value of 0.32; for the low
consumption profile, the value is 0.12 (prime aged women get a value of 0.80). We use the
medium profile.41
Figure 7, along with the life table examined below, can be used to think about the cost to society
of deaths at different ages. The most costly deaths are those that take place in young adulthood,
at the age where the consumption and income curves cross. These are individuals in whom
society has invested appreciable resources (food, childcare, education), and who have ahead of
them many expected years producing a surplus. Deaths of people at older ages are not as costly,
since such individuals have fewer expected years of surplus production; and similarly deaths of
very young children are less costly because society would still have to invest in them for many
years before they started producing a surplus. Under this interpretation, malaria deaths are
relatively low cost, with the exception of deaths of women in their first pregnancies, who are
near the peak of their value as assets to society in terms of the balance between resources
invested in them and services they can deliver.

Land in the Production Function
A number of studies have modeled pre-modern Malthusian economies and/or the agricultural
sectors of more modern economies, in which the only inputs into production are land and labor
41

We also examined data from two other sources, which paint a similar picture. First, Lee and Mason (2009) look
at data from four contemporary hunter-gatherer societies originally studied by Kaplan (1994) and Howell (in press).
The underlying data are in terms of calories collected and consumed. Their data are quite similar to the profiles in
Mueller. Second, Lee and Mason also look at data for the four poorest countries that are part of the National
Transfer Account project: Kenya, Philippines, Indonesia, and India. Income in this case is labor income, including
unpaid family labor, and pertains to both men and women. These data differ from the other two sources primarily in
showing a decline in income of the elderly that is not present in the peasant agriculture or hunter-gatherer data.

23

Kremer (1993) uses 1/3 as an upper-end estimate of land’s share, based on evidence from sharecropping contracts. In the model of Hansen and Prescott (2002), the “Malthus sector,” which is
the only part of the economy producing output prior to the industrial revolution, has a land share
of 0.3. Stokey (2001) applies a Cobb-Douglas production function to the agricultural sector for
Britain in 1850, with an exponent on land of 0.45. In the calculation reported below we use a
value of one-third as the land share in agriculture.42
Population Age Structure
The other piece of data used in the equation (12) is , the relative number of people in each age
group. In general, this will be a function of both the probability of survival to each age and the
history of births or population growth. However, for the long historical periods that we are
considering, population growth must have been very close to zero, which implies a constant
number of births per year. We can thus approximate the age structure of the population with
the fraction of survivors at each age from the life table. Thus our approach to assessing the role
of disease in affecting consumption possibilities is to start with a baseline life table and then
consider alternations that would result from eliminating or adding particular sources of mortality,
using information on the age of death from different diseases.
This exercise requires choosing a baseline life table that represents Africa in the pre-colonial
period. Systematic data on life expectancy in Africa is widely available only starting in the
1950s. For the period 1950-55, the United Nations estimate of life expectancy at birth in subSaharan Africa is 37.8 years (United Nations, 2009). Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) date the
beginning of the “international epidemiological transition,” driven by more effective public
health measures, the discovery of new chemicals and drugs, and international interventions to
1940. Although the transition came late to Africa, it is very likely that the 1950-55 figure
represents an improvement relative to previous decades. Clearly after 1955 the pace of change
was rapid. The UN estimates that life expectancy in sub-Saharan Africa rose by two years in
each of the subsequent five year periods. Further evidence that health improvements were
already underway by 1950 comes from data on total population size. Africa's population grew at
a rate of 1.0% per year between 1900 and 1950, compared to a growth rate of 0.2% per year over
the previous century (United Nations, 1999).
Data for the period prior to 1950 are very sparse. Acemoglu and Johnson (2007, Appendix C)
pull together disparate sources to present a few estimates for the period before 1950. These are,
Angola in 1940: 35 (both sexes); Mozambique in 1940: 45 (both sexes); Ghana in 1948: 38
(both sexes); and Mauritius, 1942-46: 32.3 (male) and 33.8 (female). Riley (2005) estimates that
prior to the “health transition” (he uses a different definition than Acemoglu and Johnson) that
began in Africa in the 1920s, life expectancy at birth averaged 26.4 years (this is the mean of 12

42

The other issue relevant here is the elasticity of substitution between land and other inputs. The studies discussed
here all use a Cobb Douglas production function, in which the elasticity of substitution is one. Weil and Wilde
(2009) use modern data on the share of natural resources paid to fixed factors of production to estimate this elasticity
of substitution. Their estimate is close to 2, although very imprecise. The higher is the elasticity of substitution, the
larger will be the effect of change in demographic structure on population density.

24

estimates, which range from 22.5 to 31.0.)43 In Asia, life expectancy prior to the health
transition, which started there between 1870 and 1890, was 27.4. In Europe the transition started
in the 1770s, and prior to it life expectancy was 34.3.
Riley comments that available estimates of African mortality prior to the health transition all
come from European colonies in Africa. There is a reasonable basis for thinking that life
expectancy may have been higher prior to colonization, the arrival of Arabic speaking
merchants, and the dislocations produced by the slave trade. Unfortunately, almost no
information for this period is available. Steyn (2003) examines mortality in the pre-colonial
period in northern South Africa thorugh an examination of skeletal remains. She estimates life
expectancy in the period 1000-1300 AD at 23.2, with the probability of surviving to age 20
being 48%. Remains for the post-1830 period show a slight decline in life expectancy after the
expansion of European influence.
Based on the above discussion, we use as our baseline the United Nations (1982) model life table
for a population with life expectancy at birth of 35 years (male and female combined).44 This is
the lowest life expectancy for which the model life table is available.45
To apply this framework to different diseases, one needs a profile of the mortality effect of the
disease at different ages. For malaria, we use age-group death rates from Murray and Lopez
(1996).46 To model the effect of malaria on the historical life table we proceed as follows. We
start with the UN life table (life expectancy of 35) discussed above. We take this as a
benchmark. To this we add additional mortality at each age proportional to the current age
profile of malaria deaths. Specifically, we take the current death rates from malaria and multiply
them by a scaling factor, and add these death rates to the death rates in the UN life table. The
scaling factor is chosen to match the magnitude of malaria deaths we want to model. Above, for
the case where sickle cell prevalence is moderately high ( =.2), we showed that M, the implied
probability of dying from malaria conditional on not dying of something else prior to
childbearing was 0.10. We set the scaling factor to match this probability, taking 25 to be the
43

Some represntative values are Angola: 27 years in 1940; Egypt: 30-33 years in the 1930s; Ghana: 28 years in
1921;Kenya: 23.9 years in the 1930s; South African black population: 38.1-40 years in 1935-40; Tunisia: 28.8 in the
1920s; Uganda: 23.9 in the 1930s; Zimbabwe: 26.4 in mid 1930s.
44
Unfortunately, the model life tables that are available, to the extent that they reflect African data at all, certainly
do not reflect the pattern of age-dependent mortality that existed in the period before the modern health environment
of both disease and treatment was in place. It is likely that the pattern of mortality, and in particular the ratio of
deaths at different ages, differed from what is observed today, but a priori there is no basis for guess the nature of
this difference.
45
Once we have a life table, we can also address the issue of how the decline in the non-malaria death probability P
compares to the decline in the malaria death probability M. The UN Model life table with life expectancy of 35
(general model, for females) implies 57.2% of girls will survive to age 25, which we can take as an average for
childbearing. Thus
.572 = (1-M)(1-P)
Using a value of M=.10 (consistent with the prevalence of the S allele in Nigeria, as discussed above) implies a
value of P=0.364. As discussed above, our analysis of modern data in Nigeria imply P=.207 and M=.054. Thus the
proportional decline in malaria mortality has been almost exactly the same as the decline in mortality from other
causes. However, this calculation is very sensitive to the choice of life expectancy in the historical period.
46

These are 0.00559 for ages 0-4; 0.00042 for ages 5-14; 0.00033 for ages 15-44; and 0.00036 for ages 45-59.

25

age of childbearing.47 The implied scaling factor is 2.95. Figure 8 shows the survival curves for
the baseline case and the case with high malaria.48 Life expectancy falls by 5.1 years from this
additional malaria mortality.

Effects of Malaria on Density
Applying equation (12), we can calculate consumption per capita using both the original life
table and the life table modified to reflect malaria mortality. Our finding is that adding malaria
mortality reduces density by only 2.8%. This is obviously an extremely small effect for such a
large change in mortality. We can put further this number in context two different ways. First,
Alsan (2013) also examining African data, finds that a one standard deviation change in an index
of tsetse fly impact leads to a 45% change in population density in the period prior to European
settlement. This effect is much larger than ours. Second, we can compare the effect of malaria
to variation in land quality. Ashraf and Galor (2011), using data for 1500, estimate the
coefficient in a regression of log population density on the log of a land quality index as 0.587.49
A reduction in density of the same magnitude as the one we attribute to malaria could thus be
induced by a reduction of 0.048 in the log of land quality, which is less than one twenty-fifth of
the standard deviation of that measure, once again showing that the effect of malaria on density
that we estimate is small.
The reason that our estimate of the effect of malaria is so small is two-fold. First, malaria deaths
are concentrated at young ages, and second, consumption of young children is low relative to
consumption of adults. Putting these together, most deaths from malaria do not, in this model,
represent a significant loss of resources to society. In our calculation, deaths beyond age five
account for only 1/3 of the reduction in life expectancy due to malaria, but for 2/3 of the
economic cost of the disease.
We can easily compare the implied effect of malaria on density in this calculation with the
regression coefficients estimated in the previous section. The calculation here says that going
from a malaria burden of zero to a malaria burden of 0.1 (which is consistent with equilibrium
prevalence of the sickle cell trait π=0.2) would reduce density by 2.8%. In a regression of log
population density on the level of malaria burden, this variation would produce a regression
coefficient of -0.28. In comparison to the regression coefficients in Table 4, this number is quite
close to zero, and in specifications where the null of zero is not rejected, this value is not rejected
either.

47

Specifically, we choose the scaling factor x such that

48

Of course the UN table already includes deaths due to malaria. Another approach would be to take as the baseline
a current life table stripped of malaria mortality, and then to add malaria mortality back in. This procedure would
yield very similar results.
49

Table 2, column 2; the t-statistic is 8.3.

26

We assess the robustness of this result with respect to three variations on the calculation. First,
we consider the cost of gestation. In the model presented above, the cost of death of a newborn
is zero, which is clearly unrealistic. Having said this, we do not have a good estimate for the
consumption price of producing a newborn child. For lack of better data, we assume that the
price is equivalent to one year’s consumption for a child aged 0-4, which in Mueller’s data is
0.32 of the consumption of a prime age adult. Implementing this change increases the reduction
in density from 2.8% to 3.4%.
The second variation that we consider is to allow for costs from maternal mortality. The death of
a child necessitates, in equilibrium, an additional birth, which in turn exposes a prime age
woman to mortality risk. Maternal mortality is far more costly to society than the death of a
child, because a prime aged woman has already passed through the years in which her
consumption was higher than her labor input: using our model, the cost to society of a 1% chance
of death of a one-year-old is only 0.011% of average consumption, while the cost of a 1% chance
of death of a 25 year old is 0.14% of average consumption. To see how this effect raises the
economic burden of malaria, we would ideally want an estimate of the maternal mortality rate
(MMR) in Africa during the pre-colonial period, which is not available. As an alternative
approach, we ask how large the MMR would have to be so that the burden of malaria we
calculate was doubled. The answer is that this would require an MMR of 7%. To benchmark
this number, MMRs in the worst-afflicted developing countries today are roughly 1%, while in
historical data from Sweden, the MMR in 1750 was 0.9% (Högberg and Wall, 1986). It thus
seems to us unlikely that this channel would have a major quantitative impact on our estimate of
the economic burden of malaria.
The third variation that we consider is lowering the baseline life expectancy in our calculation.
Intuitively, the death of a child is costly to society because of the resources that have to be used
to replace him or her. The higher is baseline mortality, the more expensive it is to produce a
child of given age, because there is a lower chance of a newborn reaching that age. As
mentioned above, the lowest life expectancy in the UN model life tables is 35 years. However,
using the Brass life table methodology, we can generate a family of life tables with the same
general shape as the UN table, but with lower life expectancies.50 We do this to create life tables
with life expectancies at birth of 30, 25, and 20 years. We then adjusted these life tables with
the addition of age-specific malaria mortality, as described in our baseline analysis. The result is
that in the presence of malaria, population density is reduced by 3.5%, 4.6%, and 6.4%,
respectively. Thus it is true that in the presence of lower life expectancy, the impact of malaria
on population density is amplified, but for reasonable values of life expectancy the effect
remains small. (Note that when life expectancy in the absence of malaria is 20 years, life
50

The Brass transformation is a follows. Let l(x) be the probability of living to age x in a given life table (we use the
UN life table with life expectancy of 35). We can generate an alternative table via the transformation
where

Holding the value of  constant at one, we vary the value of  in order to change life expectancy while maintaining
the general shape of the survival curve. See United Nations (1983), chapter 1.

27

expectancy inclusive of malaria is 16.0 years, which is significantly lower than any historical
estimate that we know of.)
The above analysis shows that, at least in terms of the extra costs associated with raising children
who were subsequently going to die of malaria, the effect of the disease on population density in
Africa should have been relatively low. However, it is possible that there are other channels
through which high malaria mortality may have mattered. Death from disease may impose an
obstacle to economic development beyond the instrumental cost discussed here. Stone (1977)
argues that in the face of high child mortality, pre-modern Europeans avoided forming emotional
bonds with their young children, even to the point of giving the same name to two living
children, expecting only one to survive. In such an environment, one might also expect to see
less investment of tangible resources in the human capital (both health and education) of their
children. Thus even if high child mortality from malaria were not important in the strict sense of
draining resources from the economy, it might have contributed to reduced investment in
children. Several recent theories of economic growth have stressed the importance of such
investments to long-term development.

4.2

Economic Effects of Malaria Morbidity

To pursue the question of how much malaria affects labor input of adults, we use data from the
World Health Organization on Years Lost to Disability (YLDs) from particular diseases. A
country’s YLD for a given disease is constructed as:

where I is the number of incident (newly-arising) cases in a period, DW is the disability weight
attached to the disease, and L is the average duration of the disease until remission or death. The
crucial parameter here is the disability weight, which is intended to be a cardinal measure of the
severity of different diseases or impairments, on a scale from 0, indicating perfect health, to 1,
indicating death. Disability weights are constructed by panels of healthcare providers and
medical experts using a "person trade-off" protocol which establishes utility equivalences
between years of life lived in different states of health. One year lived with a disability provides
the same utility as (1-DW) years lived disability-free (Murray, 1996)). Disability weights are
therefore not primarily intended as a measure of labor supply. Nevertheless, these estimates
provide at least some basis for comparing the effects of different diseases.51
To give an example of the interpretation of YLD: in the data below, the average YLD from all
causes for Africa is 0.12. This means that in the average year, the average man suffers disease
episodes that deprive him of the equivalent of 12% of a year's disability free life. This could

51

Some examples of disability weights are blindness (0.600), deafness (0.216), HIV (0.136), AIDS (0.505),
tuberculosis sero-negative for HIV (0.264), severe iron-deficiency anemia (0.093), malaria episodes (0.172) and
neurological sequelae of malaria (0.473).

28

mean being fully disabled for 12% of the year, 50% disabled for 24% of the year, and so on. It
could also mean suffering an incident that leaves him, say, 1% disabled for the next 12 years.
Table 6 shows the YLDs by disease type and age (for males) for the WHO's AFRO region.
YLDs are counted at the age in which a disease incident occurs. Thus, for example, the
neurological sequelae of malaria are counted as years lost to disability in the age 0-4 age group,
even thought the actual years lost are spread through the individual's whole life. (Note that the
"total" column is based on the distribution of the current population among age groups. Thus
disabilities affecting the elderly, who are a very small percentage of the current African
population, play a very minor role in determining the total figure.)
The table shows that overall, malaria accounts for only 5% of total years lost to disability.
Further, almost all of these lost years were due to incidents in the first five years of life. Some
of the years lost to disability in this case affected adults, through the neurological sequelae of the
disease, but much of the disability burden fell directly on children. Although disability (which in
this case really just measures suffering) among children does not directly affect production, one
could argue that it might have affected their accumulation of skills or human capital.52 In any
case, however, the malaria burden is relatively small in comparison to that of other diseases.
As mentioned above, another potential channel through which malaria might have affected
economic economic development is through shifting population away from potentially
productive areas. Gallup and Sachs give examples of this occurring in Europe. In the context of
Africa, we do not know of evidence that particular regions were not settled because of malaria,
and there is certainly evidence of people settling in areas of tremendously high malaria
transmission. Given that malaria deaths were concentrated among the very young, and that
mortality in this group was very high from other causes in any case, it is hard to see how malaria
would have had a great influence on settlement patterns.

5.

Conclusion

Malaney, Spielman, and Sachs (2004) write, “how better to evince the power of the parasite than
with a potentially lethal modification of the genetic code as a desperate Darwinian defense
against the even more deadly ravages of malaria? Accordingly, it may be expected that a force
strong enough to rewrite our DNA will rewrite many of the lives and economies that it touches.”
In this paper we have tried to address this issue directly. That is, we have used the extent which
malaria left its mark on the human genome to back out the severity of the disease’s impact, and
then in turn we have tried to assess how large the economic impact of that disease would have
been.

52

Bleakley (2010), Cutler et al. (2010), and Lucas (2010) all use national anti-malaria campaigns in the middle of
the 20th century as quasi-experiments in order to study the effect of childhood exposure to the disease on human
capital accumulation and adult economic outcomes. Their findings are highly variable, with Cutler et al. estimating
a small effect and Bleakley a very large one. Lucas, whose findings fall between the other two, estimates that a 10%
reduction in malaria incidence raises completed schooling by 0.1 years.

29

In areas of high malaria transmission, 20% of the population carry the sickle cell trait. Our
estimate is that this implies that historically between 10 and 11 percent of children died from
malaria or sickle cell disease before reaching adulthood. Such a death rate is roughly twice the
current burden of malaria in such regions. Comparing the most affected to least affected areas,
malaria may have been responsible for a ten percentage point difference in the proability of
surviving to adulthood. In areas of high malaria transmission, our estimate is that life
expectancy at birth was reduced by approximately five years. In terms of its burden relative to
other causes of mortality, malaria appears to have been perhaps slightly less important
historically than it is today, although we certainly can't rule out the decline in malaria mortality
has been proportional to the decline in mortality from other diseases.
Thus, malaria imposed a heavy mortality burden. Did it hold back economic development? We
find little reason to believe that it did. Examining the economic burden of malaria mortality in a
simple life cycle model suggests that the disease was not very important, primarily because the
vast majority of deaths that it caused were among the very young, in whom society had invested
few resources. Our analysis of malaria morbidity, which is necessarily more speculative, also
suggests a relatively minor effect of the disease on labor input, and thus on economic activity.
These model-based findings corroborate the findings of our statistical examination. Within
Africa, areas with higher malaria burden, as evidenced by the prevalence of the sickle-cell trait,
do not show lower levels of economic development or population density in the colonial era data
that we examine.

30

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91 (2001), 1369–1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, "Disease and Development: The Effect of Life
Expectancy on Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy 115, pp. 925-985, December
2007.
Akyeampong, Emmanuel Kwaku, “Disease in West African History” in Emmanuel Kwaku
Akyeampong, ed., Themes in West Africa's History, Athens, OH: Ohio University Press, 2006.
Alsan, Marcella, “The Effect of the TseTse Fly on African Development,” mimeo, May 2013.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor, “Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch,”
American Economic Review, 101(5), 2011, pp. 2003-2041.
Ashraf, Quamrul, Ashley Lester, and David N. Weil, “When Does Improving Health Raise
GDP?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008.
Bairoch, P. Cities and Economic Development : From the Dawn of History to the Present.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Bleakley, Hoyt. "Malaria eradication in the Americas: A retrospective analysis of childhood
exposure." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics(2010): 1-45.
Chanda, Areendam, and Louis Putterman, “Early Starts, Reversals and Catch-up in the Process
of Economic Development,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109 (2007), 387-413.
COMIN, Diego, William EASTERLY, and Erick GONG. "Was the Wealth of Nations
Determined in 1000 BC?." American economic journal. Macroeconomics 2.3 (2010): 65-97.
Cutler, David, et al. "Early-life malaria exposure and adult outcomes: Evidence from malaria
eradication in India." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics (2010): 72-94.
Currat M, Trabucher G, Rees D, Perrin P, Harding RM, et al. “Molecular analysis of the β-globin
gene cluster in the Niokholo Mandenka population reveals a recent origin of the βs Senegal
mutation”.Am J Hum Genet. 70:207–223 (2002)
Diamond, Jared, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, New York: W. W.
Norton and Co., 1997.
Fenske, James “Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions?” Forthcoming, Economic
Journal. (2013)

31

Fenske, James. “Ecology, trade, and states in pre-colonial Africa,” Forthcoming, Journal of the
European Economic Association. (2013)
Gallup, John Luke, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, "The Economic Burden of Malaria," Amercian Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygeine, 64 (1, supplement), pp. 85-96, 2001.
Gallup, John Luke, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Andrew Mellinger, "Geography and Economic
Development," International Regional Science Review 22 (2), 179-232 1999.
Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil, "Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian
Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond," American Economic Review 90, 806828 (September 2000).
Gennaioli, N. and I. Rainer, “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa”
Journal of Economic Growth 12, 185.234. (2007).
Greenwood, B., K. Marsh, and R. Snow, "Why do some African children develop severe
malaria?" Parasitology Today 1991 Oct; 7(10):277-81.
Hansen, Gary D., and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. “Malthus to Solow.” American Economic
Review, 92(4): 1205-1217.
Hay, S.I., C.A. Guerra, P.W. Gething, A.P. Patil, A.J. Tatem et al. 2009. A world malaria map:
Plasmodium falciparum endemicity in 2007. PLoS Med 6(3).
Hill, Adrian V.S. et al., "Common West Africa HLA antigens are associated with protection
from severe malaria," Nature volume 352, August, 1991, pp. 595-600.
Hibbs, Douglas A., and Ola Olsson, “Geography, biogeography, and why some countries are rich
and others are poor,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (2004), 3715-3720.
Högberg, Ulf, and Stig Wall, “Secular Trends in Maternal Mortality in Sweden from 1750 to
1980,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 64(1), pp. 79-84, 1986.
Hopkins, A. G., An Economic History of West Africa New York: Columbia University Press,
1973.
Hopkins, Donald R., The Greatest Killer: Smallpox in History, second edition, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2002.
Kiszewski, Anthony, Andrew Mellinger, Andrew Spielman, Pia Malaney, Jeffrey Sachs, and
Sonia Ehrlich Sachs, "A Global Index of the Stability of Malaria Transmission," American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 70, No. 5, pp. 486-498, May 2004.
Kremer, Michael, “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:3, 1993, 681-716.
32

Kurnit David M. “Evolution of sickle variant gene.” Lancet. 1:104; (1979)

Lee, Ronald D. and Andrew Mason, "Generational Economics in a Changing World," mimeo,
2010.
Lehmann H. “Origin of the sickle cell.” Agr J Sci; 50: 140 (1964)
Lehmann, H., and A. B. Raper, “Maintenance of High Sickling in an African Community,”
British Medical Journal August 11, 1956, 333-336.
Livingtone, Frank B. “Anthropological Implications of Sickle Cell Gene Distribution in West
Africa”. Am Anth. 60: 533-562 (1958).
Lucas, Adrienne M. "Malaria eradication and educational attainment: evidence from Paraguay
and Sri Lanka." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2.2 (2010): 46-71.
Mabogunje, Akin L. and Paul Richards, "The land and peoples of West Africa" in Ajayi, J.F.A.
and Michael Crowder, eds. History of West Africa, volume 1, 3rd edition, 1985.
Maddison, Angus. “The World Economy: Historical Statistics”. Paris, France: OECD. 2003.
McGuire, Robert A., and Philip R. P. Coelho, Parasites, Pathogens, and Progress: Diseases and
Economic Development, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011.
McNeill, William, Plagues and Peoples, New York: Anchor Books, 1977.
Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. “The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for
Africa” Mimeo. 2011.
Modiano D, Luoni G, Sirima BS, et al. “The lower susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum
malaria of Fulani of Burkina Faso (West Africa) is associated with low frequencies of classic
malaria-resistance genes.” Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg; 95:149–52. (2001)
Morrow, Richard H., and William J. Moss, “The Epidemiology and Control of Malaria” in
Nelson, Kennard, and Carolyn M. Williams, eds., Infectious Disease Epidemiology: Theory and
Practice second edition, 2006, Jones & Bartlett Publishers, 1087-1138.
Motulsky, Arno, “Hereditary Red Cell Traits and Malaria,” Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 13 (Part 1),
1964, pp. 147-158
Murray, Chrisopher J. D., and Alan D. Lopez, The Global Burden of Disease: A Comprehensive
Assessment of Mortality and Disability from Diseases, Injuries and Risk Factors in 1990 and
Projected to 2020, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.

33

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. "Facts About Sickle Cell Anemia." NIH Publication
No. 96-4057, 1996.
Persad, Govind, Alan Wertheimer, and Ezekiel J. Emanuel, "Principles for allocation of scarce
medical intervetions," The Lancet 2009; 373: 423-31.
Piel, F.B. et al. Global distribution of the sickle cell gene and geographical confirmation of the
malaria hypothesis. Nat. Commun. 1:104 doi: 10.1038/ncomms1104 (2010).
Putterman, Louis, and David N. Weil. "Post-1500 population flows and the long-run
determinants of economic growth and inequality." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125.4
(2010): 1627-1682.
Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, and John Norman and Kevin McSweeney, “The Global
Distribution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate Change,”
Global Ecology and Biogeography, 2002, 11, 377—392.
Riley, James C., "Estimates of Regional and Global Life Expectancy, 1800-2001," Population
and Development Review 31(3), September, 2005, 537-543.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., 2003, “Institutions Don't Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Per Capita
Income,” NBER Working Paper 9490.
Maleney, Pia, Andrew Spielman, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, 2004, “The Malaria Gap,” Am J. trop
hygiene and medicine Aug;71(2 Suppl):141-6.
Soloman E., and W.F. Bodmer, “Evolution of sickle variant gene.” Lancet. 1:923; (1979)
Steyn, Maryna, "A Comparison between Pre- and Post-Colonial Health in the Northern Parts of
South Africa, a Preliminary Study," World Archaeology, Vol. 35:2, Archaeology of Epidemic
and Infectious Disease (Oct., 2003), pp. 276-288
Stokey, Nancy L. 2001. "A Quantitative Model of the British Industrial Revolution, 17801850.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 55: 55-109.
Stone, Lawrence, The Family, Sex and Marriage in England, 1500-1800, 1977.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg, 2013, “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic
Development?” Journal of Economic Literature, American Economic Association, vol. 51(2),
pages 325-69, June.
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, World
Population Prospects: The 2008 Revision, New York, 2009 (advanced Excel tables).
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, The World at
Six Billion New York, 1999.
34

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, (1982). Model
Life Tables for Developing Countries.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, (1983)
Manual X: Indirect Techniques for Demographic Estimation (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.83.XIII.2).
Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. "The three horsemen of riches: Plague, war, and
urbanization in early modern Europe." The Review of Economic Studies 80.2 (2013): 774-811.
Webb, James L. A., "Ecology and Culture in West Africa" in Emmanuel Kwaku Akyeampong,
ed., Themes in West Africa's History, Athens, OH: Ohio University Press, 2006.
Webb, James L. A., Humanity's Burden: A Global History of Malaria Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Weil, David N., “Endemic Diseases and African Economic Growth: Challenges and Policy
Responses,” Journal of African Economies May 2010.
Weil, David N., “The Impact of Malaria on African Development over the Longue Durée” in
Emmanuel Akyeampong, Robert Bates, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson eds., Africa’s
Development in Historical Perspective, forthcoming.
Weil, David N. and Joshua Wilde, “How Relevant is Malthus for Economic Development
Today?” American Economic Review May, 2009.
Weisenfeld, Stephen L., "Sickle Cell Trait in Human Biological and Cultural Evolution,"
Science, CLVII, 1135-1140, 1967.
Williams TN, Mwangi TW, Wambua S, Alexander ND, Kortok M, Snow RW, and Marsh K.,
“Sickle cell trait and the risk of Plasmodium falciparum malaria and other childhood diseases,”
Journal of Infectious Diseases 2005, 192(1):178-86.
World Health Organization, Global Burden of Disease 2004.

35

Table 1: Components of the Cost of Malaria

Group

Death Rate from
Malaria
or Sickle Cell Disease

Fraction of
Births

Fraction of all
Children
who Die in Category

Non-Carriers (AA)
Carriers (AS)
Sickle Cell Disease
(SS)

1

Table 2: Malaria Burden vs. Malaria Ecology: Grid Cell Analysis
Highly Malarious c.1900

(1)

(3)

(4)
3.693***
(0.228)
[0.7102]

0.0286***
(0.003)
[0.5880]
10,220
0.346

5.546***
(0.492)
[0.4601]
0.0190***
(0.003)
[0.3894]
10,220
0.518

7.571***
(0.458)
[0.6282]

Malaria Burden

Malaria Ecology

Observations
R-squared

10,220
0.395

Average Endemicity 2007

(2)

10,220
0.504

(5)

(6)

0.0138***
(0.001)
[0.6558]
10,220
0.430

2.730***
(0.200)
[0.5249]
0.00902***
(0.001)
[0.4292]
10,220
0.654

Standard errors adjusted for 2-dimensional spatial autocorrelation in parentheses (5-degrees cut-off distance). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Standardized coefficients are reported in Brackets. Highly Malarious represents the share of ethnic group's territory under either a hyper or
holoendemic malaria evironment. Average Endemicity in 2007 represents plasmodium falciparum transmission intensity (basic reproductive
number). Observations represent grid cell's averages. Grid cell size is 0.5 degree by 0.5 degree.

Table 3: Malaria Burden vs. Malaria Ecology: Ethnic Group Analysis
Highly Malarious c.1900

(1)
Malaria Burden

Observations
R-squared

(2)

(3)

(4)
3.149***
(0.315)
[0.6618]

0.0177***
(0.004)
[0.4176]
525
0.174

4.673***
(0.653)
[0.4738]
0.0107***
(0.004)
[0.2509]
525
0.371

5.544***
(0.663)
[0.5621]

Malaria Ecology

525
0.316

Average Endemicity 2007

525
0.438

(5)

(6)

0.0112***
(0.002)
[0.5488]
525
0.301

2.546***
(0.322)
[0.5350]
0.00739***
(0.002)
[0.3605]
525
0.552

Standard errors clustered at ethnolinguistic family level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standardized
coefficients are reported in Brackets. Highly Malarious represents the share of ethnic group's territory under either a hyper
or holoendemic malaria evironment. Average Endemicity in 2007 represents plasmodium falciparum transmission intensity
(basic reproductive number). Observations represent ethnic groups's averages

36

Table 4: Malaria and Population Density
Dependent Variable: Log of Population Density in Colonial Times (Ethnographic Atlas, 1967)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Malaria Burden
4.612
-0.148
-0.0113
-0.143
(3.427)
(4.569)
(4.667)
(4.618)
Land Quality
0.0773
0.107
(0.437)
(0.443)
Land Quality * Malaria Burden
Decade Dummies
Geography and Climate Controls
Ethno-Region Dummies
Suitability for Slash-and-Burn Crops
External Infuence Controls
Observations
R-squared

Y
Y
N
N
N
242
0.249

Y
Y
Y
N
N
242
0.490

Y
Y
Y
N
N
242
0.490

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
242
0.490

(5)
-2.489
(4.469)
0.215
(0.462)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
242
0.510

(6)
4.001
(6.675)
0.696
(0.651)
-12.73
(11.36)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
242
0.513

Robust standard errors clustered at the ethno-linguistic family level in parentheses.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The decade dummies cover the period 1840-1950
(omitted decade 1960). Climate and Geography controls include ecological diversity (Fenske, 2012), share of tropical climate under Köppen climate classification,
geodesic distance of the centroid of the historical homeland of each ethnic group from the nearest coastline, mean elevation of terrain, and log total squared
kilometers of water bodies to which ethnic group has access. The ethnographic regions are African Hunters, South African Bantu, Central Bantu, Northeast Bantu,
Equatorial Bantu, Guinea Coast, Western Sudan, Nigeria Plateau, Eastern Sudan, Upper Nile, Ethiopia/Horn, Moslem Sudan, Sahara, and North Africa. Suitability for
Slash-and-Burn Crops refers to mean soil suitability for Yam and Banana/Plantain cultivation. External influence controls include dummies for colonial power ruling
the largest share of ethnic group territory, two dummy variables if explorer routes or historical trade routes intercept homeland of group, and log of 1+ total slaves
exports normalized by area of homeland (Nunn, 2008).

37

Table 5: Malaria and Ethnic Prosperity

Malaria Burden
Land Quality
Decade Dummies
Geography and Climate Controls
Ethno-Region Dummies
Suitability for Slash-and-Burn Crops
External Infuence Controls
Observations
R-squared

Urbanization

> 20K City in 1850

Settlement
Complexity

(1)
2.899**
(1.352)
0.0212
(0.202)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
167
0.458

(2)
0.529*
(0.309)
0.0690
(0.0492)
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
524
0.151

(3)
2.735***
(0.999)
0.108
(0.119)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
486
0.304

Centralization of
Political Power

Intensive
Subsistence
Agriculture

(5)
1.394*
(0.723)
-0.0731
(0.0931)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
523
0.153

(4)
-0.731
(0.852)
0.283**
(0.121)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
523
0.255

Dependent Variable Definitions (mean value in parenthesis):
Urbanization (0.23) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the mean size of local communities is 1,000 people or more
> 20K City in 1850 (0.046) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if at least one city of 20,000 people or more was located in homeland by 1850
Settlement Complexity (0.5) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if settlement pattern is either compact and relatively permanent or complex
Centralization of Political Power (0.77) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if level of hierarchy is above the local authority (Gennaioli-Rainer, 2007)
Subsistence Economy (0.34) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if intensive agriculture contributes the most to the economy
Robust standard errors clustered at the ethno-linguistic family level in parentheses.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The decade dummies cover the period 18301950 (omitted decade 1960). Climate and Geography controls include ecological diversity (Fenske, 2012), share of tropical climate under Köppen climate
classification, geodesic distance of the centroid of the historical homeland of each ethnic group from the nearest coastline, mean elevation of terrain, and log
total squared kilometers of water bodies to which ethnic group has access. The ethnographic regions are African Hunters, South African Bantu, Central Bantu,
Northeast Bantu, Equatorial Bantu, Guinea Coast, Western Sudan, Nigeria Plateau, Eastern Sudan, Upper Nile, Ethiopia/Horn, Moslem Sudan, Sahara, and North
Africa. Suitability for Slash-and-Burn Crops refers to mean soil suitability for Yam and Banana/Plantain cultivation. External influence controls include dummies
for colonial power ruling the largest share of ethnic group territory, two dummy variables if explorer routes or historical trade routes intercept homeland of
group, and log of 1+ total slaves exports normalized by area of homeland (Nunn, 2008).

38

Table 6: Years Lost to Disability per capita, WHO AFRO Region
0-4
All Causes

5-14

15-29 30-44 45-59 60-69 70-79

80+

total

0.174 0.068 0.133 0.134 0.141 0.126 0.115 0.103 0.122

Communicable,maternal,
perinatal, and nutritional
conditions

0.112 0.028 0.040 0.037 0.021 0.015 0.013 0.010 0.046

infectious and parasitic
diseases

0.047 0.019 0.037 0.035 0.021 0.014 0.012 0.010 0.031

tuberculosis

0.000 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.002 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.002

HIV/AIDS

0.000 0.000 0.017 0.015 0.004 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.007

diarrhoeal diseases

0.004 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.001

childhood cluster
diseases

0.007 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.001

malaria

0.027 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.006

tropical cluster
diseases

0.001 0.009 0.011 0.010 0.009 0.004 0.003 0.003 0.008

Noncommunicable
Diseases

0.047 0.019 0.066 0.074 0.108 0.105 0.098 0.089 0.056

Injuries

0.015 0.021 0.027 0.023 0.011 0.006 0.004 0.003 0.021

Source: Global Burden of Disease, 2002 revision

39

Figure 1: Sickle Cell Gene Frequency from Piel et al (2010)

40

Figure 2: Effect of a Hypothetical Malaria Eradication on Evolution of Carriers

Figure 3: Implications of Varying Sickle Cell Prevalence for Malaria Burden

41

Figure 4: Worldwide Distribution of Malaria Ecology

Figure 5: Malaria Ecology in Africa

42

Figure 6: Population Density by Ethnic Groups from EA (1967)

Figure 7: Consumption and Income Profiles
2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

production

consumption

0
0

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90

Age

43

Figure 8: Change in Survival Probabilities due to Malaria
1.2
Probability of Survival

Baseline (UN life table)
1

with extra malaria mortality

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0
0

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
Age

44

