                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PRICE CONTRACTS, OUTPUT,
                     AND MONETARY DISTURBANCES




                         Alan C. Stockman




                      Working Paper No. 1960




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             June 1986




Prepared for the Taipei Conference on Monetary Theory. Discussion
with Karl Brunrier helped motivate some of the ideas in this paper.
I wish to thank Robert King, Torsten Persson, Lars E. 0. Svensson,
and participants in workshops at Rochester, the Institute for
International Economic Studies, Stockholm, the Graduate Institute
for International Studies, Geneva, and the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond for helpful comments, and the National Science Foundation,
grant number SES-8309576, for research support. The individuals
mentioned, of course, should be absolved from any guilt associated
with this paper. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                   Working Paper #1960
                                                   June 1986




              Price Contracts, Output, and Monetary Disturbances




                                   ABSTRACT




This paper presents a simp1e example in which incomplete asset markets create

incentives for buyers and sellers to sign contracts that specify a price

function which differs from the spot market equilibrium price function. The

price function can exhibit downward stickiness in nominal prices, In the

sense that a fall in the money supply reduces nominal prices less than

proportionately and reduces real output. This equilibrium dominates spot

market equilibrium in terms of expected utility.




                                               Alan C. Stockman
                                               Department of Economics
                                               University of Rochester
                                               Rochester, NY 14627
                   Price Contracts. Output, and Monetary Disturbances

 I.   Introduction

      The notion that prices are somewhat sticky in a downward direction and

that output is determined by demand and not directly by supply play prominent

roles in "Keynesian' macroeconomics. Yet the rationale for sticky prices has

proved elusive. Indeed, the language of "sticky prices' is loaded: rather

than asking about the consequences of sticky prices, it would be better to

ask about the consequences of specific circumstances which lead people to

choose to trade at prices that have particular characteristics (or responses

to exogenous disturbances).1 Many macroeconomic models simply assume that

prices are sticky without investigating the causes of that stickiness.

However, there are examples in which the same circumstances that cause prices

to be sticky are known also to cause people to alter their other choices.

e.g. .   about quantity-determination, in such a way as to change the
               2
equilibrium.

      One expects this to be a general phenomenon: if restrictions are imposed

that prevent people from trading at certain prices, the restrictions also

motivate people to alter their behavior so as to minimize the effects on

their own welfare. People will choose to consume different quantities of

other goods or leisure (as in the literature on "effective demand'). In a

world of uncertainty, people will also choose different portfolios of assets




1Having said this, I will revert to the usual language in order to avoid
semantic disputes.

2See for example Barro (1976).
                                                                            2



in response to these restrictions, because the restrictions change the

probability distribution of the real returns to assets. Contractual

arrangements can be thought of as assets and subjected to asset-pricing

formulas. A desire to rationalize sticky prices and determine the effects of

various disturbances in their presence was one of the motivating forces

behind the development of the recent literature on contracts following Baily

(1974) and Azarladis (1975). Most of the literature on contracts, however.

employs real models In which money and nominal prices play no role.

    This paper develops a model in which money plays a critical role in

transactions—using a cash-in-advance constraint4—and in which households

would like to insure against fluctuations in the real value of their nominal

money balances. But explicit insurance markets to accomplish this task are

unavailable. Contracts between buyers and sellers are shown to be a partial

substitute for these insurance markets. Specifically, the paper presents an

example with contracts that (a) specify nominal prices that do not vary in

proportion to changes In the money supply, (b) involve variations in output

when the money supply changes, and (c) dominate spot market equilibrum in

terms of households' expected utility. In the example, a fall in the money

supply produces a smaller percentage fall in nominal prices and a fall in

output. Though prices are, in that sense, partly sticky in a downward

direction, they are not sticky in an upward direction.




3Stiglitz (1984) provides a critical survey of that literature. Also see
Rosen (1985).

4See Clower (1967) and Lucas (1980). Kohn (1981) and (1984) surveys the
constraint from historical perspective and discusses the recent abundance of
research making use of the constraint.
                                                                                   3


      Section II of the paper presents the model and examines spot market

equilibrium. Section III discusses determination of output and prices under

the specified contracts and examines the effects of monetary disturbances.

Section IV contains some further comments.



LI. Spot Market    Eiljbr1um in                a_Simp_ netary Model
      Consider an economy with a continuum of households indexed by their

point-of-origin along the (0, 1) Interval. Household move costlessly to

locations on the (1, 2) interval, where all trades take place. Each

household is a price-taker and maximizes discounted expected utility of

consumption and leisure over its two-period life,



          (1)   E[IJ(c) +    W(l      —
                                          L)   +   /3U(c)   ÷   /3W(l   —
                                                                            L')]

where c and c' are first- and second-period consumptions, and L and L' are

labor supplies. Assume /3 (O, 1) and that, for constant r and R.



                            cI   -r
          (2a) U(c =


and



          (2b) W(1 - L) =                 LI+R.



One unit of labor produced one unit of the consumption good. Workers never

consume their own output (perhaps because of social taboo or because of some
                                                                                         4



physical impossibilities such as that of a person watching—live——a sporting

event in which he participates).                  I also assume that each seller has a

representative sample of the population as his customers.

    The budget constraint facing each household is



           (3) M +      r   +   P(L-c)   -   N'   -
                                                      a'q   =   0



where



    N = nominal       money held at the beginning of the period, before transfers

    r   = nominal lump-sum transfer payment of money received at the beginning

           of the period

    a' =   vector    of (non-money) financial assets at the end of the period

    q = vector       of nominal prices of (non-money financial assets

    P = price       of goods in period one

    N' = money holdings at the end of period one




In addition to the budget constraint. each household faces a cash-in-advance

constraint of the form



           (4) N +     r > Pc.


In the second period, there is an analogous budget constraint and

cash-in-advance constraint
                                                                            5



           (5)   M' >   Pc'


where P' is the nominal price of goods in the second period.

    The model involves an artificial "final period" problem common to finite

horizon monetary models. To deal with this problem, I assume that a

perfectly enforced law required people to work an exogenously determined L'

hours in the second period, and to sell the output for money.

    Any attempt to obtain real effects of changes in the money supply must

rely on some real disturbance that is proximately associated with the

monetary change (to avoid real effects of a costless currency reform). One

natural candidate for a real change associated with a monetary change is a

wealth redistribution. Transfer payment financed by new money may not be

distributed in proportion to money balances; open market purchases

redistribute wealth from money-holders to people whose future tax liabilities

are reduced by the fall in government debt: expansion of bank reserves at a

below-market discount rate redistributes wealth from taxpayers to the

recipients of the subsidized loans. In order for these channels of' wealth

redistribution to operate, capital markets must be Incomplete (or costly to

trade in) since otherwise individuals could perfectly hedge against such

redistributions. The magnitudes of these wealth redistributions, however,

are small empirically and seem unable to account for the phenomena we want to
     .5
explain.



5One reaction to the small magnitude of' the wealth redistribution caused
directly by a monetary expansion is to seek a more indirect relation.
Grossman, Hart, and Maskin (1983) argue that because a large fraction of
assets are held in the form of nominal debt, and because of these and other
nominal contracts, monetary changes can produce substantial wealth
                                                                            6



    Even if monetary changes are associated with wealth redistributions,

additional elements of a model are required to explain changes in aggregate

output. If tastes are characterized by parallel linear income expansion

paths, then a wealth redistribution does not affect even relative prices.

Aggregate output may be unaffected even if shifts in relative supplies and

demands alter the composition of production. Real mobility costs of labor in

this situation could produce a temporary reduction in output and employment

in response to a change in the composition of demand. Alternatively, some

other explanation such as the asymmetry In optimal labor contracts when

workers and firms are differently informed, studied by Grossman, Hart. and

Maskin (1983). could be invoked to explain a temporary reduction in output

following a shift in the composition of demand.

    An alternative channel for real changes associated with monetary

disturbances, which does not rely on wealth redistributions, has been

discussed by Grossman and Weiss (1983), Rotemberg (1984), and Krugman,

Persson. and Svensson (1982). If demand is constrained by liquidity, then

monetary disturbances that differentially affect individuals liquidity can

alter the composition of demand and supply. It seems plausible that effects




redistributions through changes in the price level. They do not, however,
explain the existence of these nominal contracts. King and Haubrich (1984)
assume that the variance of the distribution of wealth is positively
correlated with monetary growth, without specifying the mechanism leading to
this correlation (which could reflect an endogenous component of money
growth).
                                                                             7



of monetary disturbances on liquidity may be substantially larger than the

small direct effects on wealth distribution.6

    Money supply changes will affect liquidity in this model, and the effects

will differ across households. Let there be two types of households, in

equal number, indexed by j and k. Type j households receive the transfer (or




     the Grossman and Weiss paper and the Rotemberg papers, monetary
 disturbances redistribute both liquidity and wealth. Individuals visit
 financial markets at staggered intervals, as in Jovanovic's (.1981) steady
 state general equilibrium extension of the Baumol-Tobin model, and an open
 market purchase redistributes wealth from people not currently trading in
 financial markets ("at the bank') to people who are doing so. The wealth
 redistribution takes the form of (i) a greater inflation tax on the former
 group, who currently hold more money than the latter group, and (ii) a change
 in the time-path of the real interest rate (and capital, in Rotemberg's
model) which affects the groups differently because of their different time
 paths of borrowing and lending. A redistribution of wealth, alone, may not
affect aggregate output, the price level, or real interest rates. But the
 open market purchase also raises the price level and reduces the real money
balances of people not currently In financial markets. Since money is
 required to buy consumption goods, this places a more severe liquidity
constraint on demand by the group. The group's current consumption falls by
more, as a result of this fall in liquidity, than it would if only wealth
were affected. The group with higher wealth (those at financial markets)
 increases its consumption demand, but by less than the fall in demand by the
other group. The fall in aggregate consumption demand (given output, which
depends on the predetermined capital stock) leads to an increase in the
capital stock (in Rotemberg's model) and a fall in the real interest rate.
The price level initially rises less than proportionately to the money stock
because of the increased demand of money by the wealthier group (while the
less wealthy, liquidity constrained group exhausts its money holdings).
     In Krugman, Persson, and Svensson (1982). an exogenous real disturbance
Increases the wealth of lucky consumers and decreases the wealth of unlucky
consumers. But lucky consumers are initially unable to increase their
consumption as much as they would If they were not liquidity constrained by
their (predetermined) cash balances. Unlucky consumers are not liquidity
constrained: they reduce consumption and hold some unspent cash balances. A
reduction In the rate of monetary expansion (through lump-sum transfers to
all Individuals, which cannot be used for current consumption) raises the
rate of return on money holding and so leads unlucky consumers to reduce
current purchases and save more money for future purchases. This reduction
in spending and associated increase in money demand lowers the current price
level and, therefore, makes the liquidity constraint on lucky consumers less
severe.
                                                                                        8



pay the tax) r when the first period begins. Type k households do not

receive a transfer or pay a tax. Before the first period begins, it is

impossible to determine whether a household is of type j or type k.

Moreover, households are effectively able to conceal their type ex-post

(unless they choose behavior that reveals it).

      Equilibrium in the second period is straightforward. Only (5) constrains

consumption, SO C1 =        M'/P',        where i      j, k. But goods market equilibrium

in the second period implies



           (6) 2L' =   '+
so

           (7) F' —
                      M'÷M'           = M
                        2L                2L
and

           (8) c'' = 2L'        —
                                "I
                                MS




This period-two equilibrium makes assets other than money worthless in period

two, so a' =   0.

      Households choose c, L and M' to maximize (1) subject to (3)-(5) where

t = 0 for k households, so



                                      2L'P                     r
           (9) W1(l - L) =       ,a            1 f-_    (M +       -Pc + FL)
                                      M          tM

           (10) =           —
                    01(c)
                                                                                           9


     *
Let L be the solution to


         (11) LW1(l -            L) = L'U1(L').

which in the case of (2) is




         (11') L        =
                                            TT
                            [ L1_r}

Define



                             T                I
                                                          fw   if   i =   j
                                                      =
         (12) w=1÷,
                                                           1   ifi=k,


and note that MS = M( 1 +

    Suppose    >   o.        >   0.       This is guaranteed by




         (13a) u1{2L* ._) > W(1
                                                      -
                                                          L)

         (13b) u1{2L*.j4J > W1(1                  -




which in the case of (2) reduce to




         (l3) [.i_]
                                      >    d'klrL.(lr)(r+R),                  i   = , k.
                                                                                                      10


                                       k = *
                               '
                   k
Then 'i   > 0, v       > 0, L = L          L given in (Ii'), consumption are



                                   *
                      2Lw
           (l4a) cj = ____
                              1÷&.




                              2L
           (l4b) ck =
                              1 +w

and


           (15) p =
                         21



      Expected utility is




           (16) EU =
                              u{'"J      +          + W(l   -   L)   +   /311(L)   +   ,OW(1   -   L').

Note that the last two terms in (16) are exogenous, and that if the exogenous

second-period labor supply L' is set so that L' =               L, then (11') implies L =
               and (13') reduces to ((1 ÷ w)/2to1)" > /3 which is satisfied for

/3 < I and sufficiently small t, i.e., for



           (13") 2/3(l/r) - 1 < w < (213l/r -         i)l.
      Despite the liquidity contraints on households' consumption choices and

the differential effects on liquidity across households of a change in the

money supply, (15) implies that the price level is proportional to the money

supply. Relative consumption of type j versus type k households is altered

by changes in the money supply as shown by (14), but (11') shows that total
                                                                             11



output is independent of the money supply. This last result is specific to

the two-period example and would change if the horizon were longer. However,

the two-period example simplifies the results below on contracts.



III.     Price-Contracts   with Demand-Determined Output

       The spot-market equilibrium is inefficient because households are unable

to pool the risk involved in the transfers. If this risk were partly—but

not fully—pooled, so that "lucky" households make a payment to "unlucky"

households, then the partial insurance arrangements through which these

payments are made could be interpreted as a non-neutral effect of money.

With imperfect insurance, lucky households will be net purchasers of goods

from unlucky households. Because the insurance involves payment from lucky

to unlucky households, this payment could be interpreted as part of the price

paid by lucky households for goods purchased from unlucky households. The

gross price—including these payments—would exceed the spot market price.

In the absence of insurance arrangements, households can be made better off

by alternative institutional arrangements. For example, suppose buyers and

sellers are bound by contracts that specify a price P1 for the first N units

of the good that a household purchases, and a price P2 >    for subsequent
                                                         P1

units. By appropriate choice of P1, P2, and N, one can achieve allocations

arbitrarily close to the full-insurance allocation. (Choose N to be the

full-insurance spot market price, and make P2 arbitrarily large. The

transfer payments—or unassessed taxes—then have arbitrarily small real

value.)
                                                                                             12



    In this paper, I restrict the set of potential contracts to fall within

the set in which (a) a price function q is unrelated to the amount a

household purchases, and (b) output is demand-determined. Denote output

under the contracts by X. The price q is a function of the money supply (and

other exogenous variables) and only this function q is to be chosen.

    Households live in sets called "neighborhoods" In the (1, 2) interval. A

neighborhood is defined by a contract between households and the indentity of

the households involved. An "equal rights" law, enforced perfectly and

costless.ly by the government, requires all (Identical, except for

place-of-origin on the (0, 1) interval) households in a neighborhood to be

treated identically in the contract. Neighborhoods can be treated as sets of

points between adjacent rational numbers, so there are infinitely many

neighborhoods. An exogenous probability distribution assigns possible

contracts to neighborhoods on the (1, 2) interval. Households may move

costlessly between neighborhoods before the first period begins.

    Within each neighborhood, households sell to one another. The contract

defining the neighborhood requires households to buy and sell at the

neighborhood price q(n), with sales determined by demand. Obviously, the

price must be equal in every neighborhood in which households choose to

locate. Moreover, households will choose to locate in the neighborhood(s)

with the highest expected utility per household.

    Given the contract, each household in a neighborhood chooses c to

maximize



           (1') U(c) + W(1   -
                                 X) +   IUf_(M   +   r + qX   -
                                                                  qc)]   +   W(1   -
                                                                                       L')
                                                                     J
                                                                                                          :13



subject   to given X (to be determined below) and



           (4) M +    r   >   qc.


Letting     be the multiplier on (4), c satisfies



                              2Lq    F2L'
                                                       r                  1
           (17) U (c) =             3UI—        (M +       + qx   -           +
                              MS     IMS                                  J




where r = 0 for a k-household, as before.

    Make the provisional assumption that                    >    0,       > 0.         (The conditions

that guarantee this are discussed below. )                 Then c3 =
                                                                              q
                                                                                      and     =   ,q so
output under the contract is



                      2M+r
           (18) x =
                       2q



for each household. Expected utility under the contract is



          (19) EUC =
                          - u[iJ     +
                                            ur_)
                                                   +
                                                                - 2M+rJ


where exogenous utility in the second period has been ignored. A change in

the contractual price affects expected utility by




                       = M                  +               -   2M+r              -
          (20)
                                                                                      2M÷r)
                                                                                                                   14



     Evaluating (20) at the spot market price, q = P. and using (11) one

obtains (where c3 and                  are given by (14))



                                        =    q                            +                    -
               (21)                              .{!       [c3U1(c3)          cku1(kk)J
                              q=p


                                        =q                            q rJl_r       -
                                                 [M÷T)l_r



If   L' is chosen so that L = L then (21) is



                           1—r r                                    l-r
                       M
               (22)
                              1r
                                             -
                                                 2r         (1÷w)
                      2(l+w        )                         1+w



which is positive if transfers are sufficiently small in absolute value.

because 3 <              So if r <          1,         <    1, L =     L,     and            is small, a contracturall

equilibrium with q <           P   (i.e., contract price smaller than the spot market

price would have been) and output demand-determined, dominates spot market

equilibrium in terms of expected utility. Note that, because output is

demand-determined under the contract, C                                L as q           P.




     r <   1   and 3 =    I   then (28) is zero for r = 0 and negative for all r                                  0.

(28) is minimized at               such that
                                                               -r

                                                                     =,
which implies r =         0 if O =          1.
                                                                                                 15


      Now consider the socially optimal q within this set of contracts.                     If

>   0 and     > 0 then an optimum requires, using (20), that



            (23) wU1(wm) ÷ U1(m) = (1                   +
                                                                w)W1(1
                                                                         -
                                                                             (1   +   w))


where



            (24)
                              q


and where m(l÷w) =        X
                                  .                         .
                                  is output per capita. Using (2), (23) implies
               2



                                                   1
                                              1+R r+R
            (25) q =          M
                                      kiV+W)i_r
                                      2 (l÷w



                                        1

                     =




where


                                            1-r
            (26)   12 E
                          k(li-w)
                               R     l-r
                              2 (1÷w



     Because households can costiessly choose any neighborhood in the (1, 2)

interval in which to trade, they will choose the neighborhood with the

contractual price that most closely approximates (25).
                                                                                         16


    Now return to the provisional assumption that               >   0,   >   0.   From (17),

this implies



                            I  I -r  /3 1-r
                           q=(c)    -L

                                =               - /3
                                     [M÷r']_1
                                       q
                                                       MS



is positive. At the optimal q given in (25), this implies




In particular, suppose L' is chosen so that L' = X.             Then




                          1q                    )r -
                                    r÷R[(l:w            2r/3]


which is positive if and only if (13') is satisfied. Therefore, if transfers

are small enough to satIsfy (13") a contractual equilibrium with price q

given by (25) and demand-determined output,




         (27) X = 12F;•



yields higher expected utility than the spot market equilibrium with (14),

(15), and (11).
                                                                                                                     17



      While the spot market equilibrium price P is unit elastic in the money

supply, the contractual price q in (26) is not. The elasticity of q with

respect to the money supply, M5 = 2M #                           r,   for given initial money M, is8



                                                                                        1-r         -r
                                                                                              ÷ W
               (28) (q, M5)                   (r +     R)1 1    + R   -
                                                                          (1   -   r)    1—
                                                                                              r1
which equals unity only at w = 1, i.e., when r = 0.                                     If r <      1    and w > 1 (or

r >1 and         <    I)       then (29) exceeds unity, while if r <                     1    and w < 1 (or r >      1


and     >   1) (28) is less that one. In fact, if r < 1,




               (29)             =    2r 31 L,R k (r±R(1+R) (1)                                (1lr)r÷R


takes a minimum value at t                      = 1.    So if the coefficient of relative risk

aversion is less than one, contractual prices are "sticky' in a downward

direction but rise with a greater than unit elasticity with an increase in

the money supply. Changes in the money supply raise the ratio of the

contract price to the spot market price (that would prevail without




8Given M, dlnMS =                   dln(l÷w),

so
      d in q
                     =l+—l-r-
                        r+R
                                     1               d lfl(l÷Wlr)
      d in M5                                           d in(1+)



But
      d ln(1÷w
                     l-r
                           )
                                =
                                     Ii   1+w
                                               I(1-r)w
                                                       —r
                                                            ,   so (28) follows.
        d ln(1÷w)                    I     1-r
                                     11-s.)
                                                                                       18



contracts) and thereby reduce output. Notice that if         1       and L' is chosen
         *
so that L = L' as in (11'), then (29) reduces to
                                                   1/(r+R)       C    1, so q <   P   and

output under contracts exceeds spot market equilibrium output.

    The relation between the contractual price and the money supply, for

small changes in the money supply, is illustrated in Figure 1 for the case of

relative risk aversion less than one. The price falls less than

proportionately with decreases in the money supply and rises more than

proportionately with increases in the money supply. This price behavior with

demand-determined output provides a second-best insurance arrangement. This

Insurance works in the following way. Consider a fall in the money supply

through lump-sun taxes paid by type-i households. Because type-j households

lose wealth, their desired expenditure falls; because they are

liquidity-contrained, desired expenditure falls by the full amount of the

fall in liquidity, i.e., by the full amount of the increase in taxes.

Suppose the reduction in the money supply is x%; coniecture (falsely) that

nominal prices also fall by x%. In that case, type-i households reduce

expenditure by x% (their nominal money balances fall by 2x% while nominal

money holdings of other households are unaffected). The assumption that

transfer payments are small in absolute value implies that type-k households,

who gain x% in real money balances due to the fall in prices, remain

liquidity constrained. The purpose of this assumption is to simplify the

example by ensuring that type-k households increase current expenditures by

the full x%. If nominal prices fall by less than x%, then type-i households

lose more than x% on their real balances: their nominal balances fall by 2x%

and prices fall by less than x%; similarly, type-k households would gain less
                                                                              19


than x on their real balances. Because all money is spent in this

liquidity-contrained example, these losses in real balances are losses in

consumption. If prices fall by (x -   e),   for 0 < e <   x, rather than x, then
coinaredto   the case which prices fallpx, type-i      household consume e9

less   and type-k households consume e less. Because type-k households

consume more then type-i households (who paid the tax), the absolute fall in

consumption by type k households is larger than that of type-j households.

If the degree of relative risk aversion is less than one, type-k households

lose more utility than do type-j households from lower consumption. But if

consumption is lower, because real balances are lower, then production (which

is demand-determined) will also be lower. Lower production implies less

labor supply and more leisure. Because all households work the same amount.

they all gain the same amount of utility from additional leisure. On net,

then, utility Is redistributed from 'lucky' type-k households who did not

have to pay the tax to "unlucky" type-j households who paid the tax. Prices

fall less than proportionately with money and output falls.

    Similarly, if the money supply increases by x% through transfers to

type-i households (that increase their money holdings by 2x), nominal prices

rise by more than x. Starting from a situation in which nominal prices have

risen by x%, further increases in prices reduce real balances and consumption

by all households, With the degree of relative risk aversion smaller than

one, this reduces utility of the "lucky" type-i households more than it

reduces utility of "unlucky" type-k households. But all households gain

equal utility from the reduction in labor supply that accompanies the fall in

real balances and consumption demand, Consequently, a rise in nominal prices
                                                                             20


that Is greater in percentage terms than the increase in the money supply

redistributes utility from the lucky to the unlucky households. With

relative risk aversion less than one, nominal prices exhibit some downward

(but not upward) stickiness, and, as in Grossman. Hart, and Maskin (1983),

changes in the money supply reduce output.

    The level of nominal prices reflects the fact that there are two

distortions in the model. First, as long as the rate of inflation exceeds

the negative of the discount rate, real money balances fall short of

Friedman's optimal quantity of money. As In Aschauer (1981). this takes the

form of suboptimal labor supply and output in equilibrium. Second,

uncertainty about the identity of taxpayers or transfer recipients creates

risk that would be diversifiable if capital markets were complete. The levei

of contractual prices is lower, when the tax/transfer is zero and the degree

of relative risk aversion less than one, than the level of prices in the spot

market equilibrium. Because output is demand determined, this raises output

above its spot market equilibrium value and offsets the first distortion.

The optimal contract sets prices so that real money balances are lower if the

tax or transfer is nonzero; this is required for the partial insurance

arrangement that tends to offset the second distortion.9



9KIng and Haubrich (1984) develop a rather different model in which price
contracts play an insurance role. In simplified form, their model has two
kinds of individuals, A and B. The distortion of wealth across B-people is
random and unobservable (or at least uninsurable) while the variance of this
distribution is random and observable (perhaps with error). People in group
A sell insurance to people in group B against the contingency of a high
variance, If the variance turns out to be low, B pays A an insurance premium
while If the variance turns out to high, B collects an insurance payment from
A.  In the latter situation, A is less wealthy than otherwise. King and
Haubrich assume people in group A have variable labor supply while those in B
do not (they are retired), so the fall in A's wealth leads to an increase in
                                                                            21




IV. Conclusions

    The paper has presented an example of an economy in which incomplete

asset markets create incentives for buyers and sellers to sign contracts that

specify a price function different from the spot market equilibrium price

function. The price function can exhibit downward stickiness in nominal

prices and lead to nonneutral effects of money on real output. Three key

elements of the model are the transactions role of money, fluctuations that

differ across households in the value of nominal money balances, and the

inability of households to insure directly.

    As in Grossman and Weiss (1983), a change in the money supply in either

direction not only redistributes wealth but affects the liquidity of some

consumers. The inability of households to diversify the risk of money supply

changes creates a role for contracts with nonneutral effects of money.

    The model is not developed from first principles. Instead, it seeks to

take one step toward that end starting from macroeconomic models that

postulate sticky prices. Usually, sticky prices are a source of Inefficiency

in a model, and monetary disturbances have real effects because of this

inefficiency. Ordinarily, households would prefer to be able to adjust




labor supply and output. Given a fixed velocity of money, this reduces the
price level. They also assume that the variance of the wealth distribution
is positively correlated with monetary growth (which is neutral if the
variance is fixed). States of the world with high money growth are
associated, therefore, with high output and with prices that rise less than
proportionately to money. A fall In the money supply is associated with a
smaller variance of the wealth distribution in group B and with higher wealth
for A people, so output is lower and prices fall by less than the money
supply.
                                                                           22


prices instantaneously in those models, and price stickiness must be

rationalized—usually implicitly—on the ground that changing prices has some

cost. The example in this paper, in contrast, begins with an Inefficiency

due to incomplete asset markets and the nature of monetary disturbances.

Households can increase expected utility by entering into contracts in whlih

nominal prices are somewhat sticky in a downward direction and output is

demand-determined. Further research will be required to develop the ideas in

this example further, to include an explanation based on first principles for

the absence of an explicit insurance market in the risk caused by taxes and

transfers, and to consider a broader range of possible contracts and

alternative choices for households. The goal of this paper has been much

more modest—to develop a specific example in which households would have an

incentive to enter into trades with sticky nominal prices and in which real

output is affected by monetary disturbances.
                                                                               23


                                      References


Barro, R. J. ,    "Long Term Contracts, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,'
    Journal of Moneta!y       Economics 3   (July 1977): 305-316.

Aschauer, D., "On a Positively Sloped Long Run Phillips Curve," University

     of Rochester, 1981.

Azariadis, C.,"Escalator Clauses and the Cyclical Allocation of Risks,"

    Journal of Economic Theory 18 (June 1978):         119-155.

Baily, M .,' Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand,' vof Economic

    StudIes 41 (1974): 37-50.

Clower, R .,"A Reconsideration of the Microfoundations of Monetary Theory,"

    Western Economic Journal 6 (December 1967): 1-8.

Grossman, S., 0. Hart, and E. Maskin, "Unemployment with Observable Aggregate

    Shocks," Journal of Political Economy 91 (December 1983): 907-928.

Grossman, S., and L. Weiss, "A Transactions-Based Model of the Monetary

    Transmission Mechanism,' American Economic Review 73 (December 1983):

     871-880.

Jovanovic, B.," Inflation and Welfare in the Steady State," Journal of

     Political    Econoy 90    (June 1982): 561-577.

King, R. and J. Haubrich, "Sticky Prices, Money, and Business Fluctuations,"

     University of Rochester Working Paper, January 1984.

Kruginan, P. ,   T. Perssona and L. Svensson, "Inflation, Monetary Velocity, and

    Welfare," NBER Working Paper No. 987, September 1982, forthcoming,

    Qy.!1                of   Economics.
                                                                             24


Kohn, M., "In Defense of the Finance Constraint," onnic Inquiry 19,

    (1981): 177—195.

________     "The Finance (Cash-in-Advance) Constraint Comes of Age: A Survey

    of Some Recent Developements in the Theory of Money," 1984, Dartmouth

    College Working Paper.

Lucas, R., "Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy," Economic Inquiry 28

    (April 1980): 203-220.

Rosen, S.," Implicit Contracts: A Survey," Journal of Economic Literature

    XXIII (September 1985): 1144-75.

Rotemberg, J .,"A Monetary Equilibrium Model with Transactions Costs,"

                                   92 (February 1984) :   40-58.

Stiglitz, J. ,   "Theories of Wage Rigidity," 1984. Princeton University Working

    Paper.
</ref_section>
