                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 CREDIT CONSTRAINTS AND THE RACIAL GAP IN POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION
                          IN SOUTH AFRICA

                                              David Lam
                                            Cally Ardington
                                            Nicola Branson
                                           Murray Leibbrandt

                                         Working Paper 19607
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19607


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2013




We thank seminar participants at Duke University, Rand, Stanford University, University of California,
Berkeley, University of Cape Town, University of Michigan, UCLA, USC, University of Pretoria,
University of KwaZulu Natal, and the IZA/World Bank Conference on Employment and Development.
Support for this research was provided by the South African National Research Foundation/Department
of Science and Technology: Human and Social Dynamics in Development Grand Challenge, the U.S.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (Grants R01HD39788 and R01HD045581),
the Fogarty International Center of the U.S. National Institutes of Health (D43TW000657), the Andrew
W. Mellon Foundation, and the Canadian International Development Research Centre. The Cape
Area Panel Study, which provides the key data for this paper, operates with the approval of Institutional
Review Boards at the University of Cape Town and the University of Michigan. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by David Lam, Cally Ardington, Nicola Branson, and Murray Leibbrandt. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Credit Constraints and the Racial Gap in Post-Secondary Education in South Africa
David Lam, Cally Ardington, Nicola Branson, and Murray Leibbrandt
NBER Working Paper No. 19607
November 2013
JEL No. I24,I25,J15,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the impact of high school household income and scholastic ability on post-secondary
enrollment in South Africa. Using longitudinal data from the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS), we analyze
the large racial gaps in the proportion of high school graduates who enroll in university and other forms
of post-secondary education. Our results indicate that family background and high school achievement
(measured by a literacy and numeracy exam and performance on the grade 12 matriculation exam)
are strong predictors of post-secondary enrollment and statistically account for all of the black-white
difference in enrollment. Controlling for parental education and baseline scholastic ability reduces
the estimated impact of household income on university enrollment, though there continues to be an
effect at the top of the income distribution. We also find evidence of credit constraints on non-university
forms of post-secondary enrollment. Counterfactual estimates indicate that if all South Africans had
the incomes of the richest whites, African university enrollment would increase by 65%, even without
changing parental education or high school academic achievement. The racial gap in university enrollment
would narrow only slightly, however as our results suggest that this gap in postsecondary enrollment
results mainly from the large racial gap in high school academic achievement.


David Lam                                            Nicola Branson
Department of Economics                              Southern Africa Labour and Development
University of Michigan                               Research UnLW 6$/'58
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                  University of Cape Town,
and NBER                                             Cape Town, South Africa
davidl@umich.edu                                     nicola.branson@gmail.com

Cally Ardington                                      Murray Leibbrandt
University of Cape Town                              University of Cape Town
South African Labour                                 Murray.Leibbrandt@uct.ac.za
and Development Research Unit
Rondebosch 7701
South Africa
cally.ardington@uct.ac.za
    One of the key issues in economic research on post-secondary education is the extent to
which credit constraints limit the ability of children from low-income families to attend
university. While there is clear evidence that family income is strongly correlated with university
attendance in a number of countries, there are different interpretations of what that correlation
means. One interpretation is that low-income families cannot afford to pay tuition and other costs
of post-secondary education, a problem that could potentially be solved through fee reductions or
financial aid. Another interpretation is that there are long-term educational disadvantages from
growing up in a low-income family because children attend lower quality schools and have
access to fewer educational resources. Under the second interpretation the policy challenge is
more difficult, since financial aid and reduced tuition will not be sufficient to compensate for the
cumulative educational disadvantage faced by students from low-income families.
    There has been considerable research on these issues in the United States. Using the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) 1979, Cameron and Heckman (2001) showed
that the association between family income and college attendance was greatly reduced by
controlling for Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) scores. They concluded that the
apparent effect of income is due more to early life resources than to credit constraints, and that
these long-run factors, not credit constraints, explained most of the racial-ethnic differences in
university enrollment. Carneiro and Heckman (2002) further showed that most of the income-
college gradient could be explained by AFQT scores in the NLSY 1979 cohort. Keane and
Wolpin (2001) also concluded that credit constraints had a small impact on college attendance,
partly because low-income students are more likely to work. Updating this analysis with the
1997 cohort of the NLSY, Belley and Lochner (2007) found an increased impact of family
income after controlling for AFQT scores. They concluded that credit constraints have become
more important in the U.S. over time. Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011) developed a model of
credit constraints and human capital, and showed that a combination of rising costs of university,
rising returns to education, and slow growth of government student loans can explain why U.S.
youth were not substantially constrained in the 1980s but are more constrained today. Further
evidence of credit constraints in the U.S. is provided by Lovenheim (2011), who estimated that
increases in house values caused increased college attendance among families that would
otherwise have been credit constrained.
    This paper looks at the extent to which credit constraints affect post-secondary education in


                                                   1
South Africa, with particular focus on the country’s enormous racial gap in post-secondary
enrollment. South Africa is an interesting setting in which to analyze the role of credit constraints
in post-secondary education for several reasons. First, education levels are relatively high in the
country, with almost universal primary education and with most students attending secondary
school. The critical education margins are completion of secondary school and entry into post-
secondary education. Second, the country has enormous income differences between rich and
poor. These differences, which are strongly associated with race, are much larger than racial
gaps in income in the U.S.        Third, although most post-secondary education options are
government funded, the cost of attending post-secondary institutions is high, at least in the
absence of financial assistance. Issues of affordability may therefore play an important role in
determining who is able to enroll.
    A final consideration is that the legacy of apartheid’s “Bantu education” system continues to
manifest itself in large differences in the quality of primary and secondary schooling received by
students from different race and income groups. The apartheid government ran separate school
systems for different racial groups, with enormous differentials in funding levels and curriculum
(Case and Deaton 1999, Fiske and Ladd 2004). Although government funding levels were
equalized after 1994, there continue to be large racial differences in progress through school and
ultimate educational attainment (Yamauchi 2005, Bhorat and Oosthuizen 2008, van der Berg
2007, Lam et al. 2011).
    There is some evidence that credit constraints have an impact on post-secondary education
in South Africa. Using a regression discontinuity design, Gurgand et al. (2011) found that
applicants to the Eduloan student loan program who received a loan were 20 percentage points
more likely to enroll in university than applicants who fell just short of the eligibility threshold.
These results apply to the group that applies for Eduloan loans (discussed below), and thus
exclude those who receive direct financial support from universities. Our analysis is based on a
sample of all high school graduates in the Cape Town metropolitan area, and thus provides a
broader picture of how credit constraints affect post-secondary enrollment.
    We take advantage of rich longitudinal data from the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS), a
survey that began with 4,752 14-22 year-olds in metropolitan Cape Town in 2002. In addition to
information on post-secondary education, household income, and other individual and household
characteristics collected in each wave, CAPS administered a literacy and numeracy evaluation


                                                    2
(LNE) to all respondents in Wave 1. CAPS also collected detailed results on the standardized
grade 12 matriculation exam in each wave. Following the approach of the U.S. literature, these
LNE scores and matriculation exam scores allow us to control for high-school academic
achievement in analyzing the income of household resources on post-secondary enrollment.
    As in the U.S. literature, we find that the relationship between high school household
income and university enrollment is greatly attenuated when we control for parental education
and high school academic achievement. We continue to find an impact of income at the top of
the income distribution, however, a possible indication that credit constraints play a role. A
counterfactual in which everyone is given the income of the 90th percentile whites, holding
parental education and high school achievement constant, causes African (black) university
enrollment to increase by 65%. The racial gap in enrollment remains very large, however, even
with this extreme counterfactual which assumes that all remaining effects of income are due to
credit constraints. An alternative counterfactual in which we give everyone the median test
scores of whites, without changing incomes, has much larger effects, completely eliminating the
racial gap in university enrollment. The results suggest that eliminating financial barriers to
university would have only a small impact on the racial gap in enrollment, given that the gap
results mainly from large racial disparities in high school academic achievement. We find
evidence that other forms of post-secondary education may be more affected by credit
constraints, however, and that these programs may have an important impact on earnings
inequality.
    The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background on the disappointing
trends in secondary and post-secondary education in South Africa since the end of apartheid, and
documents the high returns to post-secondary education.         Section 3 provides institutional
background about South African higher education, including discussion of financial aid and
affirmative action in admissions. Section 4 discusses the Cape Area Panel Study. Section 5
presents our main empirical analysis, including regressions that look at the impact of income on
enrollment with and without controls for family background and test scores. Section 6 presents
counterfactuals which provide a simple way of quantifying the potential role of credit constraints
in explaining the racial gap in post-secondary enrollment. Section 7 reports on a number of
robustness checks. Section 8 provides conclusions and discussion of policy implications.



                                                  3
                 I.    The Racial Gap in Educational Attainment in South Africa

       A major focus of this paper is the comparison of schooling outcomes for African, coloured,
and white youths. These three population groups were subject to very different treatment under
apartheid. Whites had advantages in a wide range of areas, including significantly higher
expenditures on schooling, privileged access to the labor market, unrestricted residential
mobility, and better access to social services. Africans had the least access to services and the
most restrictions on work and migration, with a large gap in expenditures on schooling. The
coloured population, which is heavily concentrated in the Western Cape (including Cape Town),
occupied an intermediate status under apartheid, with higher expenditures on schooling, fewer
restrictions on residential mobility, and better access to jobs than Africans.
       Table 1 uses the nationally representative General Household Survey (GHS), collected by
Statistics South Africa, to analyze trends in educational attainment for these three population
groups for 25-29 year-olds from 2002 to 2010. Whites have a large advantage throughout the
schooling distribution, although the gap has declined at lower levels. The percentage of Africans
with less than grade 9 fell from around 26% in 2002-04 to around 20% in 2008-10. 1 This is a
significant improvement in the bottom part of the schooling distribution, although Africans and
coloureds still lag far behind whites in this part of the distribution.
       There has been much less improvement at the top of the distribution. The proportion of
Africans with at least grade 12 increased slightly – from 38.7% to 40.2%, far behind the 88% of
whites who complete grade 12.            The proportion of Africans going beyond grade 12 only
increased from 7.4% to 8.3%, far below the 39% of whites who go beyond grade 12. Only 1.5%
of 25-29 year-old Africans had a university degree in 2008-10, below the 2.3% in 2002-4. This
compares to 18.3% of whites who had completed university in 2008-10. It is interesting to
compare these figures to the U.S., where 40% of whites and 23% of blacks had completed
university among 25-29 year-olds in 2012 (Aud et al. 2013). When we look at men and women
separately (not shown), there is very little gender difference in any of the statistics in Table 1, a
pattern found for most analyses of educational outcomes in South Africa (Anderson et al. 2001;
Lam et al. 2011).
       Looking at the last two rows of Table 1, African and coloured high school graduates are


1
    We pool three-year samples to increase sample size for the white and coloured groups.

                                                        4
much less likely than whites to receive any kind of post-secondary schooling. The proportion of
high school graduates aged 25-29 that went on to post-secondary education was 19.1% for
Africans and 41.1% for whites in 2002-4, rising to 20.8 for Africans and 44.2% for whites in
2008-10. The racial gap is even larger for university attendance, since the vast majority of
Africans who go beyond high school receive some kind of diploma or certificate rather than a
university degree. The proportion of African high school graduates going on to receive a
university degree was only 5.8% in 2002-4, declining to 3.6% in 2008-10. The percentage of
white high-school graduates receiving a university degree also declined over this period from
22.2% to 20.9% (this may reflect an increase in the proportion of young white university
graduates who leave South Africa for some period of time rather than an actual decline in the
proportion of whites going to university).
    Research from the 1990s estimated high returns to secondary and post-secondary education
in South Africa. Using 1993 data, Mwabu and Schultz (2000) found that the return for Africans
to completing secondary school was nearly double the return for whites. Given that the
percentage of South Africans receiving post-secondary education has not increased since 2000, it
is not surprising that the returns to post-secondary education continue to be high. Table 2 gives
estimates of the returns to education at different levels beginning at grade 10, based on the
pooled 2000-2007 Labour Force Surveys, also collected by Statistics South Africa. The
coefficients show the returns to completing a given level compared to the next lower level.
Overall the returns are very high, even below grade 12. Africans with grade 10 earn 12% more
than Africans with grade 9, controlling for a quadratic in age and dummies for male, year, and
province. Africans with grade 12 earn 29% more than Africans with grade 11. As Mwabu and
Schultz (2000) found using 1993 data, we find that returns to grade 12 and above are higher for
Africans than for whites.
    The diploma/certificate category in Table 2 includes a variety of post-secondary education
that is outside traditional universities. This includes universities of technology, vocational
colleges, and other training programs. The returns to these non-university programs appear to be
very high, at least given these conventional OLS estimates. Africans with a non-university
diploma have more than double the earnings of Africans with just grade 12. Africans with a
university degree earn over 50% more than Africans with a diploma or certificate. As with
secondary, the returns to post-secondary education are higher for Africans than for whites.


                                                  5
While the focus of this paper is on post-secondary enrollment rather than returns to post-
secondary schooling, the very large returns shown in Table 2 provide an important backdrop for
our analysis. It seems clear that the very low post-secondary enrollment rates for non-whites
shown in Table 1 are not due to low returns to post-secondary investments for non-whites.

                              II.    Institutional Background

    All major universities in South Africa are public institutions that receive funding from the
national government. A second tier of public “universities of technology” (formerly technikons)
focus on technical and vocational training. The government has also increased funding in recent
years for Further Education and Training (FET) colleges, which play a role similar to community
colleges and vocational schools in the U.S.      Private institutions are important in the non-
university sector of higher education and include large, well-established institutions providing a
wide range of certificate and diploma programs, as well as smaller programs offering specialized
short courses.
    Tuition in traditional degree-granting universities is high relative to income levels. In 2008
the average full cost of study (including registration fees, tuition fees, books, accommodation,
and meals) at traditional universities was estimated at 43,000 rands per year (about US$10,750
using Purchasing Power Parity adjustments) (Department of Higher Education and Training
2010), while median household income (based on the 2008 National Income Dynamics Study)
was 29,780 rands per year (US$7,445 PPP). Tuition in universities of technology was about
20% lower, still very high for even median income households. Although direct government
funding to universities has decreased over time, state funding for the National Student Financial
Aid Scheme (NSFAS) has increased. The NSFAS is supported by government funding and
private donations, and aims to provide loans and scholarships (bursaries) to low-income students.
About 15% of university students received NSFAS funding in 2008 (Department of Higher
Education and Training 2010). The demand for funding, however, continues to far outweigh
funds available. During the period of our study, NSFAS loans were not available for students
studying at FET colleges.
    The NSFAS is administered by university financial aid offices. Similar to U.S. systems, a
means test and an estimate of the full cost of study are used to calculate an expected family
contribution. NSFAS loans are offered to make up the difference, although a combination of


                                                  6
inadequate funding, imperfect administration, and incomplete knowledge among potential
applicants mean that students do not necessarily receive the full difference. Students with
incomes above a certain threshold are not eligible for funding, with the threshold varying across
universities.
    In addition to financing from NSFAS, financial assistance is available via institutional or
private scholarships and through loans from commercial banks, the Eduloan program, and
informal money-lenders. Eligibility requirements for commercial loans restrict this source of
finance primarily to wealthy students, while informal lenders are known to charge excessive
interest rates (Gurgand et al 2011). Eduloan, a private program financed by donors, targets
middle income students who are not eligible for NSFAS but do not have the requirements
necessary to apply for a commercial bank loan. Eduloan only provides short-term (10 to 22
month) loans and requires that the loan be paid off during the course of study. Eligibility for an
Eduloan requires that the applicant, or individual taking out the loan on their behalf, be
employed and that the installment amount does not exceed 25% of their monthly income
(Gurgand et al. 2011).
    Given the financial aid system, a key feature of South African higher education is that the
cost of university attendance increases with family income, although the relationship may be
fairly flat at low incomes. As pointed out by Belley and Lochner (2007), the fact that the
effective price of university increases with family income implies that enrollment should
decrease as a function of family income, holding academic ability and returns to higher
education constant. As we will see, not surprisingly, university enrollment is in fact a strongly
increasing function of family income in South Africa, just as it is in the U.S. and most other
countries. Credit constraints are one way to explain this relationship. Although high-income
families face a higher price of attending university, they face a lower cost of borrowing, partly
because they can self-finance. As emphasized in previous literature, an alternative explanation
of the positive relationship between income and enrollment is that prior academic achievement is
positively correlated with family income as a result of the many educational advantages that
higher income students have had over their lifetime. The Cape Area Panel Study gives us
unusually rich data for a developing country setting with which to analyze these alternative
explanations.
    Another important feature of the institutional background is affirmative action in favor of

                                                  7
traditionally disadvantaged groups. Most South African universities have explicit discussion of
preferential treatment of certain population categories in online admissions information and other
sources. For example, the University of Cape Town lists four “redress categories” in its 2012
admissions policy: “black South African, Indian South African, coloured South African, and
Chinese South African” (University of Cape Town 2012). “Equity targets” are set in each
faculty.   According to the document, “All faculties will aim to admit specified minimum
numbers of eligible South African Black, Chinese, Coloured, and Indian students in accordance
with these targets.” The minimum acceptable scores for admission vary by group within a given
program. Most programs reach their target admissions before reaching the minimum acceptable
score, however, and we do not have information on the actual differences in cutoffs for
admission.
    In our regression results we find that Africans (blacks) are predicted to have higher
university enrollment than whites once we control for high school test scores. As we discuss
below, this may be evidence of affirmative action in admissions. Our data are not ideally suited
to analyze the question, however, since we have data on enrollment rather than admission.

                          III.   Data: The Cape Area Panel Study

    The Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS) is a longitudinal survey that began in 2002 with a
sample of 4,752 young people aged 14-22 in metropolitan Cape Town. 2 Cape Town has three
predominant population groups – the distribution in the 2001 census was 48% coloured, 32%
African/black, and 19% white. CAPS oversampled areas classified as predominantly African and
white. Cape Town is the only major city in South Africa to have substantial numbers of white,
coloured, and African residents, providing unique opportunities to study changes in inequality
after the end of apartheid.
    The Wave 1 young adult questionnaire, administered to up to three household members aged
14-22, covered a wide range of variables including schooling and work. It also included a
literacy and numeracy evaluation. Wave 2 was collected in 2003 and 2004, Wave 3 in 2005,
Wave 4 in 2006, and Wave 5 in 2009. Each wave collected information on education enrollment

2
  Details about CAPS, a collaborative project of the University of Cape Town and the University of
Michigan, are available in Lam et al. (2012) and on the CAPS web site, www.caps.uct.ac.za. CAPS was
collected under the auspices of Institutional Review Boards at the University of Michigan and the
University of Cape Town.

                                                   8
and attainment since the previous interview. Respondents who reported having taken the grade
12 matriculation exam since the previous interview were asked to provide detailed information
about the results of the exam.
    The key outcome in our analysis is whether respondents were enrolled in post-secondary
education within two years of completing grade 12 (requiring a passing grade on the
matriculation exam). We use respondents who reported completing grade 12 between 2001
(reported in the 2002 Wave 1 interview) and 2007 (reported in the 2009 Wave 5 interview). We
measure household income per capita, reported by an adult respondent in the CAPS household
questionnaire, as close as possible to the year the respondents were in grade 12 (39% are
measured in the year they pass grade 12, 25% are measured one prior, 19% are measured one
year later, and 16% are measured two years prior). 3
    Table 3 provides information on sample attrition. Attrition is difficult to define precisely
since our analysis conditions on an outcome – graduating from high school – that could occur up
to five years after the baseline wave of the survey. Those who are lost from the sample but who
never graduate from high school represent, in a sense, irrelevant attrition that does not create any
attrition bias. Those who are lost from the sample and did eventually graduate from high school,
however, represent true attrition, and non-random loss of these respondents could create some
attrition bias. Table 3 presents one natural way of looking at attrition. We calculate the
proportion of respondents who we follow for up to two years beyond the year at which they
would have been expected to graduate from high school, assuming they progressed one grade per
year. For those who were in grade 12 in the 2002 baseline survey, we see 88% of them two
years later. Those who were in grade 7 in 2002 should have reached grade 12 in 2007, and thus
need to be observed in Wave 5 of the survey.               We successfully followed 68% of these
respondents.
    Column 3 of Table 3 shows the percentage of respondents in each baseline grade that we
actually observe in grade 12. This conflates two issues – whether respondents made it to grade
12 and whether respondents stayed in the survey. Comparing Columns 2 and 3, we see that most
students are not observed in grade 12 because they never got there, not because of attrition from

3
   We have enrollment data and matric score data for every year because CAPS collects data
retrospectively for the period between waves. Household income is only captured in years with
interviews, and thus is not always available for the year the student completes grade 12. We use income
reports for the year after grade 12 only when the respondent is living with the same people as in grade 12.

                                                       9
the study. Among those in grade 10 in 2002, for example, we see 82% of them until at least
2006 (2 years beyond their expected graduation year of 2004), but we only see 55% of them ever
enrolled in grade 12. Column 4 shows the percentage for which we have a grade 12 result,
requiring that respondents were interviewed and provided matriculation exam results at least one
year after grade 12. Overall we observe grade 12 outcomes for 71% of those observed in grade
12, with higher rates for those who were closer to grade 12 in 2002. Column 5 shows that the
overall grade 12 pass rate among those with known results is 82%, with large differences across
population groups. The pass rate for whites is 94%, compared to 74% for Africans. Column 6
shows that we successfully follow 92% of respondents for two years after passing grade 12,
conditional on observing them pass.
    If we define attrition using Column 2 of Table 3, overall attrition is 23%, with large
variation by race and baseline grade. We lose 15% of the coloured sample, a group with strong
historical ties to Cape Town, but we lose 44% of the white sample. As noted, these numbers
arguably overstate attrition since they include the substantial percentage of respondents who
never would have reached grade 12. Conditional on race and baseline grade, a regression shows
no significant relationship between attrition and key baseline characteristics such as household
income, parental education, or cumulative number of grades failed. One of our robustness
checks is to exclude the respondents who were below grade 10 in 2002, the group with the
highest attrition. The group that was in grades 10-12 in 2002 has an overall attrition rate of 15%.
Although we lose some precision, our key results are not affected using this lower-attrition
sample.

                                 IV.     Empirical Analysis

    We begin our empirical analysis with an overview of individual and household
characteristics we use in our regressions. Table 4 presents descriptive statistics for respondents
that we observe completing grade 12 between 2001 and 2007 and that we are able to follow for
the subsequent two years. Line 1 shows our first key outcome – whether the respondent was
enrolled in university at any point during the two years after completing grade 12. 4 The
percentage enrolling in university is 13% for Africans, 18% for coloureds, and 49% for whites.

4
  We use a two-year window to account for the fact that some students (mainly high-income students)
take a “gap year” before beginning post-secondary education, while some lower-income students may
take preparatory classes or work to earn money before beginning post-secondary education.

                                                  10
Looking at other types of postsecondary education in Lines 2-5, we see that 16% of Africans
enroll in universities of technology, compared to 10% of whites. Another 19% of Africans and
27% of whites enroll in a wide range of other post-secondary institutions, including the public
FET colleges and a variety of private institutions offering specific types of training.
    Taking all post-secondary institutions together, and accounting for the fact that some
respondents enrolled in more than one type of institution in the two years following grade 12, the
proportion enrolled in any institution is 44% for Africans, 46% for coloureds, and 83% for
whites. Line 5 shows that the proportion enrolling in some kind of post-secondary institution,
conditional on not enrolling in university ranges from 35% for Africans to 66% for whites. We
will use this as our second main outcome in the regressions below.
    In CAPS we collect information on two tests of academic achievement. The first is a
literacy and numeracy evaluation (LNE) that was administered to all youth respondents in Wave
1. The means and standard deviations of the combined literacy and numeracy score are reported
in Line 6 of Table 4 (the score is standardized to zero mean and unit variance for the full sample
of 14-22 year-old CAPS Wave 1 respondents). The LNE was a self-administered 45-question test
that took about 20 minutes to complete. Respondents could take the test in English or Afrikaans.
There was no version in Xhosa, the home language of most African respondents. The English
language test was taken by 99% of African respondents, 43% of coloured respondents, and 64%
of white respondents. In interpreting the results it should be kept in mind that most white and
coloured students took the test in their first language, while Africans took it in a second
language. It is also important to note, however, that English is the official language of instruction
in African schools and is used for tests such as the grade 12 matriculation exam. The LNE scores
are a measure of cumulative learning at the time of the 2002 interview, with scores reflecting a
combination of many factors, including innate ability, home environment, and the quantity and
quality of schooling to that point. Table 4 shows the large racial differences in performance on
this test. The mean score for Africans was almost 1.5 standard deviations below the mean score
for whites, even for this select group that passed grade 12. The standard deviation of African
scores is double the standard deviation of white scores.
    The score on the grade 12 matriculation exam features prominently in our analysis below.
We calculate the score based on answers to questions about performance on the multiple subjects



                                                   11
tested separately in the exam, generating a score from 1 to 8. 5 We use an algorithm similar to
that used by the University of Cape Town, which, like other universities, uses the matric exam
results as the basis for admission. A score of 5 roughly corresponds to the cutoff for eligibility
for admission to university. As seen in Line 7, both Africans and coloureds have a mean below
5, while whites have a mean of about 6. We will look at the distribution of these scores in more
detail below.
    Line 8 shows one important measure of progress through school, the number of grades failed
as of the baseline survey in 2002. Grade repetition is very common in primary and secondary
school, with Africans having failed an average of 0.6 grades at baseline. This compares to only
0.1 grades for whites. As Lam et al. (2011) show using CAPS data, there are high levels of
grade repetition in black secondary schools, with grade repetition playing an important role in
explaining racial gaps in ultimate educational achievement.
    Given our interest in credit constraints, a key independent variable is household income
measured when respondents were in high school (as close to grade 12 as possible). Lines 9 and
10 of Table 4 show the large differences in baseline household income per capita, as reported by
an adult respondent in the household questionnaire. The mean for whites is about eight times
greater than the mean for Africans. As shown below, there is almost no overlap in the income
distributions for Africans and whites. Related to these differences, the mean school expenditures
in 2002 (when respondents were still in secondary school) were 7.5 times greater for whites than
for Africans. 6 Whites also pay more for post-secondary education, as shown in Line 12, a
reflection of both the quality of the institutions attended and the provision of financial aid to
poorer students. Evidence of the high cost of post-secondary education is that the mean amount
paid by African students for post-secondary education was 4651 rands per year, which can be
compared to mean per capita household income of 6432 rands per year. Median total annual
household income for African households in this sample was 19,500 rands.
    In addition to these enormous racial differences in baseline income and test scores, there are
also large racial differences in parents’ education. The mothers and fathers of African youth

5
  Students are tested in a minimum of six subjects (some required, with the remainder chosen from a large
set of electives). Each subject is graded A to F. A score of 8 corresponds to a grade of A on every subject.
6
  In 2002 all schools charged school fees set by school governing bodies, in addition to costs of uniforms
and other materials. Differences in fees translate into large differences in school quality, including the
number of teachers (Fiske and Ladd 2004). Fees have recently been eliminated for the poorest schools
(Department of Education, 2006).

                                                       12
have around four years less schooling than the parents of white youth, with father’s schooling
missing for 44% of Africans 7.

                A. Income, previous achievement, and post-secondary enrollment

    The top panel of Figure 1 presents lowess estimates of post-secondary enrollment within two
years of passing grade 12 as a function of the log of household per capita income measured in
high school. The figure shows enrollment in any kind of post-secondary education as well as
enrollment in universities, with separate lines for each population group and for the combined
population. As a reference for the lowess estimates, the bottom panel plots kernel densities of
log household per capita income for each group, standardized so that the overall mean is zero.
The kernel densities demonstrate the enormous racial differences in income. A striking feature is
the very small range in which the African and white income distributions overlap, with the
coloured distribution sitting in between.
    In the ranges of income with significant densities, we see in the top panel that there is a
strong positive relationship between high school household income and enrollment in post-
secondary education. The slope of the gradient increases above mean log income, especially for
university enrollment. One reason for the lower slope at low incomes, as we will see below, is
the very low matriculation exam scores of youth from low-income households. While the line
for whites in Figure 1 tends to be above the line for Africans, the distance between the two lines
is relatively small compared to the large difference in enrollment shown in Table 4. This is
especially true for university enrollment, where the lines for whites and Africans are almost
indistinguishable in the small range in which the two income distributions overlap, even though
there is a 36 percentage point difference in university enrollment in Table 4. This gives the first
evidence that income plays an important role in explaining the racial differences in post-
secondary enrollment.      It is also striking that African enrollment is higher than coloured
enrollment at almost every income level, whether looking at university enrollment or at all post-
secondary education.
    The gap between the line for all post-secondary institutions and the line for university gives
the proportion enrolled in non-university programs of various kinds. Looking at this gap, we see
that the proportion enrolled in non-university programs increases with income at low levels of

7
  Parental schooling comes from the household questionnaire when the parent is co-resident, and was
collected from the young adult directly in the baseline questionnaire when the parent was not co-resident.

                                                      13
income, reaches a peak of about 30% around mean log income, then falls with income above the
mean.    Another interesting way to look at this is to look at enrollment in post-secondary
programs conditional on not being enrolled in university. This is shown in Figure 2. Among
those who do not enroll in university, there is a steep gradient in the probability of post-
secondary enrollment as a function of grade 12 household income. The patterns are similar to
those in Figure 1. Whites tend to have the highest enrollment, but there is little difference
between white and African enrollment in the small range in which the income distributions
overlap. Coloured enrollment is below enrollment for Africans and whites at all income levels.
    One reason high school household income predicts subsequent post-secondary enrollment is
because income is associated with better secondary school performance and higher matriculation
exam scores. Figure 3 shows the relationship between matric score and grade 12 household
income. While much of the large unadjusted racial gap in matric scores goes away when
controlling for income, whites continue to have roughly one point higher matric scores than
Africans and coloureds in the income ranges where the income distributions overlap.
    We see in Figure 3 that matric scores rise rapidly with income above the mean, but are
relatively flat below the mean. The flatness below the mean reflects several factors. First, our
analysis uses respondents who passed their matriculation exam. While passing does not translate
into an exact score, given multiple subject areas and a complex grading system, the lowest scores
have been truncated from the distribution. It is also appears from other studies that school
quality does not rise substantially with income below mean income. Branson et al. (2012) show
that when schools are ranked by neighborhood income, grade repetition rates are equally high
across the first three quintiles, even though household income and other characteristics vary
substantially across the quintiles. Similarly, Spaull (2012) finds that grade 6 test scores do not
increase across the first three school wealth quartiles, although they rise dramatically in the
highest quartile.
    Figure 4 shows the relationship between matric scores and post-secondary enrollment. We
show the relationship for the full sample and for each income tercile. The bottom panel shows
the distribution of matric scores for each tercile and the combined population. As seen in the
bottom panel, matric scores differ dramatically by household income, with only a small portion
of the lowest tercile having scores of 5 or higher, a good predictor of university eligibility. The
top panel of Figure 4 shows, not surprisingly, that there is a very strong relationship between


                                                  14
matric scores and enrollment in post-secondary education. The gradient is steeper for university
enrollment than for all post-secondary programs, especially above matric scores of 4. While the
top income tercile has the highest enrollment, the gap between terciles is relatively small at a
given matric score. Interestingly, the group with the lowest enrollment in any post-secondary
program at high matric scores is the second tercile. This may be a reflection of the fact that
middle income students are less likely to receive financial assistance than are the lowest income
students.
    Figure 4 makes it clear that the steep income gradient in post-secondary enrollment shown
in Figure 1 results in large part from the correlation between grade 12 household income and
matriculation exam scores. This appears to be especially true for university enrollment. The
next section explores these issues in greater detail with regressions that allow us to include
additional controls for individual and household characteristics.

                             B. Regressions for university enrollment

    This section presents regressions in which our dependent variable indicates that the
respondent was enrolled in university within two years after passing the grade 12 matriculation
exam. One of our key empirical questions is whether baseline household income is associated
with university enrollment, and whether the coefficient on income declines when we control for
variables such as matric scores and parental education. Table 5 presents OLS estimates of the
linear probability model using a variety of specifications.
    Regression 1 includes only dummies for coloured and white (African is the excluded
category), along with a dummy for female, dummies for the year in which the respondent
completed secondary school, and terms for age and age squared in 2002. As expected given the
sample means in Table 4, the coefficient on coloured is close to zero and statistically
insignificant. The coefficient on white implies that whites have 31.2 percentage point higher
probability of enrollment in university. Females have a slightly higher probability of university
enrollment, but the coefficient is not statistically significant. The fact the females do at least as
well as males in educational outcomes in South Africa is consistent with previous studies at the
primary and secondary levels (e.g. Lam et al. 2011).
    Regression 2 adds the log of high school household per capita income (normalized to zero
mean) and its square, allowing us to capture the non-linearity apparent in Figure 1.            The
coefficient on the linear term is highly significant, implying that a 10% increase in income is

                                                   15
associated with a 1.1 percentage point increase in university enrollment. The quadratic term is
also positive and highly significant, implying that the impact of income is higher at higher
income levels. At the mean log income for whites (1.36), the derivative is almost twice as high
as at the overall mean. A striking result in column 2 is that inclusion of household income
causes the white coefficient to fall from 0.312 to 0.074, losing statistical significance. The
coloured coefficient falls to -0.062, significantly different from zero at the 10% level.
    In Regression 3 we add mother’s education and father’s education to the regression, an
approach used in previous literature to measure long-term socioeconomic advantage or
disadvantage. We estimate positive effects of both parents’ schooling, controlling for grade 12
income. A one year increase in parental schooling is associated with a 2.1 percentage point
increase in the probability of university enrollment for mother’s schooling and a 3.5 percentage
point increase for father’s schooling. Including parental schooling causes the estimated impact of
household income to fall substantially. The coefficient on the linear term falls by over half, to
0.05, while the coefficient on the squared term falls from 0.032 to 0.026. Including parental
education also causes the coefficient on the white dummy to become roughly zero.
    Parental education could represent a number of mechanisms affecting post-secondary
enrollment. It may be a proxy for a household’s permanent income, picking up the long-term
effects of household resources on cumulative human capital. There may also be direct effects of
parental education on children’s learning that affects the probability of continuing to university.
Whatever the mechanisms are that explain the impact of parental education, an important result
for our purposes is that controlling for parental education causes the apparent effect of household
income during the student’s high-school years to fall substantially.
    Regression 4 adds the matriculation exam score and the Wave 1 literacy and numeracy exam
(LNE) score to the regression. For the matric score we use a linear spline with a change in slope
at a matric score of 5, roughly the cutoff for admission into university. Matric scores are a strong
predictor of post-secondary enrollment, but the effect is highly non-linear.                The spline
coefficients in Regression 4 imply that one additional point on the score raises the probability of
enrollment in university by 5.0 percentage points in the 0-5 range, but raises the probability by
24.6 percentage points for scores above 5. The LNE score has an additional impact, with a one
standard deviation increase in the score associated with a 6.9 percentage point higher probability
of university enrollment.     This may reflect that our LNE score captured some additional


                                                   16
cognitive ability beyond that measured in the matric score, or simply that students who did better
on both exams are more skilled than students who for some reason did well on one exam and not
on the other.
    Including the matric and LNE scores reduces the coefficients on parental schooling, though
both coefficients are still statistically significant. Importantly, the estimated impact of household
income falls still further. The coefficient on the linear term is close to zero and statistically
insignificant. The coefficient on the quadratic term falls to 0.11, roughly one-third its value in
Regression 2. In other words, controlling for parental education and scholastic ability in high
school has eliminated the apparent effect of income on university enrollment around mean
income, although there is still an effect at higher levels of income.
    Looking at the race dummies in Regression 4, the coefficient on the white dummy is now
negative and statistically significant at the 1% level. Taken literally, the coefficient implies that
when we control for baseline income, parental education, and matriculation exam scores, whites
have a 21.8 percentage point lower probability of enrolling in university than Africans. In
interpreting this result it is important to keep in mind the distributions of income and matric
scores shown in Figures 1 and 4. There is very little overlap in the African and white
distributions, making it difficult to estimate what whites would do if they had African
characteristics. Our result is similar to the results found in Lam et al. (2011), where including
controls for income and LNE scores causes a negative estimated effect of being white on
progress through secondary school.
    The result is also similar to results in the U.S., where controls for family background and
test scores typically reverse the racial gap in educational outcomes. For example, Cameron and
Heckman (2001) estimate a black-white gap of 0.11 in the probability of university enrollment,
conditional on high school completion, with the gap reversing to -0.08 in a counterfactual in
which blacks are assumed to have the same characteristics as whites. An interesting feature of
our result is that we begin with a much larger white-African gap, 0.31, and also end up with a
much larger gap in the other direction after controlling for characteristics, -0.22.
    One possible interpretation of the negative coefficient on the white variable in Regression 4
is that it is evidence of affirmative action in university admissions in favor of African students.
Many universities have explicit policies to promote the enrollment of historically disadvantaged
South Africans. To explore this issue further, Regression 5 leaves out parental education and


                                                    17
household income, since these are presumably not taken into account in the university
admissions process.    When we control for matric scores and LNE scores, whites are 11.6
percentage points less likely to be enrolled in university than are Africans. This provides some
evidence in favor of affirmative action in enrollment. It is important to recognize, though, that
our data are not ideal for analyzing the role of affirmative action in university admissions as we
have data on enrollment, not admission. It is possible that Africans are even more favored in
admission than suggested by Regression 5, conditional on academic achievement, but that this is
partially offset by obstacles to admissions such as lack of information about the application
process.
    The reversal of the white coefficient may also reflect the fact that African students who
receive high matriculation exam scores are highly selected on characteristics such as motivation
and drive that are unobserved in our data but may be observable to universities (for example,
through letters of recommendation). Students with test scores above 5 represent the top 12% of
African students, while 82% of white students have test scores above 5. Universities may
believe that African students who are able to achieve high scores in the face of extreme
disadvantage and lower quality schools are students who will also be able to achieve in
university.

                         C. Predicting other post-secondary education

    In Table 5 our measure of post-secondary enrollment is limited to university enrollment. As
shown in Figures 1 and 2, the relationship between income and post-secondary enrollment
appears to be different for universities of technology and other non-university programs such as
short-term certification programs. Table 6 presents regressions in which the outcome is post-
secondary enrollment conditional on not enrolling in university.       One motivation for these
regressions is that they might be viewed as describing the admission and enrollment decision
process for those who are not eligible to be admitted into university. We present the same
specifications shown in Table 5, beginning with simple race dummies and then adding controls
for family background and matriculation exam performance.
    Looking at Regression 1, whites are 22.7 percentage points more likely than Africans to
enroll in some kind of post-secondary education, conditional on not enrolling in university. This
gap completely disappears when we control for grade 12 household per capita income in
Regression 2. There is a strong relationship between income and post-secondary enrollment.

                                                  18
The derivative is 0.12 at the mean, similar to the result in Table 5. We continue to estimate a
positive coefficient on the quadratic term, but it is significant only at the 10% level. Looking at
Regression 3, the apparent impact of income on non-university enrollment falls when we control
for parental education, though not as much as it did in Table 5. As in Table 5, controlling for
parental education drives the coefficient on white to almost zero, losing statistical significance.
    Adding matric scores and LNE scores in Regression 4 has a smaller impact on the income
coefficients in Table 6 than it did in Table 5. The derivative of enrollment with respect to log
income at the mean is 0.065, statistically significant at the 1% level. This suggests that credit
constraints may play a larger role in non-university enrollment than they do in university
enrollment. Although financial aid programs exist for some public non-university programs,
many non-university programs are private and do not offer financial assistance other than loan
programs that may be out of reach for low-income students.
    In Regression 4 we also see that matriculation exam scores have a smaller impact on non-
university enrollment than they do on university enrollment. A one point increase in the matric
score is associated with a 5.2 percentage point increase in the probability of enrollment in the 0-5
score range and a 14.5 percentage point increase in the 5-8 range.
    As in Table 5, the coefficient on the white dummy in Table 6 becomes negative when we
control for parental education, income, and high school academic achievement, although the -
.134 coefficient is smaller than the -.218 coefficient in Table 5. Interesting, when we control
only for matric scores and LNE scores in Regression 5, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the
enrollment rates of Africans and whites are identical.        This may reflect that there is less
affirmative action in non-university programs, although as noted, our data are not ideal for
identifying the role of affirmative action.

                               V.    Counterfactual Simulations

    Returning to the issue of the racial gap in post-secondary education, what do our results
suggest about the role that credit constraints have on the racial gap in post-secondary enrollment
in South Africa? How large would the racial gap in post-secondary education be if there were no
issues in financing higher education? Suppose universities, for example, were free and provided
free housing and meals, but no changes were made in the conditions that produce the large
disparities in high school scholastic achievement. Or suppose all poor parents got rich just when


                                                   19
their children were finishing high school, too late to make up for earlier disadvantage but in time
to pay for the best universities.
    Carneiro and Heckman (2002) took the approach of assuming that young people from the
richest quartile were financially unconstrained, calculating the gap between their enrollment and
the gap of other income quartiles within bands of AFQT scores and controlling for family
background. We take a modified version of this approach, predicting enrollment if we gave
everyone the median white income, or, alternatively, the white income at the 90th percentile. We
base the predictions on regression 4 in Tables 5 and 6, so that we are controlling for
matriculation exam scores, LNE scores, and parental education. This would tell us the impact of
credit constraints under the assumption that the only reason income affects enrollment in
Regression 4 is financial constraints, given that we have controlled for family background and
high school academic achievement. A different thought experiment imagines raising the high
school academic achievement of all young people without changing household income or
parental education. Specifically, we simulate giving everyone the median matriculation exam
score of whites (a score of 6) and the median white score on the literacy and numeracy exam (a
score of 1.38).
    We create these counterfactuals for two samples. First, we use the full sample used in the
regressions in Table 5. These counterfactuals are shown in columns 1-3 of Table 7. Second, we
use only the sample that had matric scores of at least 4. These counterfactuals, shown in
Columns 4-6, reflect the reality that no amount of income will increase enrollment for those
without the minimum requirements for admission. Referring to Figure 4, we focus our analysis
on the portion of the sample for which university enrollment appears to be an option, in the range
of test scores where there is a gap in enrollment between high-income and low-income youth.
    The first two rows of Table 7 show how much we have to increase household income in
order to give everyone the 50th and 90th percentile of white incomes (The 50th and 90th
percentiles of white log household per capita income are 1.38 and 2.16, respectively). Raising
Africans to white median income requires that incomes be an average of 12.1 times higher.
Raising African incomes to the white 90th percentile requires that incomes be an average of 27.8
times higher. This further illustrates the staggering income gap between whites and Africans.
Raising Africans to a matric exam score of 6.0 would require roughly doubling scores on
average, while raising Africans to the white median LNE score would require that scores


                                                  20
increase by an average of 4.6 times.
    Line 6 of Table 7 shows that African enrollment in university would increase from 12.9% to
16.2% if all Africans had median white income, but all other characteristics, including parental
education, matriculation exam scores, and LNE scores, remained constant. Coloured enrollment
would increase from 19.9% to 22.5%. White enrollment would fall slightly, since half of whites
would experience a decline in income and the biggest impact of income is at the top of the
distribution. The overall African-white enrollment gap only falls slightly, from 43.1 percentage
points to 39.5 percentage points. Even this probably overstates the role of financial constraints,
since household income in Regression 4 is likely to still be reflecting long-run dimensions of
advantage and disadvantage rather than simply the ability to pay for university.
    We get a considerably larger effect if we give everyone the income at the 90th percentile for
whites. This raises African enrollment to 20.6%, a 59% increase from the actual level. Coloured
enrollment rises to 26.8%, a 19% increase. White enrollment also increases as households move
up the steep portion of the income-university gradient. The absolute gap between whites and
Africans continues to fall from 43.1 percentage points to 39.5 percentage points, but the relative
gap falls from 4.3 times higher white enrollment at baseline to 2.9 times higher white enrollment
when everyone has the white 90th percentile income. 8
    If we focus on the group that had matric scores of at least 4, shown in columns 4-6, the
baseline probability of enrollment for Africans is 27.7%. This increases to 30.8% if everyone is
given white median income, and 35.1% if they are given the white 90th percentile income. The
levels of enrollment are higher in every case for this more select group (30% of Africans, 50% of
coloureds, and 94% of whites have matric scores of at least 4), but the overall impact of these
large increases in income is still quite modest relative to the baseline racial gap. 9
    What if we raise everyone’s test scores instead of raising their incomes? Row 8 shows
counterfactual in which we keep incomes (and everything else) at their original levels but
increase everyone’s matric scores and LNE scores to the median score for whites. This has a
much larger impact on university enrollment than does raising incomes. African enrollment rises
to 53.4%; coloured enrollment rises to 49.8%. White enrollment falls slightly, since half of

8
  Moving from everyone having white median income to everyone having white 90th percentile income is
an additive shift in enrollment for everyone, so the absolute gap between groups does not change.
9
  If we re-estimate the regressions using only the sample with matric scores above 4, the predicted
counterfactuals are very similar to those shown in Columns 4-6.

                                                     21
whites experience a score reduction, with white enrollment ending up below African enrollment.
This is mainly because we continue to assume that Africans have a 21.8 percentage point higher
intercept than whites as in Regression 4. In other words, we assume that whatever causes
Africans to overachieve in enrollment relative to their test scores, income, and parental
education, this continues to be the case in the counterfactual world in which their test scores rise
to the level of whites. While this may seem unrealistic, it is important to note that we made the
same assumption in the counterfactual for higher incomes, but Africans still ended up with far
lower enrollment than whites, even when income was set to the white 90th percentile. The key
point is that the coefficients in Regression 4 of Table 5 imply that raising African incomes to the
white 90th percentile would raise their university enrollment by 7.7 percentage points, while
raising African test scores to the white median would raise their enrollment by 41 percentage
points. Clearly high school academic achievement is far more important in explaining the racial
gap in university enrollment than is the ability to pay for university.
    Lines 9-10 show the same counterfactuals using enrollment in any post-secondary
institution, conditional on not being enrolled in university. In this case giving everyone the
median white income has a larger effect than it did for university enrollment. We predict that
Africans would move from 40.2% enrollment to 53.9% enrollment if they all had median white
income. The white-African enrollment gap falls from 46 percentage points to 33 percentage
points. Moving from the 50th to the 90th percentile increases African enrollment to 62.2%.
    Raising matric and LNE scores to the white medians has a smaller impact on enrollment in
non-university institutions than it has on university enrollment, a result of the smaller
coefficients on test scores in Regression 4 of Table 6 compared to Table 5. It is still the case,
however, that giving Africans the median test scores of whites has a bigger impact on the racial
gap in enrollment than giving Africans even the 90th percentile of white income.
    In sum, Table 7 implies the following estimates of the impact of credit constraints on post-
secondary enrollment, using the counterfactual where we make everyone rich (giving them the
white 90th percentile income) but do not change their parental education or high school academic
achievement: If credit constraints were eliminated in this way, enrollment in university would
increase by 7.7 percentage points (59%) for Africans, 6.9 percentage points (35%) for coloureds,
and 4 percentage points (7%) for whites. Enrollment in post-secondary institutions among those
who do not attend university would increase by 22 percentage points (55%) for Africans, 16


                                                    22
percentage points (39%) for coloureds, and 8 percentage points (10%) for whites. These are
almost surely upper bounds on the role of credit constraints, however, since they assume that all
of the apparent impact of income that remains when we control for test scores and parental
education is due to credit constraints. Income could be picking up many other things, however.
For example, the fact that we get the highest impact of income at the top of the distribution
suggests that there is something about the very rich that gives them an advantage in university
enrollment. While this could be the ability to pay for university, it could also be that these
students go to elite high schools where everything about going to university is made simpler –
counseling, help with applications, and peer support.                 Even controlling for academic
achievement and parental education, these high-income students may be more likely to apply, get
admitted, and enroll.
       Even if we thought that lower fees or more generous financial aid could approximate our
simulated impact of giving everyone the income of the 90th percentile white, the racial gap in
post-secondary enrollment would remain extremely large. Whites would still be 2.9 times as
likely as Africans and 2.2 times as likely as coloured youth to go to university. Whites would be
52% more likely than Africans and 62% more likely than coloured youth to enroll in non-
university institutions, conditional on not attending university.

                                      VI.     Robustness of Results

       Our key results are robust to a number of alternative sample restrictions and econometric
specifications. As shown in Table 3, one concern about our sample is that we have considerable
attrition among those who were in the lowest grades in our 2002 baseline sample. We have
included everyone in our sample who ever completed grade 12 by 2007 in order to boost sample
size. Those who were in Grade 7 in 2002, however, can only have completed grade 12 if they
passed every grade on schedule. This will be a select group in primarily black schools, and
might introduce some bias in our results. We have re-estimated our results using only the sample
that was in at least Grade 10 in 2002. As shown in Table 3, we follow over 85% of this group
for two years beyond their expected year of passing grade 12. The results with this lower-
attrition sample are very similar to the results in Table 5 and 6 10.
       We have also estimated the regressions in Tables 5 and 6 in a number of different ways.

10
     These results are available from the authors on request.

                                                         23
Estimating probit regressions rather than OLS regressions produces very similar results. This
might be considered important for our simulations, since our OLS regressions generate predicted
values outside the 0-1 range for a non-trivial number of cases. Generating the counterfactuals
using probit regressions produces very similar results 11.
       We have also estimated the regressions separately by race. While the smaller sample sizes
cause these estimates to be less precise than our estimates with the pooled sample, we cannot
reject equality of coefficients between races for any of the variables shown in Tables 5 and 6,
with the exception of the coefficient on father’s education between the African and white
regressions. This is not surprising, given the fairly similar slopes by race in Figures 1 and 2.

                                 VII.     Summary and Conclusions

       Panel data from Cape Town indicate a strong positive relationship between the household
income experienced by students when they were finishing secondary school and subsequent
enrollment in post-secondary education.              Given the large apparent impact of income on
university enrollment and the enormous income differences between whites and Africans,
income experienced during late high school can in and of itself statistically account for most of
the 31 percentage point gap between Africans and whites in university enrollment.
       Following the approach of previous U.S. literature, we show that controlling for high school
academic achievement and parental education greatly reduces the apparent effect of high school
income on university enrollment. The association between income and university enrollment
does not entirely go away, however. Even with controls for parental education, matriculation
exam scores, and our CAPS literacy and numeracy exam score, we continue to estimate an
impact of income on university enrollment at high income levels – a 10% increase in income
increases university enrollment by 0.3 percentage points, evaluated at the mean income for
whites. Given this, we show that if Africans were given the incomes of the 90th percentile
whites, holding parental education and high school achievement constant, they would experience
a 65% increase in university enrollment. In spite of substantial efforts to provide financial
support to highly qualified students from disadvantaged backgrounds, it appears that rich South
Africans are still better able to access university, holding grade 12 matriculation exam scores
constant. This suggests that it may be possible to do more to make university accessible to low-

11
     These results are available from the authors on request.

                                                         24
income students.
    We find greater evidence of credit constraints in post-secondary programs outside of
university. When we look at the enrollment in post-secondary programs of students who do not
enroll in university, high school household income remains an important predictor of enrollment
even after we control for parental education, matric exam scores, and LNE scores. A 10%
increase in income is associated with a 0.65 percentage point increase in enrollment, evaluated at
mean log income. In our counterfactual in which all Africans are given the median income of
whites, without changing exam scores or parental education, enrollment in post-secondary
education among those not attending university increases by 43%.
    While these results suggest that it may be possible to do more to make post-secondary
education accessible to low-income students, it is important to recognize that removing financial
constraints alone would only slightly reduce the racial gap in post-secondary enrollment. Most
of the gap is due to the enormous gaps in previous academic achievement. In our upper bound
estimates in which we give everyone the income of the 90th percentile white – implying an
average 28-fold increase in African incomes – whites continue to have a 34 percentage point
higher university enrollment rate. Even this likely overstates the gains that could be made from
easing financial constraints alone, since it assumes that the estimated impact of income when we
control for test scores and parental education is entirely due to short-run financial constraints.
    It is important to point out that existing financial aid programs may be playing an important
role in making higher education, especially university education, accessible to low-income
students. We have no way to tell what would happen to enrollment if current financial aid
programs were eliminated. So while it appears that additional increases in financial assistance
would have only modest effects on enrollment, this does not mean that the current programs are
not having a large impact on overall enrollment and the racial gap in enrollment.
    Our results suggest that what is really needed to close the racial gap in post-secondary
education in South Africa is to improve the learning outcomes for non-white South Africans at
earlier stages in the educational system. The CAPS literacy and numeracy exam and the results
of nationally standardized grade 12 matriculation exams indicate that by the end of high school
there are already enormous racial gaps in academic achievement. It is this gap in high school
academic achievement that plays the major role in explaining the racial gap in postsecondary
education. Our results indicate that if Africans had the same matric scores and LNE scores as


                                                    25
whites, they would have higher university enrollment than whites, even without changing the
racial gap in income. While there may be room for policies to reduce financial constraints on
post-secondary education, our results suggest that little progress will be made in reducing the
racial gap in post-secondary education until there is progress in reducing achievement gaps at
earlier schooling levels.




                                                26
                                      REFERENCES

Anderson, Kermyt G., Anne Case, and David Lam, 2001. Causes and Consequences of
   Schooling Outcomes in South Africa: Evidence from Survey Data. Social Dynamics 27(1),
   1-23.
Aud, Susan., SidneyWilkinson-Flicker, Paul Kristapovich, Amy Rathbun, Xiaolei Wang, and
   Jijun Zhang, 2013. The Condition of Education 2013 (NCES 2013-037). U.S. Department of
   Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC.
Belley, Philippe, and Lance Lochner, 2007. The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability
    in Determining Educational Achievement. Journal of Human Capital 1(1), 37-89.
Bhorat, Haroon, and Morne Oosthuizen, 2008. Determinants of Grade 12 Pass Rates in the Post-
   Apartheid South African Schooling System. Journal of African Economies 18(4), 634-666.
Branson, Nicola, David Lam, and Linda Zuze, 2012. Education: Analysis of the NIDS Wave 1
    and 2 Datasets, National Income Dynamics Study Discussion Paper 2012/4.
Cameron, Stephen V., and James Heckman, 2001. The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for
   Black, Hispanic, and White Males. Journal of Political Economy 109(3), 455-499.
Carneiro, Pedro, and James Heckman, 2002. The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-
    Secondary Schooling. Economic Journal 112(482), 705-734.
Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton, 1999. School Inputs and Education Outcomes in South Africa.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics August, 114(3), 1047-84.
Department of Higher Education and Training, 2010. Report of the Ministerial Committee on the
   Review of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme. Pretoria.
Department of Education, 2006. South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 or 1996) Amended
   National Norms and Standards for School Funding. Government Gazette 29179, notice No.
   869.
Fiske, Edward, and Helen Ladd, 2004. Elusive equity: Education reform in post-apartheid.
    Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Gurgand, Marc, Adrien Lorenceau, and Thomas Mélonio, 2011. Student loans: Liquidity
   Constraint and Higher education in South Africa. Agence Française de Développement
   Working Paper No. 117, September 2011.
Keane, Michael P., and Kenneth I. Wolpin, 2001. The Effect of Parental Transfers and
   Borrowing Constraints on Educational Attainment. International Economic Review 42(4),
   1051-1103.
Lam, David, Cally Ardington, and Murray Leibbrandt, 2011. Schooling as a Lottery: Racial
   Differences in Progress through School in Urban South Africa. Journal of Development
   Economics, 95(2):121-136.
Lam, David, Cally Ardington, Nicola Branson, Anne Case, Murray Leibbrandt, Brendan
   Maughan-Brown, Alicia Menendez, Jeremy Seekings and Meredith Sparks, 2012. The Cape
   Area Panel Study: Overview and Technical Documentation of Waves 1-2-3-4-5 (2002-
   2009). The University of Cape Town, October 2012.


                                               27
Lochner, Lance, and Alexander Monge-Naranjo, 2011. The Nature of Credit Constraints and
   Human Capital. American Economic Review 101(6): 2487–2529.
Lovenheim, Michael, 2011. The Effect of Liquid Housing Wealth on College Enrollment.
   Journal of Labor Economics, 29 (4): 741-771.
Mwabu, Germano, and T. Paul Schultz, 2000. Wage Premia for Education and Location of South
  African Workers, by Gender and Race. Economic Development and Cultural Change 48(2),
  307-334.
Spaull, Nicolas, 2012. Poverty and Privilege: Primary School Inequality in South Africa.
    University of Stellenbosch Working Paper Series No. WP13/2012.
University of Cape Town, 2012. Admissions Policy 2012. Document downloaded September 5,
    2012: http://www.uct.ac.za/downloads/uct.ac.za/about/policies/admissions_policy_2012.pdf
van der Berg, Servaas, 2007. Apartheid’s Enduring Legacy: Inequalities in Education. Journal of
    African Economies 16(5), 849-880.
Yamauchi, Futoshi, 2005. Race, Equity and Public Schools in Post-apartheid South Africa: Equal
   Opportunity for All Kids. Economics of Education Review (24), 213-33.




                                                 28
     Table 1. Educational attainment of 25-29 year-olds, South Africa 2002-2010

                                African                  Coloured            White
Educational               2002- 2005- 2008-          2002- 2005- 2008- 2002- 2005- 2008-
attainment                2004 2007 2010             2004 2007 2010 2004 2007 2010
Less than grade 9          25.7     22.8     19.6     31.0   21.1    18.5     1.7    3.5      2.2
Grade 9                     8.3      9.0      9.0     11.1   9.9     10.6     1.8    1.5      1.4
Grade 10                   11.6     11.9     13.1     10.9   12.2    14.0     12.2   10.4     7.1
Grade 11                   15.7     17.2     18.1     7.4    12.0    11.0     3.2    3.9      1.6
Grade 12                   31.3     31.5     31.8     33.8   37.1    36.7     47.8   47.3    48.9
Post-matric
 diploma/certificate       5.1      5.9      6.9      4.3     5.9     7.2     15.3   15.3    20.4
University degree          2.3      1.7      1.5      1.6     1.8     2.0     18.0   18.1    18.3

At least grade 12          38.7     39.1     40.2     39.7   44.8    45.9     81.2   80.7    87.6
Beyond grade 12             7.4      7.6      8.3     5.9    7.8     9.2      33.3   33.4    38.8

% of grade 12s
 going further             19.1     19.4     20.8     14.9   17.3    20.1     41.1   41.4    44.2
% of grade 12s with
 university degree         5.8      4.4      3.6      4.1     4.1     4.3     22.2   22.4    20.9

Observations              18606 19464 19077          2552 3192 2324          1547 1080       893

Data Source: South Africa General Household Survey 2002-20010
Note: University degrees include degrees from traditional universities, comprehensive universities,
and universities of technology
 Table 2. Returns to schooling, South Africa men and
                  women aged 25-59

Education level        African        Coloured       White
Grade 10              0.121***        0.200***      0.0901*
                      [0.013]          [0.022]       [0.052]
Grade 11              0.164***        0.231***      0.292***
                      [0.012]          [0.023]       [0.033]
Grade 12              0.291***        0.297***      0.0666**
                      [0.010]          [0.021]       [0.027]
Diploma/Certificate   0.897***        0.523***      0.231***
                      [0.011]          [0.021]       [0.017]
University degree     0.515***        0.459***      0.370***
                      [0.016]          [0.035]       [0.019]
Observations          112,758         24,309         17,258
R-squared              0.422           0.463          0.241

Data Source: South Africa Labour Force Survey 2000-2007.
Notes: Standard errors in brackets; significance levels: *=0.1,
**=.05, ***=0.01; Regressions also include age, age squared,
dummies for grades 1-9, male, year, and province dummies;
coefficient is return relative to next lower level




                                 30
                         Table 3. Sample Composition and Attrition

                                                      Percent observed:
                         2 years after   Ever   With result for   Passing      2 years after
                 Wave 1 expected high enrolled grade 12, given grade 12,      grade 12, given
                 sample     school     in grade  observed in    given result observed passing
                  size    graduation      12      grade 12       observed        grade 12
                   (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)            (5)             (6)
Grade in 2002:
  Grade 12        390        88.2%      100.0%          78.5%         84.6%       95.2%
  Grade 11        465        89.5%      77.8%           90.1%         83.7%       93.7%
  Grade 10        572        81.6%      55.2%           79.7%         80.2%       91.6%
  Grade 9         660        68.2%      45.2%           53.4%         79.9%       80.8%
  Grade 8         399        66.4%      32.3%           20.2%         73.1%      100.0%
  Grade 7         205        67.8%       8.3%           47.1%         87.5%       88.9%

Population Group:
  African/Black 1305         77.0%      50.4%           68.8%         74.4%       93.4%
  Coloured       1025        85.3%      55.9%           74.7%         85.3%       95.8%
  White           361        56.0%      77.8%           69.8%         94.4%       80.5%

  Total           2691       77.3%      56.2%           71.2%         82.4%       91.9%
Data source: Cape Area Panel Study




                                                 31
                Table 4. Mean and Standard Deviation for Key Variables

                                             African (N=493) Coloured (N=520) White (N=263)
     Variable                                Mean      SD     Mean      SD    Mean     SD
   Proportion enrolled within 2 years
   of passing grade 12:
 1     University                             0.13        0.33   0.18     0.39     0.49     0.50
 2     University of Technology               0.16        0.37   0.11     0.31     0.10     0.30
 3     Other tertiary                         0.19        0.40   0.19     0.39     0.27     0.44
 4      Any tertiary institution              0.44        0.50   0.46     0.50     0.83     0.38
 5      Any tertiary, given not university    0.35        0.48   0.34     0.48     0.66     0.48
 6 Standardized LNE score, 2002              -0.09        0.75   0.62     0.60     1.38     0.46
 7 Matric Score (0-8)                        3.53         1.18   4.23     1.21     5.97     1.34
 8 Number of grades failed by 2002            0.61        0.77   0.31     0.62     0.10     0.38

     Per capita household income in
 9
     high school (rands/month)                536         611    1484    1692      4247     3731

10 Log per capita household income
   (zero mean)                               -0.78        0.84   0.19     0.86     1.36     0.69
     Educational expenditure in high
11
     school, 2002 (rands/year)                928         3782   1410    3378      6998     6536
     Educational expenditure on post
12
     secondary (rands/year)                  4651         5592   8002    6969     13212    10438

13   Mother's education (grades)              9.0         3.3     9.7      2.7     12.9     1.9
14   Father's education (grades)              8.5         3.8     9.9      3.1     13.2     2.1
15   Age in 2002                              17.7        2.2    17.1      1.8     17.1     1.7
16   Female                                   0.58        0.49   0.56     0.50     0.50     0.50
     Data source: Cape Area Panel Study
     Notes: Some respondents were enrolled in more than one type of tertiary institution, so row 5
     is smaller than the sum of rows 1-4. FET is Further Education and Training. LNE is CAPS
     Literacy and Numeracy Evaluation, standardized for the full 14-22 sample. Household
     income is measured as close as possible to grade 12 (see discussion in text). One rand
     equaled roughly 4 PPP US dollars in 2002.




                                                     32
  Table 5. OLS regressions for probability of enrollment in university
                 within two years of passing grade 12

Variable                            Regression coefficients and standard errors
                                      (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)
Coloured                             0.002  -0.067** -0.057** -0.094*** -0.089***
                                    [0.028]  [0.030]  [0.028] [0.026]    [0.026]
White                               0.312***      0.074      -0.025 -0.218*** -0.116***
                                     [0.042]     [0.052]     [0.050] [0.046]   [0.044]
Female                               0.019        0.028       0.017       0.003        0.007
                                    [0.028]      [0.027]     [0.026]     [0.022]      [0.023]
Log hh per cap income in                        0.111*** 0.050***         0.013
grade 12 (zero mean)                            [0.014]   [0.015]        [0.013]
Log hh per cap income                           0.032*** 0.026***        0.011**
squared                                         [0.007]   [0.007]        [0.006]
Mother's schooling                                          0.021*** 0.013***
                                                             [0.005] [0.005]
Father's schooling                                          0.035*** 0.023***
                                                             [0.005] [0.005]
Matric score spline (0-5)                                                0.050*** 0.067***
                                                                         [0.013]   [0.014]
Matric score spline (5-8)                                                0.246*** 0.276***
                                                                         [0.021]   [0.020]
Standardized LNE score                                                   0.069*** 0.094***
                                                                         [0.019]   [0.020]

Observations                         1,276        1,276       1,276       1,276        1,276
R2                                   0.138        0.200       0.272       0.433        0.395
Data source: Cape Area Panel Study
Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%. Marginal effects evaluated at sample means. All regressions also include age and
age squared (in 2002) and dummy variables for year of graduation. Regressions that
include parental schooling and test scores also include dummy variables for missing
parental schooling and test scores.




                                                 33
  Table 6. OLS regressions for probability of enrollment in post-secondary
    institution within two years of passing grade 12, conditional on not
                            enrolling in university

Variable                             Regression coefficients and standard errors
                                    (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)
Coloured                         -0.074**  -0.160*** -0.157*** -0.186*** -0.148***
                                  [0.036]   [0.041]    [0.039]    [0.044]   [0.041]
White                            0.227***        0.008        -0.049         -0.134*        0.022
                                 [0.055]        [0.074]       [0.073]        [0.081]       [0.072]
Female                           -0.003          0.015         0.017          0.020         0.010
                                 [0.035]        [0.034]       [0.034]        [0.033]       [0.033]
Log hh per cap income                          0.120***       0.093***      0.065***
in grade 12 (zero mean)                        [0.022]        [0.023]        [0.023]
Log hh per cap income                           0.020*        0.017*          0.010
squared                                         [0.010]       [0.010]        [0.011]
Mother's schooling                                            0.035***      0.033***
                                                              [0.007]        [0.007]
Father's schooling                                            -0.006          -0.008
                                                              [0.007]        [0.007]
Matric score spline (0-5)                                                    0.052**       0.062***
                                                                             [0.023]       [0.023]
Matric score spline (5-8)                                                   0.145***       0.184***
                                                                             [0.056]       [0.055]
Standardized LNE total                                                       0.051*        0.077***
score                                                                        [0.026]       [0.027]

Observations                      1,013          1,013         1,013          1,013         1,013
R2                                0.093          0.130         0.159          0.192         0.149
Data source: Cape Area Panel Study
Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Marginal effects evaluated at sample means. All regressions also include age and age squared (in
2002) and dummy variables for year of graduation. Regressions that include parental schooling
and test scores also include dummy variables for missing parental schooling and test scores.




                                                    34
Table 7. Simulated enrollment when incomes and test scores are set equal to
                             values for whites
                 (Based on regression 4 in Tables 5 and 6)

                                         Full Sample               Matric Score >=4
                                   African Coloured White      African Coloured White
                                     (1)      (2)    (3)         (4)      (5)     (6)
Average multiple required to give everyone:
1. White median income              12.1       4.8      1.1        11.5     3.5     1.1
 2. White 90th percentile income     27.8     11.0      2.6        26.4     8.1     2.5
 3. Matric score of 6                1.9       1.5      1.1        1.3      1.2     1.0
 4. White median LNE score           4.6       3.6      1.1        3.1      2.4     1.1
Predicted university enrollment:
5. Actual income and scores      0.129        0.199   0.560        0.277   0.317   0.600
 6. White median income          0.162        0.225   0.557        0.308   0.340   0.596
 7. White 90th percentile income 0.206        0.268   0.600        0.351   0.383   0.639
 8. White median test scores     0.534        0.498   0.525        0.561   0.528   0.532
Predicted enrollment, conditional on not enrolled in university:
 9. Actual income and scores     0.402        0.419   0.863        0.544   0.515   0.892
10. White median income          0.539        0.501   0.864        0.671   0.583   0.890
11. White 90th percentile income 0.622        0.583   0.947        0.754   0.666   0.973
12. White median test scores     0.692        0.626   0.847        0.734   0.653   0.853
Note:Predictions using actual income and test scores are the predicted values by race
from regression 4. Predictions changing income use actual values for test scores and
other variables. Predictions changing test scores use actual values for income and other
variables.




                                              35
               Figure 1. Proportion enrolled in post-secondary education within 2 years of matric,
                                       by household income in grade 12

                          White
      1


                          African
      .9



                          Coloured
                          All
      .8
      .7




                                            Any post-secondary
.4 .5 .6
  Proportion
      .3
      .2




                                                                      University
      .1




                                                                     Lowess estimates, top and bottom 1% trimmed
      0




               -4        -3          -2         -1         0          1         2                      3           4
                                      Log per capita household income (zero mean)
      .8




                          White
                          African
                          Coloured
                          All
      .6
Density
  .4  .2
      0




               -4         -3         -2        -1         0          1         2                       3           4
                                     Log per capita household income (zero mean)




                                                         36
                   Figure 2. Proportion enrolled in post-secondary education by household income,
                                    conditional on not being enrolled in university
     1
                      White
                      African
     .9


                      Coloured
                      All
     .8
.4 .5 .6 .7
 Proportion
     .3
     .2
     .1




                                                                Lowess estimates, top and bottom 1% trimmed
     0




              -4    -3         -2       -1       0        1        2                            3             4
                            Log per capita household income (zero mean)




                                                     37
                           Figure 3. Matriculation exam score by high school household income


       8               White
                       Coloured
                       African
       7


                       All
             6
Matric score
     5 4
       3
       2




                 -4   -3         -2       -1       0        1        2                            3             4
                              Log per capita household income (zero mean)



                                                                  Lowess estimates, top and bottom 1% trimmed




                                                        38
               Figure 4. Proportion enrolled in post-secondary education within 2 years of matric,
                                          by matriculation exam score

                          High income
      1

                          Middle income
                          Low income
      .9



                                                             Any post-secondary
                          All
      .8
      .7
  Proportion
.4 .5 .6
      .3
      .2




                                                                                  University
      .1
      0




                                                                        Lowess estimates, top and bottom 1% trimmed



                          1             2       3        4              5                6                7               8
                                                    Matric score
      .4




                                                                                                         High income
                                                                                                         Middle income
                                                                                                         Low income
                                                                                                         All
      .3
Density
  .2  .1
      0




                  0             1           2   3        4          5                6               7                8
                                                    Matric score




                                                        39
