                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      COLLATERAL VALUATION AND BORROWER FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS:
          EVIDENCE FROM THE RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE MARKET

                                            Sumit Agarwal
                                          Itzhak Ben-David
                                             Vincent Yao

                                        Working Paper 19606
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19606


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We benefited from the comments of Brent Ambrose, Effi Benmelech (NBER discussant), Joao Coco,
Yongheng Deng, Ted Durant, Mike Faulkner, Paula Sapienza, Antoinette Schoar, Amit Seru, Susan
Wachter, Wenlan Qian, Larry White, Yildiray Yildirim, and Luigi Zingales, as well as from those
of seminar participants at the NBER Corporate Finance Meeting, Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, and
Weimer School of Advanced Studies in Real Estate and Land Economics. The views in this paper are
those of the authors and may not reflect those of Fannie Mae. Itzhak Ben-David gratefully acknowledges
the financial support of the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University,
and of the Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19606.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Sumit Agarwal, Itzhak Ben-David, and Vincent Yao. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Collateral Valuation and Borrower Financial Constraints: Evidence from the Residential Real
Estate Market
Sumit Agarwal, Itzhak Ben-David, and Vincent Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 19606
October 2013
JEL No. D03,D1,D10,D12,D14,D18,G01,G02,G17,G2,G21,G23,G30,K20,L85,R2,R21,R3,R31,R51

                                              ABSTRACT

Financially constrained borrowers have the incentive to influence the appraisal process in order to
increase borrowing or reduce the interest rate. We document that the average valuation bias for residential
refinance transactions is above 5%. The bias is larger for highly leveraged transactions, around critical
leverage thresholds, and for transactions mediated through a broker. Mortgages with inflated valuations
default more often; however, lenders partly account for the valuation bias through pricing.


Sumit Agarwal                                                Vincent Yao
Associate Professor of Finance and Real Estate               Fannie Mae
NUS Business School                                          3900 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
Mochtar Raidy Building, BIZ1                                 Washington, DC 20016-2892
15 Kent Ridge Road                                           vincent_w_yao@fanniemae.com
Singapore, 119245
ushakri@yahoo.com

Itzhak Ben-David
Associate professor of finance and
Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
1.       Introduction

         Collateral is a central feature of the vast majority of credit contracts (e.g., Johnson and

Stulz, 1985; Berger and Udell, 1990; Aghion and Bolton, 1992; Hart and Moore, 1994, 1998;

Hart, 1995; Tirole, 2005; Benmelech and Bergman, 2009). Valuations are typically performed by

experts, who have knowledge about the specific market. While experts attempt to provide

unbiased opinions about the value of assets, they may be subject pressures to bias their valuation

by the parties involved: lenders, intermediaries, or even borrowers. Although an extensive

theoretical and empirical literature in corporate finance focuses on the contracting aspect of

collateral,1 very little is known about the methodology for valuing collateral.

         Experts’ valuations, however, may be attenuated by financially-constrained borrowers.

Those borrowers are likely to be motivated to maximize the debt capacity of their assets or to

minimize their interest payments, and they can do so by influencing the valuation process; a

higher valuation for an asset means a higher debt capacity and a lower interest rate.2 If such

influence indeed exists, then the observed leverage of originated loans (measured as the loan-to-

value ratio) could be underestimated (since the valuation component is overestimated).3 While

anecdotal evidence suggests such pressure by and on behalf of borrowers, no systematic study

1
  Economic theory explains the role of collateral in debt contracts as an attempt to mitigate agency costs or
contracting frictions in a world with asymmetric information. Chan and Thakor (1987) argue that collateral
alleviates the adverse selection problem, while Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) argue that collateral alleviates the
moral hazard problem. Inderst and Mueller (2007) show that collateral allows local banks that use soft information
to be more competitive than banks that use hard information in their lending. Benmelech, Garmaise, and Moskowitz
(2005) find that liquidation values of collateralized assets are first-order determinants of loan contract terms. Vig
(2013), using a natural experiment, finds that strengthening creditor rights forces firms to alter their debt structure.
Berger, Espinosa-Vega, Frame, and Miller (2011) present empirical evidence that the introduction of information
technology reduced the incidence of using collateral in lending, suggesting that collateral solves an asymmetric
information problem.
2
  Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2013) find evidence that lenders, when making lending decisions, put a lot of weight on
observable “hard” information such as asset values.
3
  For a broader literature on the evidence linking the creation of the real estate bubble in the early 2000s to
misaligned incentives, see Mian and Sufi (2010), Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van de Klaauw (2011), Keys,
Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2010), Agarwal and Ben-David (2012), Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund (2009), Agarwal,
Chang, and Yavas (2012), Piskorski, Seru, and Vig (2010), and Agarwal, Amromin, Ben-David, Chomsisengphet,
and Evanoff (2011).

                                                           1
has examined the phenomenon and quantified the economic effect. Thus, the goal of this paper is

to measure the effect of borrowers’ pressure to inflate valuations in the residential housing

market.

       Lenders in the real estate market rely heavily on experts (called appraisers) in estimating

the value of the collateral, especially in refinance transactions. In purchase transactions, lenders

typically consider prices of purchase transactions as reflecting unbiased market valuations, but to

prevent fraud, they often request an appraisal to verify that the purchase price is reasonable. In

refinance transactions, however, there is no market price available; thus, lenders rely solely on

appraisers to determine the value of the collateral. In residential real estate, appraisers primarily

determine this value by compiling recent purchase prices of comparable assets—a method that is

subjective, as appraisers have a lot of leeway in determining which properties to use as

comparables.

       While it is hard to determine whether pressure on appraisers comes directly from

borrowers, or through intermediaries and lenders, we can measure the size of the bias using a

dataset of transactions and appraisals. Our estimation approach relies on comparing purchase

prices of properties to previous valuations of refinance (refi) transactions for the same property.

Like appraisers, we assume that prices of purchase transactions reflect an unbiased estimate of

the property value. Thus, the difference between the sales price and the valuation used in the

preceding refi transaction reflects a valuation bias. To account for systematic trends in home

prices, we also include in our sample prices of pairs of purchase transactions for the same

properties.

       We apply our measurement methodology to a large sample of more than one million pairs

of conforming mortgage transactions that were originated between 1990 and 2011. We find that



                                                 2
valuations in refinance transactions are 4.6% higher for rate and term refis and about 6.8%

higher for cash-out refis, compared to the prices of purchase transactions on the same properties.

       The bias is stronger when the parties involved in the transaction have stronger incentives

to bias valuations. We document that the magnitude of the bias is positively correlated with the

leverage of borrowers. This relationship, however, weakens once we control for location and

time fixed effects, presumably because these controls are highly correlated with refinance

activity interacted with leverage. We show that the relation between the valuation bias and

leverage is especially strong in nonrecourse states where borrowers are not personally liable for

the mortgage balance, perhaps because borrowers see a smaller downside to influencing

appraisers in those states.

       To understand the economic mechanism better, we study the determinants of the bias in

the cross-section of properties. We find that the magnitude of the valuation bias is affected by the

incentives of mortgage originators and borrowers in four primary ways. First, refinance

mortgages that were originated by third-party originators (e.g., mortgage brokers) have an extra

valuation bias of about 2.0 percentage points. These originators sell all of their loans to

aggregators and therefore do not bear the liability from borrower default. They thus are more

willing to influence the valuations in order to close the deal. Second, there are strong lender fixed

effects: some lenders are persistently more prone to valuation bias than others. We document that

the valuation bias is stronger among lenders who had exhibited strong bias in the past. Third, the

magnitude of the valuation bias decreases dramatically as loan sizes approach the jumbo-loan

cutoff limit. Close to this threshold, borrowers have weaker motivation to inflate valuations, as

the size of the loan is already limited. Fourth, the magnitude of the valuation bias is higher for

rate/term refinance loans that are at or below the leverage thresholds at which mortgage rates



                                                 3
increase. This finding is consistent with the idea that these borrowers influence appraisals to

reduce their mortgage costs.

         We next investigate whether valuation bias is related to default. Indeed, we find evidence

supporting our hypothesis that the likelihood of default is higher for transactions in which

valuations are inflated. To understand whether correcting for the valuation bias better explains

default patterns, we conduct a horse race between the observed leverage and the estimated true

leverage. The correction is made according to the type of mortgage, leverage, and origination

channel. Our results show that the bias-corrected leverage contains additional information about

the likelihood of default that is not contained in the observed leverage. This result explains why

cash-out refinance loans pose greater credit risk (Elul, Souleles, Chomsisengphet, Glennon, and

Hunt, 2010) and are subject to stricter eligibility requirements and higher fees (Freddie Mac,

2012).

         Finally, we explore whether lenders charge higher interest rates to compensate for the

higher risk of default among loans with valuation bias. We find that lenders, indeed, charge

higher rates for mortgages that have higher valuation bias. Our analysis shows that controlling

for interest rate, and its polynomials, capture all the variation in valuation bias, thus

demonstrating that lenders partly accounting for valuation bias through pricing.

         Given that lenders appear to be aware of the valuation bias and adjust their interest rates

accordingly, we are intrigued by the role of valuation inflation in the lending process. Why do

financially constrained borrowers not simply borrow larger amounts without needing to put

pressure on lenders and appraisers? The main reason is that lenders are bound to 100% LTV

lending by regulators (in case of banks)4 or the practice of the secondary market. If lenders did


4
 For example, see bank restrictions on loan-to-value by property type:
http://www.fdic.gov/regulations/laws/rules/2000-8700.html

                                                         4
not tolerate valuation inflation, they could lose business from financially constrained borrowers,

a large segment of the market. In turn, some borrowers likely would not refinance their

mortgages unless they received attractive valuations on their houses.5 Hence, lenders effectively

collude with borrowers to lend them larger amounts than dictated by capital providers. This idea

is consistent with Zingales’ (2012) claim that lenders bent the rules during the credit boom

period (early 2000s) to expand the supply of credit.

        There are two concerns with our empirical methodology: potential selection bias into the

sample, and potential changes over time in the quality of transacted homes. We run additional

tests to verify that our results are not affected by these factors. The tests show that the results are

largely robust.

        Overall, our results are consistent with the idea that financially constrained borrowers

influence valuations of collateralized assets. Valuations in refinance transactions are

systematically inflated relative to purchase transactions, and therefore have higher leverage than

what can be observed by outsiders. Although collateral valuation seems like a piece of hard

information (see Petersen, 2004), it is subject to manipulation. This effect is especially

pronounced for highly leveraged transactions and for mortgages originated by third-party

originators. Our results suggest both that borrowers adversely select into the contract and that

lenders are aware of the inflation of collateral values and price mortgages accordingly.

        The question of attenuation of collateral valuation relates also to the growing literature

about the manipulation of asset values and credit quality during the housing boom. Ben-David

(2011) presents evidence that homebuyers collude with home sellers to inflate transaction prices

5
  In Figure 1 we present evidence for the demand for leverage: the plot shows the fraction of mortgages that were
originated with 100% loan-to-value in Loan Performance database (securitized subprime and Alt-A loans) as well as
in our dataset (conforming loans). The plot shows that during the credit expansion years, the fraction of 100% LTV
loans increased dramatically: by 25 percentage points for the subprime loan data, and by 15 percentage points for the
confirming loan data.

                                                         5
in order to increase the debt capacity of the house. Also, Jiang, Nelson, and Vytlacil (2009)

provide evidence that borrowers inflate their personal income, and Garmaise (2012) shows that

borrowers    inflate   their   reported   personal    assets.   Agarwal,    Ben-David,     Amromin,

Chomsisengphet, Evanoff (2013) document that predatory lending (i.e., manipulations by

lenders) was an important factor in borrower default during the financial crisis. Griffin and

Maturana (2013) and Piskorski, Seru, and Witkin (2013) document that mispricings (such as

unreported second liens, appraisal overstatements, owner occupancy misreporting, and flipping)

were common in securitized mortgage pools. Furthermore, these studies find that manipulation

activity is associated with a higher probability of default. More broadly, the valuation process of

any asset is potentially biased by pressures from the parties involved. Bolton, Freixas, and

Shapiro (2007) offer a general model for expert advice and conflict of interest. Michaely and

Womack (1999) show conflict of interest in security analysts’ opinions around IPOs. Allen,

Jagtiani, Peristiani, and Saunders (2004) find evidence for conflict of interest by banks as

advisors in mergers. White (2010) discusses the pressure that credit rating firms experience from

bond issuers.



2      Background

2.1    The Role of Appraisers in the Lending Process

       The real estate market has several characteristics that lead participants to seek the opinion

of experts (appraisers) regarding the valuation of assets that serve as collateral. Assets in the real

estate market are unique: no two properties are identical, and they can be distinct in their

location, size, interior and exterior conditions, quality of construction, style, age, etc. Also, the

property market is thin in the sense that properties typically change hands infrequently, every



                                                  6
few years. There are about 110 million residential properties in the United States, but only 5%

transact every year. Because the customary leverage in the real estate market is high, typically

80% loan-to-value or higher in the United States, it is important for the lender to have a precise

estimate of the value of the collateral.

        Banks typically hire appraisers to estimate the value of properties that are candidates for

financing. In the residential market, appraisers base their opinion on comparable sales

(“comps”). Appraisers use three to five comparable assets to estimate the value of the subject

property by comparing their characteristics. The comps are properties with physical

characteristics similar to the asset in question that were transacted in recent months. When the

comps have characteristics distinct from those of the asset in question that could affect the price

(e.g., the number of bedrooms), appraisers manually make adjustments to the price to reflect

these differences. This method is the most relied-upon type of appraisal in the residential market.

This method is equivalent to a hedonic model of valuation that an econometrician would use,

only with a very small sample. In addition to the appraisal, some banks use an automated

valuation model (AVM),6 which is essentially a hedonic model. In the appraisal process, the

appraiser must make many assumptions, allowing for a great deal of discretion. For example, the

appraiser has the latitude to select the properties that appear to be the best comparables. Because

properties can resemble each other on many dimensions, the appraiser can always distort his or

her choice of comparable assets.

        Most real estate lending transactions include valuations prepared by appraisers, but

appraisers’ opinions hold more weight in refinance transactions than in purchase transactions. In

purchase transactions, banks rely primarily on the transaction price. The price is also a proxy for


6
  AVMs are statistical models that predict property values based on transaction prices of nearby properties with
similar characteristics. The models are typically based on a hedonic regression analysis.

                                                       7
the fundamental value; it is likely to be unbiased, because typically it reflects an arm’s length

transaction. In purchase transactions, the role of the appraiser is to provide another

approximation for the fundamental value and verify that the transaction price presented to the

bank is not fraudulent. In refinance transactions, however, there is no transaction price and banks

rely exclusively on appraisals.



2.2    Valuation Bias

       Given the uncertainty and the discretion in the appraisal process, valuations can be

considered a noisy proxy for the fundamental value of assets. We therefore wonder about the

quality of valuations: are they good proxies for the fundamental values of assets, and in

particular, are they biased in a predictable way? What are the economics behind the bias?

       The hypothesis that we test is that appraisers bias valuations of residential real estate

properties upward to cater to borrowers, potentially through intermediaries. Specifically,

prospective borrowers demand high valuations when they are highly leveraged because higher

valuations allow them to borrow more and at a lower rate. Intermediaries agree to put pressure

on appraisers, because it increases the odds that the client would be satisfied and close the deal.

We expect to find bias in refinance transactions because they rely solely on appraisals to

determine the value of the collateral.

       Much anecdotal evidence suggests that such a bias exists. For example, a recent well-

known legal case of systematic biases in appraisals involved Washington Mutual (a lender) and

eAppraiseIT (an appraisal management company). In November 2007, New York Attorney

General Andrew Cuomo filed suit against Washington Mutual alleging that between July 2006

and April 2007 the firm put pressure on its appraisal management company, eAppraiseIT, to



                                                  8
generate high appraisals. Washington Mutual threatened to transfer business to eAppraiseIT’s

competitors and in a number of cases actually discontinued its contract. eAppraiseIT bowed to

Washington Mutual and produced a list of “proven accepted” (by Washington Mutual)

appraisers. Other appraisers did not receive appraisal assignments.7

        Recent legislation (the Dodd-Frank Act) and new industry standards acknowledge the

existence of appraisal bias and attempt to address it.8 In May 2009, both Fannie Mae and Freddie

Mac announced the Home Valuation Code of Conduct to establish a firewall between appraisers

and loan officers. Since then, both companies have invested millions of dollars in developing

new appraisal data standards, forms, and tools; requiring more due diligence on the part of both

banks and appraisers; and enforcing stricter rules governing how appraisals should be done

(Fannie Mae, 2012). In addition, in late 2010, as a requirement of the Dodd-Frank Act, the

Federal Reserve announced a number of new rules to ensure that real estate appraisers are free to

use their independent professional judgment in assigning home values without influence or

pressure from those with an interest in the transactions (Federal Reserve, 2010).

        One wonders why lenders and brokers are willing to influence the appraisal process on

behalf of financially constrained borrowers. One explanation relates to the optionality of

refinancing. Borrowers who apply for refinancing can typically carry on with their current

mortgage. Refinancing improves their position, but only at the margin. Furthermore, they have

the leisure to shop for the best deal, and, in some cases, not to engage in the transaction at all.

Thus, loan officers in essence compete for the business of refinancing borrowers. Much evidence

7
   See Wamu-eAppraiseIT case coverage on http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/09/28/us-appraisal-settlement-
idUSBRE88R02520120928. Also, other media resources include
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/02/02/AR2007020200712.html,
http://www.myrecordjournal.com/latestnews/article_15198981-28a6-575f-9b68-b93a607e64c4.html,
http://www.mortgagenewsdaily.com/4252005_Appraisal_Fraud.asp.
8
  See Donna Borak, “Rules set for ‘independent appraisers,’” American Banker, December 3, 2010. See also
http://www.mortgagenewsdaily.com/5112005_Aprraisers_On_Pressure_And_Reform.asp and
http://www.publicintegrity.org/2009/06/17/2842/despite-new-rules-appraisers-say-pressure-remains.

                                                    9
of this behavior emerged during the real estate bubble, when advertisements for the refinancing

to highly leveraged mortgages were common.

        Furthermore, the parties involved in the origination process have incentives that induce

them to approve loans that are undercollateralized. As discussed earlier, appraisers’ assignments

used to be for decades, until 2010, in the hands of loan officers, hence, appraisers did their best

not to be an obstacle from a deal to happen. Loan officers are often incentivized by origination

volume (Agarwal and Ben-David 2012).

        It is possible that lenders’ reputation would enact as a counter force, and prevent moral

hazard problems such as valuation bias (e.g., Pennacchi, 1988; Gorton and Pennacchi, 1995).

However, evidence from the industry about blacklisting practices and our empirical evidence

suggest that moral hazard problems in the banking industry do exist in lending, thus reputation is

not sufficient to mitigate those problems.



3       Measuring the Appraisal Bias

        Our approach to estimating the magnitude and effects of the appraisal bias is based on

comparing a property sale price to an earlier valuation from a refinance transaction of the same

property. The basic premise of the analysis is that a sale price provides an arm’s length unbiased

valuation of the property and therefore can serve as a benchmark valuation.9 The valuation used

in a refinance transaction could potentially be biased. Therefore, the log difference in values

between the initial valuation of the refinance transaction and the subsequent purchase transaction

serves as a proxy for valuation bias.



9
  Appraisals are also used in purchase transactions; however, these usually converge to the transaction price or
above. Cho and Megbolugbe (1996) find that 95% of appraisals are either equal to the sale price (30%) or above it
(65%).

                                                       10
       As a control sample, we use pairs of consecutive purchase transactions to estimate the

difference in values in the absence of a refinance transaction. Thus, each observation in our

sample reflects the log difference in values, either between an initial refinance transaction and a

subsequent purchase transaction, or between two purchase transactions for the same property.

       Because we compare valuations of the same property over time (either in the form of a

sale price or an appraisal), we need to account for changes in general market valuations. We

address this issue by including a control for the time passed between the transactions and by

including two sets of fixed effects: a set of fixed effects for the interaction of the MSA

(Metropolitan Statistical Area) with the calendar quarter for each of the transactions in the pair.

These two sets of fixed effects capture the level of market valuations at the MSA calendar-

quarter level. Thus, our controls remove the market component of valuation changes from the

dependent variable.

       The measurement methodology we propose relies on the assumption that homeowners

decide on when to refinance their properties independent of future returns of the property. This

assumption is also likely to be valid, since the properties are valued by professional appraisers. It

is implausible that homeowners have better information on average about the market than market

professionals.

       In a regression framework, this measurement methodology translates to the following

sample and variables. Our sample includes two types of pairs of transactions for the same

property: an initial refinance transaction followed by a purchase transaction, or two successive

purchase transactions. For each pair, we compute the log difference in values. This is our

dependent variable. Our main prediction is that the log difference in values will be significantly

larger for refinance-purchase pairs than for purchase-purchase pairs. Hence, the explanatory



                                                 11
variables are the refinance dummies (either cash-out refinance or rate/term refinance), along with

many other controls. In our specification, the coefficient on the refinance dummy should be

positive—indicating that appraisals are inflated in the initial refinance transactions compared to

purchase-purchase pairs.



4      Data

4.1    Data Sources

       Our main body of data comes from two sources. First, we collect mortgage information

about the first transaction in each pair using the universe of mortgages that were securitized from

1990 to 2011. These are conventional not government loans. These mortgages are conforming

loans made to borrowers with a relatively high credit score (620 or higher). Conforming

mortgages meet the conforming loan limit, which has been $417,000 since 2006 for a one-unit,

single-family dwelling. We exclude borrowers with credit scores below 620. The original dataset

includes about 14.1 million transactions. Relative to other datasets of securitized loans used in

the literature such as LoanPerformance or McDash, our dataset contains loans of higher credit

quality (e.g., higher FICO scores, lower LTVs).

       The second dataset consists of purchase transactions only. Because we do not require

mortgage information for these transactions and because we wish to maximize the sample size,

we supplement the loan-level data with public records (e.g., records of deeds) for the second

transaction in each pair.

       Our final dataset is composed of pairs of transactions for the same property. There are

two types of transaction pairs that are of interest: a refinance (either cash-out or rate/term

refinance) transaction followed by a purchase transaction, and a purchase transaction followed



                                                12
by a purchase transaction. As explained in Section 3, our interest is in the first transaction

because we use it to measure the valuation bias. For each pair, we record the transaction dates,

the origination channel of the first transaction, and the characteristics of the mortgage.

       In one of the robustness tests, we compare valuations made by appraisers to valuations

made by AVMs. For this test, we do not require pairs of transactions, but rather require that

individual transactions have valuation estimates produced by both appraisers and AVMs. These

data have characteristics similar to the dataset described above: loans were originated between

1990 and 2011, and are conventional loans below the conforming loan limit.



4.2    Summary Statistics

       The summary statistics are presented in Table 1. The average sales price for the second

transaction is $217,000. The average sales price for the second transaction is $241,000. When

examining the first transaction in each pair, we find that cash-out refis account for 25% of all

transactions, rate/term-refis make up 34% of all transactions, and the rest are purchase

transactions. We find that 51.6% of transactions were sourced by third-party originators (TPOs:

e.g., mortgage brokers and correspondent banks) for the purpose of selling in the secondary

market; the rest of the loans were sourced by lenders who keep some loans on their books.

       The average combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV) in the first transaction in each pair is

relatively low (75.8%). About 30% of loans have very low CLTV (≤ 70%). Approximately 19%

of loans have CLTV greater than 70% and lower than 80%, and another 18.4% are concentrated

at 80% CLTV. In the dataset, 3.5% of loans have CLTV greater than 80% and lower than or

equal to 85%, and 11.4% have leverage greater than 85% and lower than or equal to 90%. About




                                                 13
10.5% have leverage greater than 90% but lower than 95%, and the remaining 7% have CLTV

greater than 95% and lower than or equal to 100%.

        Loan quality of the first transaction in each pair is relatively high. The average FICO

credit score is 715. A total of 12.1% of loans in the second transaction ended up in default or

foreclosure, and 14.4% of properties were sold when the borrowers were in serious delinquency

(60+ days past due).



5       Empirical Analysis

5.1     Estimating the Valuation Bias

        We begin by estimating the valuation bias for the entire sample. In Table 2, we regress

the change in valuation between a sale and a previous transaction (either a sale or refinance) for

the sample property. The variables of interest are the refi indicators of the previous transaction:

either a cash-out refi10 or a rate/term refi.

        We present three generic specifications in Table 2. In Column (1) we regress the log

difference in transaction values on cash-out and rate/term refi indicators as well as indicators of

whether the price in the subsequent transaction is associated with a default or a serious

delinquency. These indicators have coefficients because a default or delinquency means that the

property is likely to be foreclosed upon and probably sold at a significant discount (Campbell,

Giglio, and Pathak, 2011; Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao, 2009, 2012), making the initial

transaction appear to have a relatively high valuation. Without these indicators, the discount of a

distressed sale in the second transaction would have been attributed to a valuation bias in the

initial transaction. In Column (2) we add property- and mortgage-level characteristics. These


10
  Greenspan and Kennedy (2008) categorize the uses of cash from cash-out refinancing as financing consumer
spending, outlays for home improvements, debt repayment, and acquisition of assets.

                                                   14
characteristics relate to the first transaction in the pair. In Column (3) we add two series of fixed

effects: for the MSA interacted with the quarter of the initial transaction and for the MSA

interacted with the quarter of the subsequent transaction.

       We focus on Column (3), which controls for property- and mortgage-level characteristics

as well as for fixed effects. Purchase-purchase pair is the benchmark category. Compared to this

benchmark, the valuation bias is about 6.8% of property values for cash-out refis and is 4.6% for

rate/term refis. These findings suggest that there is a significant valuation bias between

appraisals for refinance transactions and contract prices of purchase transactions; in addition, the

bias is larger for cash-out refis, potentially because homeowners who look to extract equity from

their homes more strongly demand higher valuations.

       Overall, these estimates show that valuation bias is economically important. Given that

25% of all mortgage transactions are cash-out refi transactions and 34% are rate/term refi

transactions (Table 1), our results indicate that the bias is economically material.



5.2    Leverage and Valuation Bias

       To test the hypothesis that valuation bias increases with borrowers’ leverage, we regress

our measure of the valuation bias (the log difference of values) on cash-out and rate/term refi

dummies interacted with leverage dummies, in addition to controls and fixed effects. The

regressions are presented in Table 3, Columns (1) to (3). They show that the valuation bias

generally increases with leverage. In Columns (1) and (2), which include controls but no fixed

effects, the coefficients increase almost monotonically with leverage dummies, indicating that

the valuation bias increases with leverage. In Column (3), the additional fixed effects appear to

covary with the refi dummies that are interacted with the high leverage dummies, and thus the



                                                 15
coefficients on the dummies of the very high leverage categories have smaller coefficients than

those in Columns (1) and (2).

        To illustrate the magnitude of the effect, compare the valuation bias for low- versus high-

leverage refinanced loans. Compared to cash-out refi loans with leverage lower than or equal to

70%, loans with leverage greater than 95% have a valuation bias that is higher by 6.7% (Column

(1)), or by 3.5% and 0.6% (Columns (2) and (3), respectively). The differences in the coefficients

for rate/term refis are smaller.

        Why does the valuation bias decline at high leverage ratios? One possibility is that there

are factors that reduce the demand among some highly leveraged borrowers for high valuations.

One such factor could be the recourse status of the state. In recourse states, the lender can pursue

other assets of borrowers in the event of default, thus increasing their cost of default; other states

do not have such a provision. Our prediction is, therefore, that mortgages originated on homes in

states that have a recourse clause have lower valuation bias than mortgages originated in

nonrecourse states. This effect should be especially strong for highly leveraged mortgages, for

which the ex-ante risk of default is more probable.

        To test whether this factor has an effect on the valuation bias, we split the sample into

recourse and nonrecourse mortgages and rerun the analysis from Table 3, Column (3). The

results are presented in Columns (4) and (5). As expected, valuation bias is significantly higher

for highly leveraged borrowers in states with nonrecourse provisions relative to those with

recourse provisions. In nonrecourse states, the valuation spread between cash-out mortgages with

leverage of 70% CLTV and below, and mortgages with leverage of 95% CTLV or above is

nearly 4%.




                                                 16
        Finally, we test whether valuation bias is associated with the information quality of the

loan. In Table 3, Columns (6) and (7), we split the sample by the documentation level of the

mortgages (low vs. full) and reran the analysis. The results show that valuation bias is

significantly stronger for the low-documentation population, suggesting that this bias is

correlated with the overall quality of mortgages. This is a bad news for lenders, since mortgages

with low-level of documentation are more likely to default (e.g., since borrowers lied about their

income; Jiang, Nelson, and Vytlacil 2009), and now we show—are more likely to have their

collateral value overvalued.

        In sum, borrower leverage is correlated with the extent of valuation bias. This finding is

consistent with the idea that financially constrained borrowers demand higher appraisals on

refinance transactions, especially in nonrecourse states.



5.3     Variation in the Incentives to Influence Valuations

        Next, we explore several situations in which borrowers’ incentives to influence

valuations are modified.



5.3.1   Retail versus Third-Party Originators

        Loans in our dataset are originated through two channels: a lender’s own retail branches

or through third-party originators (TPOs), including brokers and correspondent lenders. Whereas

lenders originate loans either to keep them on their balance sheets or to sell them to mortgage

securitizers, TPOs originate loans for the sole purpose of selling them, without intending to keep

any.




                                                 17
        Given the difference in the exposure to default risk, we anticipate that the degree of the

bias in valuation will be greater for loans that were originated by third-party originators.

Although all mortgages in our dataset were securitized, we can distinguish between mortgages

that were originated by third-party originators or by retail lenders. In Table 4, Panel A, Column

(1), we regress the log difference of valuations on refi dummies interacted with an indicator of

whether the loan was originated by a third-party originator. The regressions show that refi

mortgages that were originated through a third-party origination channel have significantly

higher valuations by 1.7%.



5.3.2   Lenders’ Attitudes toward the Screening Process

        The ability of borrowers to influence appraisals depends largely on the attitudes that

lenders have toward the screening process. If the screening procedure is perceived as an

important element in the underwriting process that reflects on the reputation of the lender, then

lenders are likely to resist the attempts by borrowers to influence the appraisal. Conversely, some

loan officers may view the screening process as a hurdle that needs to be overcome, perhaps

because their compensation structure incentivizes them to do so (Agarwal and Ben-David, 2012).

In these cases, loan officers would apply pressure on appraisers in order to satisfy their mortgage

applicants.

        Attitudes toward the screening process are likely to be embedded in the lenders’

organizations and therefore should display persistence over time. To test this conjecture, we

estimate the lender fixed effects for the valuation bias in each year, and then determine whether

these fixed effects correlate with the valuation bias on future originations. Specifically, in the

first stage of the analysis, we run a regression of the log difference of values on the usual



                                                18
controls and lender fixed effects for each calendar year (according to the origination year of the

first mortgage in each pair). Then, for each year, we sort these fixed effects into deciles and scale

them to be between 0 and 1, with a high rank indicating high past valuation bias.11 In the second

stage of the analysis, we regress the log difference in values on interactions of refinance

indicators and the lender ranking.

          The results of the analysis are presented in Table 4, Panel A, Column (2). The regression

shows that valuation bias is persistent at the lender level, i.e., lenders whose previous refinance

originations had a high valuation bias also would have such a bias in their future originations, on

average. The economic effect is large. The spread in valuation bias between lenders who have a

history of high valuation bias to those who do not is in the magnitude of 1.0% to 2.2% of asset

values.



5.3.3     Lender Market Competition

          The level of competition in the lenders’ market is potentially an important factor

determining valuation bias. To test for this channel we conduct two tests. In the first test we use

HMDA dataset to calculate a Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) for the concentration of the

lending market at the MSA level. For each MSA-year we count the number of lenders and the

number of loans each generated. Then, the HHI variable is calculated by summing the squares of

the percentage market shares held by the respective lenders. For example, an industry consisting

of two firms with market shares of 70% and 30% has an HHI of (70²+30²)/1000, or 5.8, where

higher values correspond to greater concentration in the market. Since HMDA is available to us

since 2000, the analysis is restricted to 2000-2011.

11
  We note that this analysis cannot be done in real time, because the dependent variable includes information from
the future: the log difference in values between the first and second transactions. The sample in this regression has
only 714,892 observations because we require at least ten transactions per lender in the preceding year.

                                                         19
        In Table 4, Panel A, we regress the valuation bias on the interaction of refinance

indicators and HHI. The results show that the coefficient is positive, suggesting that valuation

bias is stronger for local markets in which competition is lower. The effect is minor in

magnitude: one standard deviation increase in HHI is associated with a bias higher by 0.5%. The

direction of the effect can be rationalized if lenders are interested to provide high valuations (to

expand their lending market), and put pressure on appraisers to comply.



5.3.4   Maximum Loan Size

        Another dimension in which borrowers’ incentives vary is the dollar size of the loan with

respect to the maximum loan size allowed. Specifically, the federal government sets a

conforming loan limit on an annual basis; this cap has increased over time but has held at

$417,000 since 2006.

        This cap on loan size allows us to test borrowers’ motives for influencing the valuation of

the underlying assets. By inflating the value of the asset, borrowers can borrow a larger amount,

because lenders often determine the maximum loan amount as a fraction of the value of the

underlying asset (i.e., loan-to-value ratio). Also, with a larger property valuation, borrowers can

benefit from a lower interest rate because loans with lower CLTV generally have lower interest

rates. When a loan reaches the dollar size cap, then the first motive is shut off: there is no point

in influencing the valuation in order to borrow more. The second motive, however, still exists.

        We therefore predict that loans that are closer to the jumbo-loan cutoff have smaller

valuation bias. The prediction is tested in Table 4, Panel B. We stratify the sample by the ratio of

the loan size to the jumbo-loan cutoff for the relevant year. The results show that cash-out refi

loans that are close to the conforming loan limit have a 4.2% valuation bias, relative to a



                                                20
valuation bias of 6.9% for loans at or below 85% of the jumbo-loan cutoff. Rate/term refi loans

exhibit a sharp decline in the valuation bias, from 4.8% for low loan values to 0.6% for loans

near the jumbo-loan cutoff. One explanation for the different behavior between cash-out and

rate/term refis is that cash-out refi borrowers’ objective is to maximize the amount that they

withdraw and therefore the jumbo-loan cutoff drastically reduces their motive to influence

valuations. Conversely, rate/term refi borrowers’ objective is to lower the rate that they pay;

hence, even given a maximum loan value, it still might be worthwhile for some borrowers to

push the valuation to benefit from better financing terms.



5.3.5 Leverage Thresholds

       Another way to test our hypothesis that borrowers influence appraisals to benefit from

better interest rates is to exploit the discontinuities in mortgage rates with respect to the

combined loan-to-value ratio. Specifically, mortgage rates increase when leverage surpasses

85%, 90%, and 95%. Our hypothesis therefore predicts that borrowers have a stronger incentive

to influence appraisals when the inflated valuation would push them to a lower mortgage rate,

i.e., below a mortgage threshold. In particular, this incentive is stronger for borrowers seeking

rate/term refis. For these borrowers, there is no need to inflate the appraisal value beyond the

valuation associated with their original mortgage; they have, however, strong motivation to

refinance their mortgage to a lower rate.

       To test this prediction, we stratify the sample around these thresholds and include

mortgages that have a cumulative CLTV of ±1% around each threshold. Then, we test whether

mortgages that are at or below each threshold have higher valuation bias. The results are

presented in Table 4, Panel C. The regressions show that the coefficients on the interaction of



                                                21
at/below leverage cutoff and rate refi are always positive and statistically different from zero for

rate/term refi transactions. In addition, the magnitude of the coefficients increases with the

leverage ratios. Thus, consistent with our hypothesis, rate/term refi mortgages that are at or

below a threshold have a greater valuation bias.



5.3.6 Time Series of Valuation Bias

       We next portray the time series of valuation bias. To do so, we split the sample by the

date of the first transaction (refinance or purchase), and rerun the main tests. The results are

presented in Table 4, Panel D. The results show that the valuation bias was relatively modest in

the 1990s (5.3% for cash-out refis and 3.8% for rate refis). It increased in the early 2000s (8.0%

for cash-out refis and 6.0% for rate refis), declined and bottomed in 2004 (5.6% for cash-out

refis and 3.0% for rate refis) and increased again since then. In the years following the real-estate

boom period, when the real-estate market was in decline (2007-2011), the valuation bias was

very high (9.3% for cash-out refis and 7.5% for rate refis). A potential reason for this is that

appraisers use comparable assets from previous months, when prices were higher.



6      Borrower Default and Valuation Bias

       The valuation bias has the potential of being an important determinant for borrower

default. If valuations of refinance transactions are inflated, then their observed leverage should

be downward biased. The prediction is therefore that loans with more severe valuation bias are

more likely to default. Such a result would be consistent with the finding of Lacour-Little and

Malpezzi (2003) that appraisals that are higher than valuations predicted by a hedonic model




                                                 22
predict future borrower default. Similarly, Kelly (2007) shows that discrepancy between actual

appraisals and AVMs is associated with future borrower default.

        In this section, we test this prediction using a two-stage procedure. The idea is to run a

default regression as is customary in the literature (i.e., on indicators of the observed CLTV and

on mortgage characteristics), and then test whether the residuals of this regression contain

additional information that can be explained by the CLTV recalculated based on the deflated

property value.12

        We begin with a base specification in Table 5, Column (1), which is the standard default

regression (e.g., see Ambrose and Capone, 1998; Deng, Quigley, and Van Order, 2000). The

dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the mortgage defaulted in the first 12 months

after origination. The independent variables include mortgage characteristics13 as in previous

regressions, as well as fixed effects for MSA interacted with calendar quarter. We use a probit

regression, and the table presents the marginal effects. As expected, the likelihood of borrower

default increases with the observed CLTV.

        Then, we regress the residuals from the first-stage regression on leverage indicators that

reflect the recalculated leverage based on the deflated asset values. We recalculate the CLTV as

the loan divided by the recalculated value, where the recalculated value is deflated for refi

transactions according to their relevant values based on the coefficients in Tables 3 and 4, Panel

A, Column (1). For example, we adjust down the value of initial cash-out and rate/term refi

transactions that were originated by third-party originators by a factor of 1.7%, as appears in

Table 4, Panel A, Column (1).


12
   We cannot perform the horserace in one regression since the correlation with the observable LTV and the
recalculated LTV is often greater than 80% resulting in multicollinearity.
13
   Control variables include FICO score, indicators for mortgage products (30-year FRM, 15-year FRM, ARM), an
investor dummy, a condo dummy, the excess premium, and the debt-to-income ratio.

                                                     23
           The results of the regression of the residuals on the indicators of the recalculated CLTV

values are presented in Table 5, Column (2). The regression shows that the residuals of default

increase with the recalculated leverage. This means that the recalculated leverage contains

information that is not captured in the observed leverage.



7          Is the Valuation Bias Priced by Banks?

           Lenders typically measure the risk of loans based on three primary variables—loan

purpose, credit score (FICO), and leverage—and price them accordingly.14 An important

empirical question is whether lenders are aware of the distortion created by the valuation bias

and attempt to price for it.

           To answer this question, we test whether default risk is fully captured by interest rates

charged by banks, or whether highly-leveraged refinance transactions have a higher probability

of default. The test is implemented in the regressions presented in Table 6. In Column (1) we

present the base regression: we regress the default indicator on refinance indicators interacted

with CLTV indicators. The regression shows that the likelihood of default increases with

leverage for the refinance loans.

           In Column (2), we control for the interest rate charged on the mortgage, as well as

interest rate-squared and cubed. The regression shows that the coefficients on the interactions of

refinance indicator and leverage indicator become zero or flip signs. With respect to observable

leverage ratio, it appears that lenders fully account for default risk.

           However, we can improve on the observable leverage ratios by impounding the valuation

bias by adjusting the value component of CLTV (as was performed in Section 6). In Columns (3)

and (4) we regress borrower default on the dummies of the recalculated CLTV (adjusted for third
14
     e.g., these are the main determinants of the interest spread charged to borrowers (Freddie Mac, 2012).

                                                           24
part origination), and controlling for polynomials of the mortgage rate. The results show that

mortgage rate accounts for the risk in default for all the leverage groups, except for the very high

recalculated leverage group, in which the valuation bias is the largest; for this group the default

is unexplained by the interest rates that are charged on the mortgage.

       Thus, these results are indicative of interest rates only partly account for the increased

default risk due to valuation bias. Of course, this result does not necessarily hold in the time-

series dimension, i.e., the interest rates charged to borrowers do not necessarily compensate

lenders for losses incurred in systematic events, like the real-estate bust in 2007-2010.



8      Robustness

       Our measurement methodology raises several concerns. Primarily, one might be

concerned about selection of the first transaction (that could be either a refinance or purchase) or

the second transaction (purchase). Another concern is that the quality of the property could

change between the first and second transaction in a systematic fashion (e.g., remodeling). In the

following section, we discuss and analyze potential biases in our analysis.



8.1    First Transaction in the Pair (Refinance or Purchase) Is Endogenous

       Our measurement method is based on differencing out properties’ valuations as measured

both in prices and in appraisals. One concern is that selection into the sample is correlated with

the independent factors that we study here, namely borrower leverage. There are several

potential mechanisms that could explain why borrowers at high leverage would condition their

refinance (or sale) upon having a high valuation. For example, Genesove and Mayer (1997) find




                                                 25
that homeowners are reluctant to sell when they are underwater, and Genesove and Mayer (2001)

show that homeowners are reluctant to sell when they make a loss on their original investment.15

           Essentially, these mechanisms link leverage and the likelihood of deal execution through

the appreciation of the asset relative to the current valuation. To test whether these mechanisms

can explain our results, we condition our regressions on the change in prices between our first

transaction in each pair in the data and the transaction preceding it. Thus, we create triplets of

transactions, where an additional purchase transaction is added before the current pair of

transactions. This additional transaction allows us to control for the change in values prior to the

refinance or purchase transaction of interest.

           In Table 7, Panel A, Columns (1) to (3), we present base specifications that use the triplet

dataset (no controls for pre-transaction returns). Columns (4) to (6) add the log difference in

values between the second transaction (t = 1; refi or purchase) and the preceding purchase

transaction (t = 0). Because we require additional prior transactions for the same property, our

dataset is reduced to 109,598 observations; there are relatively few observations of transactions

with high leverage. We repeat the main specifications from Tables 2 and 3, this time with the

sample of triplets.

           The results show that controlling for the value appreciation preceding the refinance (or

purchase) transaction does not materially affect the results.



8.2        Second Transaction in the Pair (Purchase) Is Endogenous

           Another concern is that the second transaction in each pair (a purchase transaction) is

endogenous. Again, Genesove and Mayer (1997, 2001) provide the motivation: homeowners

may be reluctant to sell their properties because they are underwater or in loss. Such a selection
15
     See also Korteweg and Sorensen (2012) for an estimation of the bias due to selection.

                                                           26
could be correlated with the leverage of borrowers in the previous refinance transaction (the first

transaction in the pair).

        To provide evidence that our results are independent of this selection issue, we examine a

sample of purchase and refinance transactions for which we have value estimation from an

automated valuation model (AVM). AVMs are hedonic models that are used by mortgage

lenders to estimate valuations of properties. They use information known at the time of the

estimation and typically are based on home values of purchase transactions in the vicinity and

crude information about homes, such as square-footage, the number of rooms, and the age of the

structure. The AVM information that we employ in the study was estimated at the time of each

transaction by the originating mortgage lender. By nature, these models have errors that correlate

with the quality of the property.

        Our test circumvents the selection problem (i.e., the dependence on the second

transaction taking place) by focusing on only the first transaction: the refinance transactions.

Specifically, we obtain a sample of 441,132 refinance transactions for which we have AVMs as

well as human appraiser valuations. Using this sample, we compare human appraisals to the

AVM values. Because we do not require any future purchase data, this new sample includes both

refinance transactions with future sales and those without. If the effects that we document are

driven by selection of the second transaction, then we should not observe these patterns when

focusing on only a single transaction.

        In Table 7, Panel B, we regress the log difference between appraisals and AVMs on the

refinance indicators, interactions with the third-party originator dummy, and interactions with

leverage dummies. Column (1) presents the base regression: relative to purchase transactions, the

difference in values between human appraisals and AVMs for refinance transactions is 6.9%



                                                27
higher for cash-out refi transactions and 3.7% higher for rate/term refi transactions. This result is

consistent with the previous evidence that appraisals on refinance transactions are inflated, on

average (e.g., Table 2, Column (3) shows a valuation bias of 6.8% for cash-out refis and 4.6%

for rate/term refis).

        Furthermore, Column (2) presents evidence that the difference between appraisals and

AVMs are especially high for refinance loans that were originated by third-party originators. The

magnitude of the effect is 1.7% for cash-out refis and 2.3% for rate/term refis. These effects are

of a similar magnitude to those documented in Table 4, Panel A (1.7% for both cash-out refis

and rate/term refis).

        Finally, Column (3) shows that the valuation bias, measured as the difference between

the human appraisal and the AVM, is higher for refi transactions and increases with leverage,

peaking at the leverage categories around 85%. Higher leverage ratios show relatively lower

valuation bias, which means that the valuation bias (captured in the coefficients of the

regression) is not monotonic in leverage. One explanation for this effect is that the difference

between human appraisals and AVMs is correlated with differences in house quality. Homes

owned by financially constrained borrowers are likely to be more run down than those owned by

unconstrained borrowers. The AVM, however, does not observe the quality of the home, and

uses geographical information to assess the value of these homes. Hence, it may overestimate the

value of poorly maintained homes and underestimate the value of high quality homes.

Appraisers, on the other hand, include the quality of the home in their appraisals. Therefore,

AVMs would overestimate the value for highly leveraged transactions (a proxy for poor home

quality), making the valuation bias smaller.




                                                 28
8.3    Changes in the Quality of the Property over Time

       Another concern about the main specification of the study is that the quality of properties

could change in a systematic way over time. For example, if borrowers remodel their properties

before refinance transactions but not before selling the properties, then we might expect

valuations in refinance transactions to be higher than prices in arm’s length transactions.

       The test in Table 7, Panel B, also addresses this concern. The results show that there is a

systematic difference in the valuation levels between appraised values and AVMs for the same

property at the same time.



9      Discussion and Conclusion

       The valuation of collateral is often subject to pressures from borrowers—pressures that

increase with the financial constraints of the borrower. In this paper, we present evidence from

the residential real estate market that these pressures result in substantial overvaluation of assets.

We show that valuations of refinance transactions performed by human appraisers are biased

upward on average. The bias is more severe when the parties involved (borrowers,

intermediaries, and lenders) have a stronger incentive to inflate valuations: e.g., valuations are

inflated in highly leveraged transactions and among third-party originations (when mortgages are

more likely to be sold to third parties).

       The biases identified in the paper have important implications for loan pricing and default

models. The inflation of the collateral value that we detect implies that the leverage calculated

based on the observed valuation of the asset is downward-biased, creating a systematic bias in

standard default models. These models could be improved by correcting the leverage to account




                                                 29
for the bias in valuation. We find that lenders account for the bias in valuation and charge higher

interest rates so that properties that are over-appraised pay higher interest rates.

        Our evidence highlights a puzzle in the lending process. Financially constrained

borrowers apply pressure to increase borrowing amounts. However, lenders appear to understand

this mechanism and adjust mortgage rates accordingly so that they reflect the bias in valuation

and at least partly account for the higher likelihood of default of loans supported by inflated

collateralized assets. Why are lenders and brokers willing to exert pressure on appraisers instead

of simply lending larger amounts to borrowers outright? We offer two explanations for this

phenomenon. First, both borrowers and lenders are constrained by lending rules that are imposed

by the secondary market and by legislation. In particular, there is almost no lending beyond

100% of the loan-to-value ratio in the United States.16 Inflating valuations allows both borrowers

and lenders to informally collude and circumvent the rigid rules imposed by investors in the

secondary market and by the government. The second explanation is based on heterogeneity in

the population of borrowers. For many borrowers, the financial constraints would not be

completely relaxed even if lending rules were more lax, meaning that there will always be an

incentive to inflate valuations. Therefore, no matter what bounds investors and lenders put on

leverage, collateral will always be inflated by financially constrained borrowers, and lenders will

respond optimally.

        The biases in the valuation process could potentially be resolved by properly designing

institutions and processes. In March 2010, the Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) began

requiring that appraisals of residential properties be ordered by appraisal management

companies, not directly by loan officers. Unfortunately, because our methodology requires two


16
  Interestingly, in some countries (e.g., Commonwealth countries: the U.K., New Zealand, Australia) lenders allow
leverage higher than 100% at the time of origination of residential mortgages.

                                                       30
consecutive transactions on each property, it cannot effectively test yet whether the valuation

bias was indeed eliminated following this change in process.

       Although our data and results come from the residential real estate market, our findings

have general implications for corporate finance. We chose to study the residential housing

market because it allows us to empirically estimate the valuation bias: it is liquid enough to have

sufficient transactions for a quantitative study, and at the same time, appraisers have enough

latitude to inflate valuations. In other areas of finance, the assessment of value is often done in

domains where assets are even more complex (e.g., firms, securities), and thus it is hard to pin

down a systematic bias. Nevertheless, such bias is likely to exist given that the experts valuing

the assets are subject to pressures by the parties involved in the transactions.




                                                 31
                                      Appendix A. Variable Definition
Variable                     Definition
Appraised value              The value of a house as was determined by a human appraiser.
AVM                          The value of a house as was determined by an automated valuation model.
Sales price                  The price of a house as was recorded in a purchase transaction.
                             An indicator as to whether a transaction is a cash-out refi transaction (loan balance
Cash-out refi
                             increases by more than a certain percentage).
                             An indicator as to whether a transaction is a rate/term refi transaction (loan balance
Rate/term refi
                             does not increase except for closing costs).
Originated by third party    An indicator as to whether the loan was originated by a broker or correspondent bank.
3-month local market         Change in the Case-Shiller (1990) house-price index over the previous quarter.
returns                      Variable available for the top 20 MSAs.
                             An indicator that the combined loan-to-value ratio of the loan is greater than X% and
X% < CLTV ≤ Y%
                             less than or equal to Y%.
CLTV                         The combined loan-to-value ratio of the mortgage, ranging from 1 to 100.
Defaulted within 12          An indicator that the second transaction in the pair of transactions defaulted (90+ days
months                       past due) within a year.
                             An indicator as to whether the second transaction in the pair of transactions considered
Serious delinquency
                             had a serious delinquency (60+ days past due).
FICO / 100 (at
                             FICO credit score at the origination of the mortgage. (Variable is divided by 100.)
origination)
                             An indicator as to whether the mortgage is a short-term (teaser period <= 3 years)
Short-term ARM indicator
                             adjustable rate mortgage (ARM).
                             An indicator as to whether the mortgage is a hybrid adjustable rate mortgage (ARM).
Hybrid ARM indicator
                             Teaser period can be 5, 7, or 10 years and rate resets every year after the teaser period.
Fixed rate 15-year (or 30-
                             An indicator as to whether the mortgage is a 15-year (or 30-year) fixed rate mortgage.
year) mortgage
Excess premium               The residual of a regression of the mortgage rate on mortgage characteristics.
Owner-occupier indicator     An indicator as to whether the property is owned by an owner-occupier.
                             Back end ratio: a ratio of the monthly housing expense plus other debt payments
Debt-to-income ratio
                             divided by monthly income.
                             An indicator as to whether the property is a condo (as opposed to a single- or multi-
Condo indicator
                             family home).
House-price index growth     Quarter-on-quarter house price growth in the Case-Shiller index for the MSA.
                             The average appraisal in the MSA-quarter as estimated from an MSA quarter-level
Valuation bias
                             regression.
                             The time lapsed (measured in months) from the first transaction to the second
Tenure
                             transaction.
                             Measures the historical overvaluation at the lender level. The variable is calculated as
                             follows. We split the data by years, and run a regression of log(Value(t=1) /
                             Price(t=2)) with the usual controls and interactions of the refi indicator with lender
Lender fixed effect (t–1)    fixed effects. For each year, we sort the interaction of the refi indicator and the lender
                             fixed effects into ten bins and scale to a range of 0 to 1. High lender fixed effect (= 1)
                             means that the lender was in the top decile of appraisal overvaluation in the previous
                             year.
                             Herfindahl-Hirschman Index. Measures the concentration of lenders at the MSA-year
HHI
                             level. The index is computed as the sum of squared market share of each lender.


                                                        32
References
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas Evanoff,
    2011, The role of securitization in mortgage renegotiation, Journal of Financial Economics 102(3),
    559–578.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas Evanoff,
    2013, Predatory Lending and the Subprime Crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Agarwal, Sumit and Itzhak Ben-David, 2012, Do loan officers’ incentives lead to lax lending standards?
    Working Paper, The Ohio State University.
Agarwal, Sumit, Yan Chang, and Abdullah Yavas, 2012, Adverse selection in mortgage securitization,
    Journal of Financial Economics 105 (3), 640–660.
Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, An incomplete contracts approach to financial contracting,
   Review of Economic Studies 59(3), 473–494.
Allen, Linda, Julapa Jagtiani, Stavros Peristiani, and Anthony Saunders, 2004, The role of bank advisors
    in mergers and acquisitions, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36(2), 197–224.
Ambrose, Brent W., and Charles A. Capone, 1998, Modeling the conditional probability of foreclosure in
  the context of single-family mortgage default resolutions, Real Estate Economics 26(3), 391–429.
Ben-David, Itzhak, 2011, Financial constraints and inflated home prices during the real-estate boom,
   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(3), 55–78.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai Bergman, 2009, Collateral pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 91,
   339–360.
Benmelech, Efraim, Mark J. Garmaise, and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2005, Do liquidation values affect
   financial contracts? Evidence from commercial loan contracts and zoning regulation, Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 120(3), 1121–1154.
Berger, Allen., Marco A. Espinosa-Vega, W. Scott Frame, and Nathan H. Miller, 2011, Why Do
   Borrowers Pledge Collateral? New Empirical Evidence on the Role of Asymmetric Information,
   Journal of Financial Intermediation 20, 55-70.
Berger, Allen N., Gregory F. Udell, 1990, Collateral, loan quality and bank risk, Journal of Monetary
   Economics 25(1), 21–42.
Bolton, Patrick, Xavier Freixas, and Joel Shapiro, 2007, Conflicts of interest, information provision, and
    competition in the financial services industry, Journal of Financial Economics 85(2), 297–330.
Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak, 2011, Forced sales and house prices, American
   Economic Review 101, 2108–2131.
Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller, 1990, Forecasting prices and excess returns in the housing market,
   Real Estate Economics 18(3), 253–273.
Chan, Yuk–Shee, and Anjan V. Thakor, 1987, Collateral and competitive equilibria with moral hazard
   and private information, Journal of Finance 42, 345–363.
Cho, Man, and Isaac F. Megbolugbe, 1996, An empirical analysis of property appraisal and mortgage
   redlining, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 13, 45–55.
Deng, Yongheng, John Quigley and Robert Van Order, 2000, Mortgage terminations, heterogeneity and
   the exercise of mortgage options, Econometrica 68(2), 275–307.




                                                   33
Elul, Ronel, Nicholas S. Souleles, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Dennis Glennon, and Robert Hunt, 2010,
    What “triggers” mortgage default?, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 100, 490–
    494.
Fannie Mae, 2012, Fannie Mae appraisal messaging notification, https://www.fanniemae.com
   /content/news/appraisal-messaging-notification.pdf, accessed on December 12, 2012.
Federal Reserve, Press Release on October 18, 2010, http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press
   /bcreg/20101018a.htm, accessed on Dec 12, 2012.
Freddie Mac, Postsettlement delivery fee, www.freddiemac.com/singlefamily/pdf/ex19.pdf, accessed on
    June 28, 2012.
Garmiase, Mark J., 2012, Borrower misrepresentation and loan performance, Working paper, University
   of California, Los Angeles.
Genesove, David, and Christopher J. Mayer, 1997, Equity and time to sale in the real estate market,
   American Economic Review 87(3), 255–269.
Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer, 2001, Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence from the
   housing market, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4), 1233–1260.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi, 1995, Banks and loan sales: Marketing non-marketable assets,
   Journal of Monetary Economics 35(3), 389–411.
Greenspan, Alan, and James Kennedy, 2008, Sources and uses of equity extracted from homes, Oxford
   Review of Economic Policy 24, 120–144.
Harding, John P., Eric Rosenblatt, and Vincent Yao, 2009, the contagion of the foreclosed properties,
   Journal of Urban Economics 66 (3), 164–178.
Harding, John P., Eric Rosenblatt, and Vincent Yao, 2012, The foreclosure discount: myth or reality?
   Journal of Urban Economics 71, 204–218.
Hart, Oliver, 1995, Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human capital,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841–879.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1998, Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of debt, Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 113, 1–41.
Haughwout, Andrew F., Donghoon Lee, Joseph Tracy, and Wilbert van de Klaauw, 2011, Real estate
     investors, the leverage cycle, and the housing market crisis, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank
     of New York.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real sector,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 62, 663–691.
Inderst, Roman, and Holger M. Mueller, 2007, A lender-based theory of collateral, Journal of Financial
    Economics 84(3), 826–859.
Jiang, Wei, Ashlyn Aiko Nelson, and Edward Vytlacil, 2009, Liars loan? Effects of origination channel
    and information falsification on mortgage delinquency, Working paper, Columbia University.
Johnson, Herb, and René M. Stulz, 1985, An analysis of secured debt, Journal of Financial Economics
   14, 501–522.
Kelly, Austin, 2007, Appraisals, automated valuation models, and mortgage default, Working paper,
    Federal Housing Finance Agency.


                                                   34
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Did securitization lead to
   lax screening? Evidence from subprime loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307–362.
Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sorensen, 2012, Estimating loan-to-value and foreclosure behavior,
   Working paper, Stanford University.
Lacour-Little, Michael, and Stephen Malpezzi, 2003, Appraisal quality and residential mortgage default:
   evidence from Alaska, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 27(2), 211–233.
Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane Sherlund, 2009, The rise in mortgage defaults, Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 23(1), 27–50.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2010, Household leverage and the recession of 2007 to 2009, IMF Economic
   Review 58(1), 74–117.
Michaely, Roni, and Kenneth Womack, 1999, Conflict of interest and the credibility of underwriter
   analyst recommendations, Review of Financial Studies 12(4), 653–686.
Pennacchi, George, 1988, Loan sales and the cost of bank capital, Journal of Finance 43(2), 375–396.
Petersen, Mitchell A., 2004, Information: Hard and soft, Working paper, Northwestern University.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Securitization and distressed loan renegotiation:
    evidence from the subprime mortgage crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 97(3), 369–397.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and James Witkin, 2013, Asset Quality Misrepresentation by Financial
    Intermediaries: Evidence from RMBS Market, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Rajan, Uday, Amit, Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2013, The failure of models that predict failure: Distance,
    incentives and default, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Tirole, Jean, 2005, The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Vig, Vikrant, 2013, Access to collateral and corporate debt structure: Evidence from a natural experiment,
    Journal of Finance 68(3), 881–928.
White, Lawrence J., 2010, The credit rating agencies, Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(2), 211–226.
Zingales, Luigi, 2012, A capitalism for the people: Recapturing the lost genius of American prosperity,
Basic Books: New York.




                                                   35
                                              Table 1. Summary Statistics
The table presents summary statistics for the data used in the study.

Variable                                          N        Mean     Std dev     Min   Q25     Q50     Q75       Max
Prior sale price or appraised value (t = 1)   1,011,749   216,913   123,333    9,000 130,000 185,000 273,913 1,000,000
Sale price (t = 2)                            1,011,749   240,879   141,850    9,000 140,000 205,000 304,000 1,000,000
log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100      1,011,749     9.418   29.867    -110.29 -1.73   10.71 26.30      85.02
Cash-out refi                                 1,011,749     0.250    0.433      0.00  0.00    0.00    1.00      1.00
Rate refi                                     1,011,749     0.339    0.474      0.00  0.00    0.00    1.00      1.00
Originated by third party                     1,011,749     0.516    0.500      0.00  0.00    1.00    1.00      1.00
3-month local market returns                   431,580      0.022    0.031     -0.15  0.01    0.02    0.04      0.22
        CLTV ≤ 70%                            1,011,749     0.298    0.457      0.00  0.00    0.00    1.00      1.00
70% < CLTV < 80%                              1,011,749     0.194    0.396      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
        CLTV = 80                             1,011,749     0.184    0.388      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
80% < CLTV ≤ 85%                              1,011,749     0.035    0.184      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
85% < CLTV ≤ 90%                              1,011,749     0.114    0.318      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
90% < CLTV ≤ 95                               1,011,749     0.105    0.307      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
95% < CLTV                                    1,011,749     0.069    0.254      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
Defaulted                                     1,011,749     0.121    0.326      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
Serious delinquency                           1,011,749     0.144    0.351      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
FICO / 100 (at origination)                   1,011,749     7.146    0.576      3.00  6.76    7.21    7.61      8.99
Combined LTV (CLTV)                           1,011,749     0.758    0.167      0.03  0.68    0.80    0.90      1.00
Short-term ARM indicator                      1,011,749     0.034    0.181      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
Hybrid ARM indicator                          1,011,749     0.089    0.284      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
Fixed rate 15-year mortgage                   1,011,749     0.187    0.390      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
Fixed rate 30-year mortgage                   1,011,749     0.690    0.462      0.00  0.00    1.00    1.00      1.00
Excess premium                                1,011,749    -0.009    0.749     -4.03  -0.51   -0.04   0.42      7.83
Owner-occupier indicator                      1,011,749     0.945    0.228      0.00  1.00    1.00    1.00      1.00
Debt-to-income ratio                          1,011,749     0.344    0.136      0.00  0.25    0.34    0.42      1.00
HHI lenders                                    397,596      3.466    1.686      1.30  2.27    2.97    4.14     20.55
Condo indicator                               1,011,749     0.042    0.201      0.00  0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00
Size (sqft '000)                               916,884      1.813    0.896      0.14  1.30    1.68    2.19    156.77
Tenure (months)                               1,008,700   35.894    25.883      1.00  16.00 28.00 51.00       381.00




                                                               36
           Table 2. Estimating the Average Valuation Bias in Refinance Transactions
The table explores the valuation bias among cash-out and rate/term refi transactions. Sample observations are based
on pairs of transactions on the same property, and the dependent variable measures the difference in appraised value
for the second minus the first transaction. Defaulted and serious delinquency are dummies indicating whether the
second transaction in the pair defaulted (90+ days past due) or was in serious delinquency (60+ days past due),
respectively. Cash-out refi and Rate/term refi indicators describe the first transaction in each pair. Mortgage controls
include information about the first transaction: FICO credit score (at origination), combined loan-to-value ratio
(CLTV), short-term ARM indicator, hybrid ARM indicator, fixed rate 15-year mortgage indicator, fixed rate 30-year
mortgage indicator, excess premium indicator, owner-occupier indicator, debt-to-income ratio, condo indicator,
property size, property age, and tenure. MSA × YYQQ FE is MSA-quarter fixed effects. There are MSA-quarter
fixed effects for the first transaction in each pair as well as for the second transaction. Variable definitions are in
Appendix A. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the calendar quarter level. t-
statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

                                             Dependent variable:         log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100
                                                                     (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)
                     Cash-out refi                                 4.84***       4.93***        6.76***        7.05***
                                                                   (52.57)       (54.90)         (95.01)       (94.96)
                     Rate/term refi                                1.90***       2.75***        4.55***        4.55***
                                                                   (27.50)       (37.77)         (70.64)       (67.20)

                     Defaulted                                     25.60***     24.53***      29.05***       29.29***
                                                                    (78.73)       (77.03)     (119.21)       (114.89)
                     Serious delinquency                              0.27       4.83***       5.31***        5.58***
                                                                     (1.71)       (31.46)       (33.53)        (33.23)
                     FICO (at origination)                                       1.11***       0.35***        0.27***
                                                                                  (20.36)        (7.54)         (5.61)
                     CLTV                                                       -4.34***      -5.08***       -5.06***
                                                                                 (-21.40)      (-29.30)       (-26.97)
                     Short-term ARM indicator                                    0.87***       2.06***        2.10***
                                                                                   (6.92)       (17.86)        -17.16
                     Hybrid ARM indicator                                        2.03***       2.54***        2.49***
                                                                                  (17.26)       (30.58)        -28.81
                     Fixed rate 15-year mortgage                                -3.15***      -3.38***       -3.36***
                                                                                 (-44.67)      (-53.04)       (-49.45)
                     Fixed rate 30-year mortgage                                 3.38***       2.32***        2.42***
                                                                                  (25.41)       (26.35)        -26.47
                     Excess premium                                             -1.49***      -1.88***       -1.85***
                                                                                 (-34.08)      (-41.73)       (-38.98)
                     Owner-occupier indicator                                    0.85***       1.70***        1.27***
                                                                                   (6.96)       (13.93)        -10.13
                     Debt-to-income ratio                                        5.21***       4.24***        4.10***
                                                                                  (28.92)       (25.60)        -23.42
                     Condo indicator                                             1.52***       2.29***        1.58***
                                                                                   (6.44)       (17.66)        (11.17)
                     Tenure                                                     -0.13***      -0.25***       -0.25***
                                                                                (-119.69)     (-143.31)      (-135.91)
                     Size (sqft '000)                                                                         -0.15**
                                                                                                               (-2.83)
                     Property age (years)                                                                    -0.06***
                                                                                                              (-31.82)

                     MSA × YYQQ (first transaction) FE                No           No            Yes           Yes
                     MSA × YYQQ (second transaction) FE               No           No            Yes           Yes

                     Observations                                  1,011,749    1,011,749     1,011,749      927,588
                             2
                     Adj R                                          0.105         0.155         0.323         0.327


                                                                    37
                                  Table 3. Valuation Bias and Borrower Leverage
The table explores the valuation bias with respect to borrower leverage. Sample observations are based on pairs of
transactions on the same property, and the dependent variable measures the difference in appraised value for the
second minus the first transaction. Defaulted and serious delinquency are dummies indicating whether the second
transaction in the pair defaulted (90+ days past due) or was in serious delinquency (60+ days past due), respectively.
Cash-out refi and Rate/term refi indicators describe the first transaction in each pair. In Columns (4) and (5) the
sample is split to recourse and non-recourse mortgages. In Columns (6) and (7) the sample is split to mortgages with
low- and full documentation. Mortgage controls include information about the first transaction: FICO credit score
(at origination), combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV), short-term ARM indicator, hybrid ARM indicator, fixed rate
15-year mortgage indicator, fixed rate 30-year mortgage indicator, excess premium indicator, owner-occupier
indicator, debt-to-income ratio, condo indicator, property size, property age, and tenure. MSA × YYQQ FE is MSA-
quarter fixed effects. There are MSA-quarter fixed effects for the first transaction in each pair as well as for the
second transaction. Variable definitions are in Appendix A. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are
clustered at the calendar quarter level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                          Dependent variable:                                 log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100
                                    Sample:         All         All             All       Recourse Non-recourse          Low Doc    Full Doc
                                                    (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)          (6)         (7)
    Cash-out refi
     × CLTV ≤ 70%                                3.74***     3.71***      4.72***          4.68***        4.85***        7.48***    5.10***
                                                  (29.59)    (30.12)      (41.18)          (34.36)        (23.15)         (23.94)   (51.52)
      × 70% < CLTV < 80%                         3.49***     3.53***      5.15***          5.03***        5.44***        9.09***    6.27***
                                                  (26.24)    (24.77)      (37.43)          (30.69)        (21.71)         (23.72)   (62.75)
      × CLTV = 80%                               5.06***     4.56***      6.32***          6.04***        6.94***        9.77***    7.63***
                                                  (31.98)    (26.22)      (39.21)          (30.74)        (24.79)         (21.41)   (61.59)
      × 80% < CLTV ≤ 85%                         4.96***     4.79***      6.53***          6.20***        7.49***        10.70***   8.04***
                                                  (18.20)    (16.95)      (24.61)          (20.03)        (14.85)         (11.21)   (32.99)
      × 85% < CLTV ≤ 90%                         5.29***     4.58***      6.30***          6.18***        6.63***        9.17***    8.06***
                                                  (25.02)    (19.48)      (30.01)          (24.94)        (16.98)         (16.43)   (46.81)
      × 90% < CLTV ≤ 95%                         7.06***     4.79***      4.56***          3.53***        6.36***        8.64***     3.28**
                                                   (6.99)     (4.81)       (6.03)           (3.56)         (5.58)          (8.86)    (2.98)
      × 95% < CLTV                               10.44***    7.17***      5.30***          3.66**         8.72***        9.52***      -0.89
                                                   (5.92)     (4.06)       (4.56)           (2.61)         (4.46)          (6.93)   (-0.42)

    Rate refi
     × CLTV ≤ 70%                                  0.07      1.15***      2.53***          2.53***        2.55***        1.78***    3.05***
                                                  (0.63)     (10.25)      (22.60)          (19.16)        (12.38)         (5.88)    (31.45)
      × 70% < CLTV < 80%                         1.10***     1.62***      3.11***          3.00***        3.38***        3.81***    4.35***
                                                  (9.52)     (12.53)      (24.10)          (19.42)        (14.62)        (13.89)    (50.87)
      × CLTV = 80%                               2.39***     2.50***      4.17***          4.09***        4.41***        4.64***    5.62***
                                                 (17.64)     (16.42)      (28.00)          (22.66)        (16.95)        (15.34)    (52.17)
      × 80% < CLTV ≤ 85%                         2.36***     2.79***      3.97***          3.88***        4.18***        6.88***    5.49***
                                                 (12.94)     (14.54)      (21.05)          (17.26)        (12.21)        (11.85)    (35.80)
      × 85% < CLTV ≤ 90%                         1.47***     1.99***      2.86***          2.91***        2.79***        5.81***    4.60***
                                                  (9.55)     (11.14)      (16.53)          (13.95)         (9.17)        (15.13)    (38.58)
      × 90% < CLTV ≤ 95%                         2.21***     2.07***      2.42***          2.48***        2.34***        5.85***    4.24***
                                                 (10.86)      (8.93)      (11.57)           (9.89)         (6.29)        (11.55)    (26.40)
      × 95% < CLTV                               4.90***     3.23***       1.61**            1.21         2.50**         6.41***     1.58**
                                                  (7.28)      (4.78)       (3.06)           (1.88)         (2.75)         (7.57)     (2.59)

    Defaulted + Serious delinquency indicators     Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
    Mortgage controls                              No          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
    MSA × YYQQ (first transaction) FE              No          No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes
    MSA × YYQQ (second transaction) FE             No          No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes

    Observations                                 1,011,749   1,011,749    1,011,749        673,722        338,027         94,745    917,004
            2
    Adj R                                         0.107       0.155           0.325         0.314           0.349         0.379      0.319



                                                                         38
                                      Table 4. Determinants of Valuation Bias
The table explores the determinants of the valuation bias. Sample observations are based on pairs of transactions on
the same property, and the dependent variable measures the difference in appraisals for the second minus the first
transaction. Panel A explores the correlation of the valuation bias with lender characteristics. Panel B explores the
correlation of the magnitude of the valuation bias with the distance from the jumbo-loan cutoff. Panel C explores the
magnitude of the valuation above and below leverage thresholds that are correlated with mortgage rate changes.
Panel D presents a split of the sample by the year of the first transaction. Defaulted and serious delinquency are
dummies indicating whether the second transaction in the pair defaulted (90+ days past due) or was in serious
delinquency (60+ days past due), respectively. Cash-out refi and Rate/term refi indicators describe the first
transaction in each pair. Mortgage controls include information about the first transaction: FICO credit score (at
origination), combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV), short-term ARM indicator, hybrid ARM indicator, fixed rate 15-
year mortgage indicator, fixed rate 30-year mortgage indicator, excess premium indicator, owner-occupier indicator,
debt-to-income ratio, condo indicator, property size, property age, and tenure. MSA × YYQQ FE is MSA-quarter
fixed effects. There are MSA-quarter fixed effects for the first transaction in each pair as well as for the second
transaction. Variable definitions are in Appendix A. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are
clustered at the calendar quarter level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Lender- and Market-Level Determinants of Valuation Bias
                                           Dependent variable:            log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100
                                                                      (1)                    (2)                   (3)
                  Cash-out refi                                     5.64***              6.76***                7.04***
                                                                    (67.00)               (88.78)               (76.17)
                   × Third party originator                         2.00***
                                                                    (23.63)
                   × Lender fixed effect (t-1)                                           0.15***
                                                                                           (5.46)
                   × HHI                                                                                         0.30**
                                                                                                                 (2.97)

                  Rate refi                                         3.52***              3.17***              4.26***
                                                                    (48.36)              (42.20)              (48.14)
                   × Third party originator                         1.99***
                                                                    (28.77)
                   × Lender fixed effect (t-1)                                           0.23***
                                                                                          (9.00)
                   × HHI                                                                                       0.31**
                                                                                                               (3.28)

                  Third party originator

                  Lender fixed effect (t-1)                                             -0.52***
                                                                                        (-39.84)
                  HHI                                                                                         -4.03***
                                                                                                              (-33.63)




                  Defaulted + Serious delinquency indicators          Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                  Mortgage controls                                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                  MSA × YYQQ (first transaction) FE                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                  MSA × YYQQ (second transaction) FE                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes

                  Observations                                     1,011,749             714,892              397,596
                        2
                  Adj R                                               0.325                0.300                0.307
                  Note: Entire sample restricted to lenders with obs >= 10 in previous year


                                                                     39
                            Table 4. Determinants of Valuation Bias (Cont.)
Panel B: Jumbo-Loan Cutoff

                                         Dependent variable:      log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100
                         Sample restriction (% of loan limit): 0%-85% 85%-95% 95%-98% 98%-100%
                                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
             Cash-out refi                                     6.90***     5.20***      5.68***      4.17***
                                                                (92.06)    (19.68)      (11.25)       (8.66)
             Rate refi                                         4.77***     2.48***      2.14***        0.64
                                                                (70.52)    (10.55)       (4.29)       (1.39)

             Defaulted + Serious delinquency indicators          Yes        Yes            Yes      Yes
             Mortgage controls                                   Yes        Yes            Yes      Yes
             MSA × YYQQ (first transaction) FE                   Yes        Yes            Yes      Yes
             MSA × YYQQ (second transaction) FE                  Yes        Yes            Yes      Yes

             Observations                                       920,388    47,796       11,282     13,142
                    2
             Adj R                                              0.319       0.380          0.383   0.368




Panel C: Leverage Thresholds
                                 Dependent variable:              log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100
                                        Subsample:     84<=CLTV<=86         89<=CLTV<=91             94<=CLTV<=96
                                                              (1)                    (2)                     (3)
   Cash-out refi                                           7.14***               10.68***                   5.78
                                                            (7.97)                 (4.51)                  (1.15)
     × At or below leverage cutoff                           0.32                  -1.99                    5.63
                                                            (0.34)                (-0.84)                  (1.11)
   Rate/term refi                                          3.19***               2.70***                   -0.43
                                                            (4.70)                 (3.43)                 (-0.22)
     × At or below leverage cutoff                          1.59*                2.74***                 6.53***
                                                            (2.19)                 -3.41                   (3.31)

   At or below leverage cutoff                                0.55                   -0.07              4.26**
                                                             (1.41)                 (-0.10)             (-2.88)

   Defaulted + Serious delinquency indicators                  Yes                   Yes                    Yes
   Mortgage controls                                           Yes                   Yes                    Yes
   MSA × YYQQ (first transaction) FE                           Yes                   Yes                    Yes
   MSA × YYQQ (second transaction) FE                          Yes                   Yes                    Yes

   Observations                                             26,541                  74,273              77,250
   Adj R2                                                    0.361                  0.347                 0.322




                                                          40
                              Table 4. Determinants of Valuation Bias (Cont.)
Panel D: Time-Series of Valuation Bias

                     Dependent variable:                          log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100
                 Sample (first transaction): 1990-2000 2001        2002      2003        2004        2005       2006   2007-2011
                                                (1)     (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)      (8)
Cash-out refi                                5.33*** 8.00***    7.69*** 6.85*** 5.58*** 6.18***              8.15***   9.32***
                                             (41.06) (35.70)    (41.47) (49.44) (29.27) (29.30)              (33.58)   (52.55)
Rate refi                                    3.80*** 5.99***    6.01*** 4.44*** 2.95*** 3.90***              6.45***   7.45***
                                             (34.76) (27.16)    (33.84) (34.51) (16.02) (17.40)              (23.90)   (44.09)

Defaulted + Serious delinquency indicators    Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
Mortgage controls                             Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
MSA × YYQQ (first transaction) FE             Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
MSA × YYQQ (second transaction) FE            Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes

Observations                                 273,227   86,171       125,523   213,524   87,470     70,844     55,695    99,295
        2
Adj R                                         0.364    0.379         0.375     0.368    0.397       0.439      0.479     0.468




                                                               41
                            Table 5. Borrower Default and Valuation Bias
The table explores the relation between the likelihood of borrower default and valuation bias. Columns (1) and (2)
present a two-stage analysis. In the first stage (Column (1)), an indicator for default within 12 months is regressed
on indicators of observed leverage, controls, and fixed effects. In the second stage (Column (2)), the residuals from
the first stage are regressed on indicators of recalculated leverage, which is corrected for valuation bias. The
recalculated leverage adjusts the observed leverage by the coefficients of valuation bias with respect to leverage
(Table 3, Column (3)) and third-party origination (Table 4, Panel A, Column (1)). Mortgage controls include
information about the first transaction: FICO credit score (at origination), combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV),
short-term ARM indicator, hybrid ARM indicator, fixed rate 15-year mortgage indicator, fixed rate 30-year
mortgage indicator, excess premium indicator, owner-occupier indicator, debt-to-income ratio, condo indicator,
property size, property age, and tenure. MSA × YYQQ FE is MSA-quarter fixed effects. Variable definitions are in
Appendix A. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the calendar quarter level. t-
statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

                                                              Main test
                      Dependent variable: Default indicator × 100                 Residuals
                                                 Stage 1                           Stage 2
                                                     (1)                             (2)
               Observed CLTV
               70< CLTV <80                      0.06***
                                                   (8.86)
               CLTV = 80                         0.12***
                                                 (16.24)
               80< CLTV <=85                     0.16***
                                                 (15.59)
               85< CLTV <=90                     0.23***
                                                 (23.55)
               90< CLTV <=95                     0.30***
                                                 (26.02)
               95< CLTV <=100                    0.62***
                                                 (43.86)
(continues on next page)




                                                         42
                   Table 5. Borrower Default and Valuation Bias (Cont.)

(continues from previous page)

                                                           Main test
                   Dependent variable: Default indicator × 100         Residuals
                                              Stage 1                   Stage 2
                                                 (1)                      (2)
            …
            Recalculated CLTV
            70< CLTV <80                                               -0.01***
                                                                        (-4.61)
            CLTV = 80                                                    -0.01*
                                                                        (-2.49)
            80< CLTV <=85                                              -0.02***
                                                                        (-8.84)
            85< CLTV <=90                                                -0.01*
                                                                        (-2.04)
            90< CLTV <=95                                                0.01*
                                                                         (2.30)
            95< CLTV <=100                                             0.08***
                                                                        (15.50)
            100< CLTV <=105                                            0.09***
                                                                         (8.62)
            105< CLTV <=110                                            0.13***
                                                                         (5.44)
            110< CLTV                                                  0.16***
                                                                         (4.64)

            Other controls                       Yes                      No
            MSA × YYQQ                           Yes                      No

            Observations                      1,011,749                1,011,749
                       2
            Pseudo-R                            0.140                   0.002




                                               43
                        Table 6. Is Valuation Bias Priced in Mortgage Interest?
The table tests whether interest rates charged to mortgages capture the cross-sectional risk of default. Column (1)
presents the base regression in which default indicator is regressed on interactions of refinance indicator and
leverage indicators, as well as mortgage controls and origination quarter fixed effects. Column (2) includes in
addition controls for the interest rate of the mortgage, interest rate squared and interest rate cubed. Columns (3) and
(4) use leverage bins based on recalculated leverage (which account for the third-party origination channel).
Mortgage controls include information about the first transaction: FICO credit score (at origination), combined loan-
to-value ratio (CLTV), short-term ARM indicator, hybrid ARM indicator, fixed rate 15-year mortgage indicator,
fixed rate 30-year mortgage indicator, excess premium indicator, owner-occupier indicator, debt-to-income ratio,
condo indicator, property size, property age, and tenure. MSA × YYQQ FE is MSA-quarter fixed effects. Variable
definitions are in Appendix A. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the calendar
quarter level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.




                                                           44
Table 6. Is Valuation Bias Priced in Mortgage Interest? (Cont.)
             Dependent variable:                 Default indicator × 100
                        Sample:        All          All            All          All
             Leverage indicators:          Original                  Recalculated
                                       (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)
   Cash-out refi
    × CLTV ≤ 70%                    0.06***       -0.08***    0.07***      -0.08***
                                     (7.77)       (-10.84)    (8.77)       (-9.51)
     × 70% < CLTV < 80%             0.02**        -0.10***    0.02**       -0.10***
                                     (2.90)       (-16.02)    (2.98)       (-14.18)
     × CLTV = 80%                   0.03**        -0.11***    0.01         -0.12***
                                     (3.24)       (-13.20)    (0.95)       (-15.56)
     × 80% < CLTV ≤ 85%             0.08***       -0.08***    0.07***      -0.08***
                                     (6.03)        (-5.57)    (6.47)       (-7.52)
     × 85% < CLTV ≤ 90%             0.11***       -0.05***    0.11***      -0.05***
                                    (11.50)        (-4.87)    (9.48)       (-4.43)
     × 90% < CLTV ≤ 95%             0.15***         -0.03     0.14***      -0.04*
                                     (4.04)        (-0.69)    (9.46)       (-2.32)
     × 95< CLTV <=100               0.30***         0.11      0.19***      -0.01
                                     (5.15)        (1.89)     (5.88)       (-0.37)
     × 100< CLTV <=105                                        0.15**       -0.06
                                                              (2.60)       (-1.05)
     × 105< CLTV <=110                                        0.41***      0.18**
                                                              (6.18)       (2.64)
     × 110< CLTV

   Rate refi
    × CLTV ≤ 70%                     0.03***      -0.15***    0.04***      -0.14***
                                      (3.85)      (-22.00)    (5.66)       (-19.17)
     × 70% < CLTV < 80%             -0.09***      -0.23***    -0.08***     -0.22***
                                    (-16.89)      (-40.15)    (-13.15)     (-34.96)
     × CLTV = 80%                   -0.07***      -0.21***    -0.11***     -0.24***
                                     (-9.93)      (-29.36)    (-17.07)     (-36.95)
     × 80% < CLTV ≤ 85%             -0.06***      -0.21***    -0.06***     -0.20***
                                     (-6.61)      (-21.30)    (-6.91)      (-24.05)
     × 85% < CLTV ≤ 90%              -0.02**      -0.17***    -0.04***     -0.19***
                                     (-2.99)      (-24.52)    (-5.64)      (-23.90)
     × 90% < CLTV ≤ 95%                0.01       -0.15***    0.02         -0.14***
                                      (0.65)      (-14.40)    (1.82)       (-15.40)
     × 95< CLTV <=100                0.19***        0.01      0.10***      -0.08***
                                      (6.97)       (0.23)     (6.88)       (-5.23)
     × 100< CLTV <=105                                        0.22***      -0.00
                                                              (6.83)       (-0.00)
     × 105< CLTV <=110                                        0.15**       -0.11
                                                              (2.63)       (-1.96)
     × 110< CLTV

   Interest rate polynomials          No            Yes           No           Yes
   Mortgage controls                  Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
   MSA × YYQQ FE                      Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes

   Observations                     1,011,749     1,011,749    1,011,749    1,011,749
         2
   Adj R                             0.140         0.160         0.140        0.160


                                             45
                                           Table 7. Robustness Tests
The table explores the possibility that the previous results are driven by selection. Panel A focuses on selection to
the first transaction in the previous tests (purchase or refinance transactions). The panel uses a sample of triplets:
three transactions for the same property. The first and third transactions are purchase transactions, and the second
transactions can either be a purchase or refinance transaction. The dependent variable is the log difference between
the third purchase transaction and the second purchase/refi transaction. Columns (4) to (6) include controls for the
log difference in values of the second (purchase/refi) and the first (purchase) transactions. Panel B focuses on
selection into the second (purchase) transaction in the previous tests. The panel uses a sample of refi transactions
that have valuations produced by automated valuation models (AVMs). The dependent variable is the log difference
between the appraisal value and the AVM. Defaulted and serious delinquency are dummies indicating whether the
third transaction in the triplet (in Panel A) or the transaction (in Panel B) defaulted (90+ days past due) or was in
serious delinquency (60+ days past due), respectively. Cash-out refi and Rate/term refi indicators describe the
second transaction in the triplet (in Panel A) or the transaction of interest (in Panel B). Mortgage controls include
information about the second transaction in the triplet (in Panel A) or the transaction of interest (in Panel B): FICO
credit score (at origination), combined loan-to-value ratio (CLTV), short-term ARM indicator, hybrid ARM
indicator, fixed rate 15-year mortgage indicator, fixed rate 30-year mortgage indicator, excess premium indicator,
owner-occupier indicator, debt-to-income ratio, condo indicator, property size, property age, and tenure. MSA ×
YYQQ FE is MSA-quarter fixed effects. There are MSA-quarter fixed effects for the second and third transactions in
the triplet (in Panel A) or the transaction of interest (in Panel B). Variable definitions are in Appendix A. All
regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the calendar quarter level. t-statistics are reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Controlling for Selection Drivers in the First Transaction

                             Dependent variable:                   log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100
                                       Sample:            Triplet subsample                         Triplet subsample
                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)        (6)
Cash-out refi                                      5.59***     4.88***                       5.42*** 4.86***
                                                   (30.49)      (21.97)                      (29.44) (21.88)
  × Third Party Originator                                     1.35***                                   1.07***
                                                                 (5.57)                                   (4.46)
  × CLTV ≤ 70%                                                              4.78***                                3.52***
                                                                             (13.85)                               (10.21)
  × 70% < CLTV < 80%                                                        4.61***                                3.92***
                                                                             (11.37)                                (9.72)
  × CLTV = 80%                                                              5.39***                                4.74***
                                                                             (11.96)                               (10.58)
  × 80% < CLTV ≤ 85%                                                        5.73***                                5.43***
                                                                              (8.58)                                (8.15)
  × 85% < CLTV ≤ 90%                                                        5.43***                                5.01***
                                                                              (9.83)                                (9.16)
  × 90% < CLTV ≤ 95%                                                         5.73**                                 6.06**
                                                                              (3.04)                                (3.22)
  × 95% < CLTV                                                                 3.20                                   3.05
                                                                              (1.04)                                (1.00)

(continues on next page)




                                                           46
                                          Table 7. Robustness Tests (Cont.)

(continues from previous page)

                                Dependent variable:                   log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 2)) × 100
                                          Sample:            Triplet subsample                          Triplet subsample
                                                         (1)         (2)          (3)               (4)         (5)       (6)
…
Rate/term refi                                         2.52***        1.55***                   4.06***    3.14***
                                                       (15.86)         (8.98)                   (24.74)    (17.79)
  × Third Party Originator                                            2.14***                              1.98***
                                                                      (14.40)                              (13.47)
  × CLTV ≤ 70%                                                                  1.34***                                1.92***
                                                                                 (4.17)                                 (6.00)
  × 70% < CLTV < 80%                                                            1.95***                                2.97***
                                                                                 (5.36)                                 (8.21)
  × CLTV = 80%                                                                  2.91***                                4.06***
                                                                                 (7.30)                                (10.26)
  × 80% < CLTV ≤ 85%                                                            2.92***                                3.80***
                                                                                 (6.14)                                 (8.09)
  × 85% < CLTV ≤ 90%                                                            2.00***                                3.13***
                                                                                 (4.34)                                 (6.86)
  × 90% < CLTV ≤ 95%                                                             1.22*                                 2.62***
                                                                                 (2.31)                                 (5.04)
  × 95% < CLTV                                                                   -1.14                                   0.40
                                                                                (-1.04)                                 (0.38)

log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 0))                                                              0.04***    0.04***     0.04***
                                                                                                (14.84)    (14.90)     (14.41)
log(Value (t = 1) / Price (t = 0)) * I(Refi (t = 1))                                            0.10***     0.09***    0.10***
                                                                                                (20.04)     (19.68)    (21.13)

Defaulted + Serious delinquency indicators              Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes
Mortgage controls                                       Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes
MSA × YYQQ (first transaction) FE                       Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes
MSA × YYQQ (second transaction) FE                      Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes

Observations                                           109,598        109,598   109,598         109,598    109,598     109,598
        2
Adj R                                                   0.279          0.281     0.281           0.293       0.294      0.295




                                                                 47
                                Table 7. Robustness Tests (Cont.)
Panel B: Using AVMs as Benchmark Valuations

                                    Dependent variable: log(Value (t = 1) / AVM (t = 1)) × 100
                                              Sample: Refi subsample + refi w/o purchase
                                                             (1)           (2)         (3)
              Cash-out refi                               6.94***       6.05***
                                                           (36.97)      (31.39)
               × Third Party Originator                                 1.69***
                                                                        (19.84)
               × CLTV ≤ 70%                                                         5.62***
                                                                                    (27.23)
               × 70% < CLTV < 80%                                                   6.79***
                                                                                    (33.86)
               × CLTV = 80%                                                         7.62***
                                                                                    (36.59)
               × 80% < CLTV ≤ 85%                                                   7.60***
                                                                                    (26.29)
               × 85% < CLTV ≤ 90%                                                   6.42***
                                                                                    (28.28)
               × 90% < CLTV ≤ 95%                                                   4.85***
                                                                                     (7.46)
               × 95% < CLTV                                                         4.14***
                                                                                     (5.46)

              Rate refi                                    3.67***     2.56***
                                                           (19.27)     (13.33)
                × Third Party Originator                               2.28***
                                                                       (32.21)
                × CLTV ≤ 70%                                                        2.46***
                                                                                    (11.64)
                × 70% < CLTV < 80%                                                  2.95***
                                                                                    (14.83)
                × CLTV = 80%                                                        4.15***
                                                                                    (20.03)
                × 80% < CLTV ≤ 85%                                                  5.22***
                                                                                    (20.62)
                × 85% < CLTV ≤ 90%                                                  3.89***
                                                                                    (18.32)
                × 90% < CLTV ≤ 95%                                                  3.53***
                                                                                    (14.79)
                × 95% < CLTV                                                        3.09***
                                                                                     (7.22)

              Defaulted + Serious delinquency indicators    Yes          Yes         Yes
              Mortgage controls                             Yes          Yes         Yes
              MSA × YYQQ (first transaction) FE             Yes          Yes         Yes
              MSA × YYQQ (second transaction) FE            Yes          Yes         Yes

              Observations                                 441,132     441,132      441,132
                      2
              Adj R                                         0.043       0.047        0.044


                                                      48
                 Figure 1. Origination of 100% Loan-to-Value Mortgages




The figure shows the fraction of loans (purchase and refinance) that were originated at 100%
LTV. The data used is the universe of mortgages in Loan Performance (LP; subprime and Alt-A
securitized mortgages) and confirming loans (the dataset that is used in this study).




                                            49
