                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 AMERISCLEROSIS? THE PUZZLE OF RISING U.S. UNEMPLOYMENT PERSISTENCE

                                          Olivier Coibion
                                        Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                          Dmitri Koustas

                                        Working Paper 19600
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19600


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We thank Olivier Blanchard, Romain Ranciere, David Romer, and Justin Wolfers for very helpful
comments, and Florence Jaumotte for sharing updated Blanchard-Wolfers series on labor market
institutions. This paper was written in part while Coibion was a visiting scholar at the IMF, whose
support was greatly appreciated. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as representing those of any institutions with which they are or have been affiliated.
We thank Alex Dombrowski, Noa Dreymann, Chuck Fang, and especially Donna Kim and Yury
Yatsynovich for research assistance. Gorodnichenko thanks NSF and Sloan Foundation for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Dmitri Koustas. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Amerisclerosis? The Puzzle of Rising U.S. Unemployment Persistence
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Dmitri Koustas
NBER Working Paper No. 19600
October 2013
JEL No. E24,E32,E52,J64,R11,R23

                                              ABSTRACT

The persistence of U.S. unemployment has risen with each of the last three recessions, raising the specter
that future U.S. recessions might look more like the Eurosclerosis experience of the 1980s than traditional
V-shaped recoveries of the past. In this paper, we revisit possible explanations for this rising persistence.
First, we argue that financial shocks do not systematically lead to more persistent unemployment than
monetary policy shocks, so these cannot explain the rising persistence of unemployment. Second,
monetary and fiscal policies can account for only part of the evolving unemployment persistence. Therefore,
we turn to a third class of explanations: propagation mechanisms. We focus on factors consistent with
four other cyclical patterns which have evolved since the early 1980s: a rising cyclicality in long-term
unemployment, lower regional convergence after downturns, rising cyclicality in disability claims,
and missing disinflation. These factors include declining labor mobility, changing age structures, and
the decline in trust among Americans. To determine how these factors affect unemployment persistence,
this paper exploits regional variation in labor market outcomes across Western Europe and North America
during 1970-1990, in contrast to most previous work focusing either on cross-country variation or
regional variation within countries. The results suggest that only cultural factors can account for the
rising persistence of unemployment in the U.S., but the evolution in mobility and demographics over
time should have more than offset the effects of culture.


Olivier Coibion                                       Dmitri Koustas
University of Texas, Austin                           Department of Economics
7600 Pitter Pat                                       530 Evans Hall #3880
Austin, TX 78736                                      University of California, Berkeley
and NBER                                              Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
ocoibion@gmail.com                                    dkoustas@econ.berkeley.edu

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
I        Introduction
When the U.S. unemployment rate surged by four percentage points between 1979 and 1983 in the midst
of what was then the most severe slump since the Great Depression, West European countries
experienced, on average, an almost identical rise in unemployment in those years. But whereas rapid job
growth in the U.S. offset all of the rise in joblessness by 1987, the average unemployment rate among
West European countries declined only half a percentage point over the same time period. This very
different response to what was most likely a common set of shocks was crystallized for economists by
Blanchard and Summers (1986) when they coined the term “hysteresis” to characterize the exceptional
persistence in unemployment experienced by countries like France and Germany. Among a more general
audience, Eurosclerosis became the common term used to describe the missing job recovery amongst
European countries, in sharp contrast to the apparent dynamism and vitality of American labor markets.
         Thirty years later, and nearly six years after the start of the 2007-9 “Great Recession”, the
recovery in the U.S. labor market is a pale shadow of the U.S. experience in the early 1980s. From its
peak of 10 percent in October of 2009, the U.S. has seen its unemployment rate fall only halfway back to
its pre-recession levels in the four years since. This comparatively slow rate of recovery still likely
overstates the state of the job market as much of the reduction in the unemployment rate reflects a decline
in labor force participation rather than job growth (Erceg and Levin 2013).1
         But while the pace of the U.S. job market recovery looks downright sclerotic relative to the rapid
rebound experienced after the Volcker recessions of the early 1980s or prior recessions in the post-World
War II era, the degree of persistence in unemployment since the Great Recession only modestly exceeds
that following the 2001 recession, which in turn modestly exceeded that of the 1990 recession. From this
perspective, we observe a gradual trend of increasingly “jobless recoveries” over the last three recessions
that contrasts sharply with the previous U.S. experience. If this trend reflects more than a historical
coincidence and were to continue, future U.S. recessions are likely to display a level of sclerosis which
increasingly resembles the experience of many West European countries in the 1980s.
         To support the notion that there may have been common factors at work in the 1990, 2001 and
2007 recessions, we document four related properties of the Great Recession which are puzzling in
comparison to historical (pre-1990) recessions but are not unusual when compared with the 1990 and
2001 recessions: (1) missing disinflation– given the historical link between inflation and unemployment,
one would have expected inflation to fall much more in the Great Recession than it actually did; (2) the
unusually large share of long-term unemployed; (3) the slow rate of convergence in regional labor
markets; and (4) the rise in disability claims during the Great Recession. We show that each of these is
indeed puzzling relative to pre-1990 recessions, but that the experience in the Great Recession is either in
line with or only modestly exceeding what would have been expected given the patterns of the 1990 and
2001 recessions and the severity of the Great Recession.
         A second striking element about these properties of the data is that each was also found to be a
puzzle for West European countries in the 1980s: Blanchard and Summers (1986) discuss the missing
disinflation in European economies during the early 1980s, Decressin and Fatas (1995) document the
slow regional convergence within individual European labor markets during the 1980s relative to the
more rapid convergence of the U.S., Machin and Manning (1999) discuss the well-known rise of long-
term unemployment in Western Europe over the course of the 1980s, and Emerson and Dramais (1988)
document the unusual rise in disability claims amongst West Europeans in the 1980s. The fact that four

1
 The labor force participation rate has declined by over 3 percentage points since January 2007; in contrast, no
major decline in labor force participation occurred during the 1980s recovery (BLS 2013).

                                                                                                              2
features of the Great Recession (when unemployment persistence was high) are puzzling relative to pre-
1990 recessions (when unemployment persistence was low) but not puzzling relative to the 1990 and
2001 recessions (when unemployment persistence was high) and that these same four features were also
present in West European economies in the early 1980s (when unemployment persistence was high) is at
least suggestive of common forces at work underlying the persistence of unemployment.
         What lies behind this rising persistence of U.S. unemployment? We consider three classes of
explanations. First, the composition of shocks driving U.S. business cycles may have changed. If the
channels through which shocks affect the economy vary across different types of shocks, then one might
expect some shocks to have more persistent effects on the economy than others. This view is frequently
advocated in the context of financial shocks, based on the evidence of Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) and
Jorda, Schularick and Taylor (2011) that financial crises have historically been associated with longer-
lived downturns than typical recessions. Second, policy responses to business cycles may have changed.
In the context of the Great Recession, one can point to a monetary policy response which has been
severely constrained by the zero bound on nominal interest rates and fiscal policy turning increasingly
contractionary since 2010. Third, the economic mechanisms via which shocks propagate through the
economy (propagation mechanisms) may have changed. This view would imply that the same shocks
which generated little unemployment persistence in the U.S. economy of the 1980s may now have much
longer-lived effects. We address each of these potential explanations in turn.
         With respect to a changing composition of shocks, a common interpretation is that most post-
WWII recessions were driven by the Federal Reserve’s desire to clamp down on inflation, leading to
rapid recoveries once interest rates were loosened, while recent recessions have been driven by financial
factors which could inherently have longer-lived effects. While the historical evidence is certainly
consistent with financial crises being associated with slow recoveries (e.g. Reinhart and Rogoff 2009a),
this correlation does not tell us whether financial shocks cause slow recoveries or whether other factors
are responsible for both a higher prevalence of financial shocks and gradual recoveries. To assess whether
the relationship is causal, we compare the persistence of unemployment after financial shocks, identified
as in Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012), to the unemployment persistence after monetary policy shocks,
identified as in Romer and Romer (2004), and find no meaningful difference between the two. Historical
decompositions further suggest that while these financial shocks contributed significantly to the rise in
unemployment during the 2001 and 2007 recessions, they cannot account for the persistence in
unemployment observed in each recession. Thus, our empirical evidence does not support the argument
that financial shocks, as a source of recent business cycles, can explain the rising unemployment
persistence in the U.S.
         The second explanation is that changing policy responses to business cycles are responsible for
the rising unemployment persistence, with the zero bound on interest rates and a turn toward fiscal
austerity being the sources of contractionary monetary and fiscal policies respectively in the Great
Recession. We construct for each recession the monetary policy deviations from an average response
function conditioning on the Fed’s real-time beliefs about economic conditions following Romer and
Romer (2004), which allows us to quantify the extent to which monetary policy was unusually
expansionary or contractionary in recent recessions (including during the zero bound period) relative to
the pre-1990 average. We perform a similar exercise for fiscal policy, using changes in the cyclically
adjusted federal budget balance as a share of potential GDP to quantify the extent to which fiscal policy
was unusually expansionary or contractionary in each of the last three recessions relative to pre-1990
recessions. We can then quantify the contribution of the stance of monetary and fiscal policies on


                                                                                                        3
unemployment in each recession, using the estimated response of unemployment to monetary policy
shocks and assumptions about fiscal multipliers for monetary and fiscal policies respectively.
         For the 1990 recession, we show that both monetary and fiscal policy were relatively
contractionary and that, while these cannot account for the delayed peak in unemployment rates during
this recession, unemployment rates would have declined much more rapidly if monetary and fiscal
policies had followed their pre-1990 cyclical behaviors. Thus, policy responses can explain most of the
inertia in unemployment rates during the 1990 recession. During the 2001 recession, while fiscal policy
was initially expansionary relative to pre-1990 recessions and monetary policy was typical, both policies
became relatively contractionary two and a half years after the start of the recession, contributing around
one-third of the excess persistence in unemployment relative to historical recession patterns. Finally, in
the Great Recession, both monetary and fiscal policies were initially quite expansionary by historical
standards, yielding an unemployment rate that was approximately 1 percentage point lower in 2009 than
would have been the case under pre-1990 policies. But with the onset of the zero bound on interest rates
in December 2008 and the reduction in cyclically adjusted deficits starting in mid-2009, both policies
turned increasingly contractionary relative to historical patterns, pushing the unemployment rate 1.5
percentage points higher than it would have at the end of 2011 under pre-1990 policies. Hence, fiscal and
monetary policies clearly contributed to the unusually high persistence in unemployment during the Great
Recession, as they did with the 1990 and 2001 recessions. Yet much of the excess persistence in
unemployment relative to historical recessions remains unexplained.
         We therefore turn to the third class of explanations: changes in the propagation mechanisms of
the economy. Because the range of factors which can affect the propagation of shocks is vast, we use the
four stylized facts from the Great Recession—the missing disinflation, the rise in long-term
unemployment, the declining convergence rate in regional labor markets, and the changing cyclicality of
disability claims—as guideposts in selecting possible candidate explanations. For example, much of the
recent discussion of the missing disinflation has centered on downward wage rigidity, which in a low
inflation environment can hinder the downward adjustment of real wages needed to facilitate the
adjustment of labor markets during economic downturns. Proponents of this view point to the fact that
since the early 1980s a rising share of workers experienced no annual change in wages. But if downward
wage rigidity is to hinder the downward adjustment of wages during a downturn, one would expect to
find a larger increase in the incidence of zero wage changes during recent recessions than in the past, a
feature which we document is absent in the data. More broadly, for wage rigidities to be the source of the
missing price disinflation, one would expect to see a missing wage disinflation as well, whereas no such
pattern can be found in the data. Hence, downward wage rigidities appear an unlike source of the missing
disinflation or the rising persistence in U.S. unemployment.
         Since downward wage rigidities are unlikely to be the source of the missing disinflation or the
rising persistence in U.S. unemployment, we consider instead three alternative potential explanations.
Inspired by the declining rate of convergence in regional labor markets, the first possibility we consider is
the declining rate of labor mobility in the U.S. Low mobility can delay the adjustment of regional labor
markets (Blanchard and Katz 1992) and could lead to lower quality job matches, thereby potentially
inducing firms to defer hiring after recessions in the presence of hiring/firing costs. The second possible
explanation is the aging of the U.S. workforce. Older workers who lose their jobs tend to be unemployed
for longer periods of time than younger workers, also in part because older workers may be more resistant
to wage cuts, occupational changes, or geographic relocations (GAO 2012). Another mechanism is that
older unemployed workers, particularly high-tenured displaced workers, are more likely to have obsolete


                                                                                                           4
skills that require retraining, which is particularly costly given their shorter remaining working years.
Hence, an aging workforce could potentially be a factor behind the rising persistence of unemployment.
The third explanation we consider is a cultural one, inspired by the rising cyclicality of disability claims
and larger share of long-term unemployment. Surveys over the last thirty years reveal, for example, that
Americans increasingly find it justifiable to claim government benefits for which one does not qualify.
These surveys also reveal increasingly cynical interpretations of others’ motives, and more broadly a
decline in social trust. These changing social mores could naturally explain rising shares of long-term
unemployment and increases in disability claims during downturns as well as more persistence in overall
unemployment rates.
         These explanations are potentially consistent not only with the time series variation in
unemployment persistence in the U.S. but also the earlier cross-country differences in labor market
outcomes from the 1980s. For example, the U.S. population in 1981 was unusually mobile and had a
demographic composition much more heavily tilted toward the young than any of the countries in
Western Europe. The U.S. also stood out among developed countries in terms of many of its cultural
mores, including high levels of social trust. The falling U.S. labor mobility rate, the aging of the U.S.
population and the decline in Americans’ social trust over the last thirty years all represent, therefore, a
movement toward West European characteristics of the early 1980s in the same way that the rising
persistence of U.S. unemployment recalls the Eurosclerosis experience.
         Can the evolution of these characteristics account for the rise in U.S. unemployment persistence?
Answering this question requires a quantitative estimate of how changes in each of explanatory variables
are related to unemployment persistence. Because of the gradual evolution of each over time, there is
little possibility of extracting such estimates from U.S. time series. Instead, we return to the cross-section
experience of the 1980s to help quantify these effects. Specifically, we build a new dataset of regional
labor market outcomes across twelve West European countries, the U.S. and Canada from 1970 to 1990,
from which we construct regional measures of unemployment persistence—or degree of hysteresis in the
terminology of Blanchard and Summers (1986). Regional data provide much wider cross-sectional
variation than either time series or cross-country analysis, thereby allowing us to quantify the contribution
of each explanation to unemployment persistence. For example, this regional variation captures the high
hysteresis in the south of Belgium compared with the low level of hysteresis in the north of Belgium,
along with the well-known variation in labor market outcomes between the north and south of Italy. We
show that the average within-country labor market variation is as large as the variation across countries,
so this strategy dramatically expands our ability to study the sources of European hysteresis. We also
document a systematic positive link between the degree of aggregate hysteresis in unemployment and the
extent to which regional disparities in unemployment within a country increased over the course of the
1970s and 1980s, further justifying our focus on regional variation in labor market outcomes.
         To be able to isolate the causal effect of mobility, demographics and culture on regional
unemployment outcomes, we integrate into our data a wide range of predetermined regional controls circa
1970 designed to capture in a reduced form the many factors which could affect regional hysteresis levels.
These include, among others, income per capita levels, years of schooling, female employment shares,
urbanization rates, and the sectoral composition of employment. We also construct regional measures of
our key explanatory variables: labor mobility, age structure of the population, and levels of trust. The
combination of detailed regional controls with country fixed effects that capture the effects of aggregate
policies and institutions therefore allows us to isolate the quantitative effects of mobility, demographics
and trust on regional hysteresis.


                                                                                                            5
          While regional mobility rates display a mild negative unconditional correlation with hysteresis
levels, we find no evidence that higher mobility is associated with lower unemployment persistence once
controls (regional and/or aggregate) for other factors are included. This result is robust to a variety of
checks and strongly suggests that the rising persistence in U.S. unemployment cannot be explained
through declining labor mobility. Second, we find that, ceteris paribus, a higher share of older workers
relative to younger workers is generally associated with less hysteresis, the opposite of the effect needed
to explain the rising persistence of U.S. unemployment through demographic effects. Third, we document
a systematic negative correlation between regional levels of trust and unemployment persistence, even
after regional controls and country fixed effects are included. Only this last result goes in the direction
needed to account for the rise in U.S. unemployment persistence.
         With these estimated effects of each channel on unemployment persistence, we can then quantify
how much of the rise in unemployment persistence could potentially be accounted for through these
propagation mechanisms. We find that the decline in trust in the U.S. can account for all of the rise in
unemployment persistence observed since the 1980s. However, once we also incorporate the aging of the
U.S. population, the latter yields even larger predicted declines in persistence, so that the net effect from
all three explanations combined predicts a reduction in unemployment persistence since the 1980s rather
than an increase.
         We interpret our results as supporting the idea that “jobless recoveries” are likely to remain a
prominent feature of future U.S. business cycles since the high persistence in U.S. unemployment after
the Great Recession appears to be a continuation of previous trends rather than accounted for by special
factors such as the financial crisis. While we cannot pin down a unique factor which explains the rising
propagation of shocks in the U.S., this feature of the data may require some rethinking of optimal
countercyclical policies. In particular, if we can expect future business cycles to be much more long-lived
events than the V-shaped recessions that characterized much of the post-WWII period, then discretionary
fiscal policy responses might need to be more focused on longer-lived investment projects than the
transitory transfer payments that have become common in recent stimulus packages.
         The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 documents the rising persistence of U.S.
unemployment. Section 3 investigates whether this rising persistence can be explained—in whole or in
part—by financial shocks or policy responses. Section 4 considers possible propagation mechanisms
while section 5 quantifies the effects of our suggested mechanisms. Section 6 concludes.

II       The Rising Persistence of U.S. Unemployment
A useful starting point for characterizing the changing persistence of U.S. unemployment is to compare
the Great Recession with the twin recessions of the early 1980s. The recession that began in 1980 was a
watershed event for advanced economies. For the U.S., the twin recessions—induced by the Volcker
disinflation policy—generated the largest increase in unemployment since the Great Depression, led to a
persistent decline in inflation, and were ultimately followed by the Great Moderation, a twenty-five year
period of relatively stable macroeconomic outcomes. In contrast, many European countries experienced a
similarly large increase in unemployment over the course of 1980s, but whereas the rise in unemployment
in the U.S. was completely undone by the mid-1980s, unemployment in many European countries
persisted at exceptionally high levels beyond the 1980s. This high persistence in unemployment, referred




                                                                                                           6
to as hysteresis among economists since Blanchard and Summers (1986) or Eurosclerosis among a
broader audience, has been a scourge for many European policymakers since.2
         Panel A of Figure 1 plots unemployment rates in the U.S. during the Volcker recession and
thereafter relative to 1979. The unemployment rate rose nearly four percentage points by 1982 and 1983,
but then declined sharply thereafter. The near-symmetry in unemployment rates during this period is
striking, with unemployment declines in the years after the Volcker recession being nearly as rapid as the
rise during the recession. The figure also plots the average rise in unemployment rates for West European
countries. The rise in unemployment was of approximately the same size and speed as in the U.S. with a
rise of nearly four percentage points by 1983. But whereas U.S. unemployment fell sharply after 1983,
unemployment in Europe stayed persistently high, approximately three to four percentage points higher
than in the late 1970s nearly a decade after the start of the recession.
         Panel A also plots the unemployment rate in the U.S. during the Great Recession. The initial rise
in unemployment exceeds that of the 1980s recession in both the U.S. and W. European countries by
about one percentage point. But the more striking difference is the absence of a strong decline in
unemployment in the U.S. since the peak in unemployment. This asymmetry in the response of
unemployment during the Great Recession represents a sharp contrast with the U.S. experience of the
1980s, at least so far. From 2012 onwards (4 years into the recession), the figure also shows the projected
path of unemployment from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, which implies only a very gradual
decline in unemployment with much more persistence in unemployment than occurred in the U.S. in the
early 1980s. Furthermore, some of the recent decline in unemployment has been driven not by rising
employment but rather by declining labor force participation. Broader measures of employment in the
U.S. like employment to population ratios suggest even less improvement in labor markets than the
unemployment rate since the height of the recession (e.g. Erceg and Levin 2013). The figure suggests the
U.S. recovery from the Great Recession is therefore approximately mid-way between the U.S. recovery in
the 1980s and that of Western Europe over the same period.
         The labor market recovery following the Great Recession appears anemic not only compared to
the recessions of the early 1980s but also compared to most recessions of the post-World War II era.
Panel B of Figure 1 illustrates this by plotting the average path of the unemployment gap (the
unemployment rate minus the CBO’s estimate of the long-run natural rate of unemployment) across U.S.
recessions from the 1948 recession up to and including the 1981-82 recession, relative to the
unemployment gap prior to the start of each recession and normalized by the maximum rise in the gap
during each recession (to control for difference in size of recessions).3 In the average recession until the
1980s, unemployment peaked approximately one year after the start of the recession and had returned to
the natural rate within four years of the start of the recession. Within one year of the peak rise in
unemployment, approximately half of the rise in the unemployment gap had been undone. In contrast, the
peak in the unemployment rate during the Great Recession did not occur until two years after the start of
the recession. Furthermore, in the two years following the peak rise in the unemployment gap during the
Great Recession, only about one-fourth of the rise in unemployment was undone. Thus, the persistence in
unemployment, both in terms of the length of time before the peak and then in the pace of the decline in


2
  While the term “hysteresis” is sometimes used narrowly to refer only to cases in which transitory shocks lead to
permanent changes in unemployment rates, we adopt the broader interpretation of the word as characterizing long-
lived changes in unemployment that need not necessarily be permanent.
3
  When the recovery from one recession is interrupted by a subsequent recession, we drop all values as of the start of
the new recession in constructing the average path of pre-1990 recessions.

                                                                                                                    7
unemployment after the peak, following the Great Recession stands in sharp contrast to most post-World
War II recessions in the U.S.
         However, as also illustrated in Panel B of Figure 1, the labor market recovery following the Great
Recession looks much less exceptional when compared to the 1990 and 2001 recessions. In each of these
cases, unemployment gaps rose for around two years, and the subsequent declines were much more
inertial than those of the average pre-1990 recession. There appears to be a trend toward increasingly
inertial labor market recoveries over time, with the 2001 recovery being more inertial than the 1990
recovery and the Great Recession recovery in turn being more inertial than the 2001 recovery. Thus,
while the labor market recovery following the Great Recession stands out relative to those recessions
before 1990, it is not much more inertial than the “Jobless Recoveries” of 1990 and 2001. This suggests
that there is likely a common cause to the high persistence in unemployment in all three recessions and
that explanations for the high persistence in unemployment following the Great Recession which do not
also apply to the 1990 and 2001 recessions are unlikely to be fully satisfactory. Indeed, in section 4.1, we
document several other features of the Great Recession which stand out relative to most post-WWII
recessions but which were also present in the 1990 and 2001 recessions, consistent with the presence of
common factors underlying the high unemployment persistence in each recession.
         As a third metric for assessing the changing persistence of unemployment in the U.S., we
consider rolling autoregressive estimates of the unemployment rate. Specifically, starting in 1980Q1 and
iterating forward until 2013Q2, we estimate an AR(2) model for the quarterly unemployment rate over the
previous 30 years.4 Panel C of Figure 1 reports the estimated sum of the two autoregressive coefficients
along with one-standard-error band over time. The point estimates range from a low of approximately
0.92 in the sample ending in 1980Q1 to a high of 0.97 in the sample ending in 2011Q3.5 This is a very
large difference in terms of implied dynamic responses. For example, an AR(1) process with persistence
of 0.92 has a half-life of approximately 2 years while an AR(1) process with persistence of 0.97 has a
half-life of over 5 years. Furthermore, the increase in estimated persistence of unemployment occurs
sharply at first as we move through the early 1980s but gradually afterwards. This pattern is consistent
with the recession dynamics illustrated in Panel B of Figure 1: the 1990 recession is the first instance with
increased persistence of unemployment and the subsequent recessions had even more persistence in
unemployment. Thus, this time series approach confirms the progressive and ultimately large increase in
unemployment persistence which has occurred since the early 1980s. In short, while the Great Recession
stands out relative to the 1990 and 2001 recessions in terms of its magnitude, the slow pace of recovery in
unemployment appears consistent with the continuation of a trend apparent in the previous two
recessions.

III      Can Financial Shocks and Policy Responses Account for Rising UE Persistence?
In this section, we consider two prominent explanations for the rise in U.S. unemployment persistence
since the 1980s. The first is that recent business cycles have been driven by financial factors and that
financial crises are, in general, associated with more persistent declines in economic activity. The second


4
  An AR(2) process is a parsimonious representation of unemployment dynamics, but higher-order lags are generally
insignificant.
5
  We can reject the null that the sum of the autoregressive parameters is equal in the 30-year period preceding
1980Q1 and the period thereafter at the 5% level. The same result obtains if we use a later breakdate such as
1986Q1. We find similar results if we use the time series of the unemployment gap, and the estimated differences in
unemployment persistence are even larger, with a low of 0.90 in 1980Q1 and a high exceeding 0.96 in 2011Q3.

                                                                                                                 8
explanation focuses on the response of policy-makers to business cycles, such as the inability of monetary
policymakers to reduce interest rates in the face of the zero-bound.

3.1. Financial Shocks and the Persistence of Unemployment
A commonly suggested reason for the delayed recovery during the Great Recession is that financial crises
such as that of 2007-09 have historically been associated with more persistent economic downturns than
recessions not associated with financial crises (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009a, Reinhart and Rogoff 2009b),
Jorda, Schularick and Taylor 2011). While the evidence on this point is persuasive, the chain of causality
is much less so. The persistence of economic downturns following financial crises could be higher than
normal because financial shocks themselves lead to more persistent downturns than other shocks. But it
could also reflect other underlying factors responsible for both the appearance of financial shocks and
more persistent economic downturns. Romer (2013), for example, notes that there have been many more
financial crises in the U.S. since the 1980s than there were in the previous thirty years, which is precisely
the period during which unemployment has become more persistent. To name just one such factor, low
inflation rates could lead financial firms to invest in riskier assets in a “search for yield” (since nominal
rates would also be low) and simultaneously lead to more persistence in unemployment if the low rate of
inflation interacted with downward nominal wage rigidities to prevent the decline in real wages needed to
clear labor markets.
         To assess the causal nature of this claim, i.e. whether financial shocks lead to more persistent
economic downturns than other shocks, we compare the persistence of unemployment after identified
financial shocks to the unemployment persistence following monetary policy shocks. We focus on
monetary policy shocks in particular because these are one of the leading candidates for explaining post-
World War II recessions up to and including the Volcker recessions (Romer and Romer 2004, Coibion
2012). To identify monetary policy shocks, we replicate Romer and Romer (2004) with the same sample
and data and regress changes in the target Federal Funds rate decided upon at FOMC meetings on real-
time information available to FOMC members through the Greenbook forecasts generated by the staff of
the Board of Governors. The estimated residuals are then defined as monetary policy shocks. Impulse
responses of unemployment to monetary policy shocks are constructed by regressing the unemployment
rate on lags of itself and lags of the monetary policy shock. Following Romer and Romer (2004), we use
24 monthly lags of the variable and 36 lags of the monetary policy shock to estimate impulse responses at
the monthly frequency which we then convert to quarterly frequency.
         For financial shocks, we focus on the credit spread shocks identified in Gilchrist and Zakrajsek
(2012). They construct a measure of excess corporate bond premiums from corporate spreads which has
significant predictive power for economic activity and then identify exogenous innovations to excess
bond premiums from a vector autoregression (VAR). The specific VAR they use includes a vector of non-
financial variables, their measure of the bond premium, and a vector of other financial variables. The
identifying assumption is that non-financial variables do not respond on impact to a shock to the excess
bond premium whereas other financial variables do. We replace real GDP in the VAR with the level of
the unemployment rate, but otherwise follow Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) in using 2 lags in the VAR
and data from 1973Q1 until 2010Q3.
         We focus on this specific measure of financial shocks for several reasons. First, this measure is
one of very few well-defined identification schemes for financial shocks. Second, this shock captures
rising bond spreads associated with credit crunches, a feature thoroughly documented in Gilchrist and
Zakrajsek (2012) and apparent in the financial crisis of 2007-2009. Third, changes in the excess bond


                                                                                                           9
premium have strong predictive power for macroeconomic aggregates, consistent with their quantitative
importance. Fourth, the macroeconomic responses to these shocks from the VAR are consistent with
financial shocks being a potential source of recessions, with a rise in the bond premium being followed by
pronounced declines in consumption, investment, output, inflation and interest rates.
         As a first step to measuring the persistence of unemployment implied by each shock, we estimate
the half-life of unemployment from each shock, defined as the number of quarters needed for the
unemployment rate to reach half its maximum level. Specifically, we estimate the impulse response of
unemployment to each kind of shock along with standard errors of coefficients. We then repeatedly draw
from the distribution of parameters and construct impulse responses for each draw. For each set of
impulse responses, we find the number of quarters after the shock that it takes for the unemployment rate
to fall halfway below its peak level. Monetary policy shocks, on average, require 13 quarters before
unemployment falls below half of its peak level, while financial shocks take 12 quarters on average. The
90% confidence intervals are [11,20] and [8,20] quarters for monetary and financial shocks respectively.
Thus, the two sets of shocks yield very similar results for the overall persistence of unemployment.
         We also construct a narrower measure of persistence which focuses only on the rate of decline of
unemployment after its peak. Specifically, we estimate the impulse response of unemployment to each
kind of shock along with standard errors of coefficients. We then repeatedly draw from the distribution of
parameters and construct impulse responses for each draw. For each set of impulse responses, we
normalize the dynamic response of unemployment by the peak rise in unemployment in that response and
store the resulting normalized path of unemployment starting with the period in which unemployment
peaks. This yields a distribution of responses after the peak rise in unemployment for each of the two
shocks. The left figure in Panel A of Figure 2 then plots the median response of unemployment after the
peak for each of the two shocks as well as the associated 90% confidence intervals. The rate at which
unemployment declines after the two shocks is broadly similar: a little quicker for monetary policy shocks
in the first year but much slower in the second year, so that both median responses point to
unemployment returning to normal approximately 10 quarters after the period in which unemployment
peaks. The confidence intervals largely overlap, so there is little statistical evidence that an average
financial shock leads to more persistence (by either metric) in unemployment rates than monetary policy
shocks.
         The right figure of Panel A reproduces the confidence interval for unemployment responses after
financial shocks and superimposes on the graph the normalized path of unemployment (after the peak
rise) for the average pre-1990 recession as well as for the 2007 recession. While the average pre-1990
recession is near the middle of the distribution, the unemployment persistence following the 2007
recession is well above the 90% confidence interval of unemployment paths from financial shocks. Thus,
we find that financial shocks as identified in Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) do not lead to more persistent
responses of unemployment than monetary policy shocks and that the persistence of unemployment since
the Great Recession exceeds what one would expect from a financial shock.
         Even if a typical financial shock does not lead to more persistence in unemployment than
monetary policy shocks, one could still explain high unemployment persistence over recent recessions
through financial shocks if the latter were themselves unusually pervasive during each period. To assess
this possibility, we construct the predicted path of unemployment during the 2001 and 2007 recessions
from financial shocks starting in the year prior to each recession. We then plot in Panel B of Figure 2 the
path of unemployment in each recession (relative to the level in the quarter prior to the start of the



                                                                                                         10
recession and normalized by the size of the peak increase in unemployment), the predicted path from
financial shocks, and the unexplained component of unemployment.6
         Financial shocks account for most of the initial rise in unemployment, and because of the rise in
the excess bond premium at the end of 2002 and 2003 can also account for some of the persistence in
unemployment over the first year after the official end of the recession. This is an example of how an
unusually long sequence of financial shocks can contribute to excess persistence in unemployment even if
a single shock itself does not deliver more unemployment persistence than other shocks. However, this
effect was short-lived: the effect of financial shocks on unemployment is predicted to have completely
dissipated by early 2004 whereas unemployment was still at 80% of its peak rise. As a result, the very
gradual decline of unemployment from 2003 to 2006 is unexplained by financial shocks. A similar result
obtains in the Great Recession. The credit bust accounts for half of the initial rise in unemployment, but
its effects should have dissipated rapidly, so the persistence of unemployment is again unexplained. In
short, our results suggest that financial shocks have no more persistent effects on unemployment than
monetary policy shocks and that the excess persistence in unemployment observed in the 1990, 2001 and
2007 recessions also cannot be explained by the sequences of financial shocks in each period.
         Although credit supply shocks are likely one of the leading sources of financial shocks, one could
extend this analysis to other financial factors. Hall (2013), for example, suggests that equity premia,
rather than bonds, are at the root of the slow recovery from the Great Recession. While there are no well-
identified measures of shocks to equity risk premia (to our knowledge), we find no evidence that shocks
to excess stock returns in the VAR of Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) contributed to the unusual
persistence of unemployment following the 1990, 2001 or 2007 recessions.
         Yet another financial factor which is often raised in the context of the Great Recession is the
deleveraging hypothesis, the idea that the decline in household debt to income ratio since 2007 can
account for the severity of job losses incurred during the Great Recession (e.g. Mian and Sufi 2011).
There are, however, several reasons to be skeptical of household deleveraging as a fundamental
explanation for the rising unemployment persistence observed in the U.S. First, household deleveraging
has been unusually high only in the Great Recession. This is illustrated in Panel C of Figure 2, in which
we plot the evolution of household debt to income ratios in the last three recessions as well as the average
across pre-1990 recessions. If household deleveraging is central to the high unemployment persistence
observed in the Great Recession, one needs additional explanations to account for the high persistence in
unemployment during the two previous recessions. A second source of skepticism is that the 2001
recession was followed by a leveraging up of households which mirrors the deleveraging of households
during the Great Recession. Unless there are strong asymmetries in the effects of leveraging versus
deleveraging, strong repercussions of changes in household leverage on unemployment would imply that
we would have expected unemployment to fall sharply during the 2001 recession, in direct contrast to
what actually occurred.
         Asymmetric effects are, of course, possible. Indeed, theoretical models in which household
deleveraging plays a large role emphasize precisely such an asymmetry occurring through the zero bound
on interest rates (e.g. Eggertson and Krugman 2012). In these models, an increase in credit constraint on
borrowers forces them to reduce their consumption, inducing an economic downturn and a decline in

6
  We omit the 1990 recession from the figure because financial shocks did not contribute to raising unemployment.
In the case of the 2007 recessions, financial shocks are not available after the third quarter of 2010. However, given
the decline in bond spreads since then, it is unlikely that extending the excess bond premium series would
significantly alter the results.

                                                                                                                   11
inflation via nominal rigidities. When nominal interest rates are fixed at the zero bound, the decline in
inflation raises real interest rates, which further reduces output and inflation. This deflationary spiral
mechanism can lead to large and persistent declines in activity. There are thus two source of asymmetries
present in these models. First is the absence of countercyclical monetary policy. Second are the feedback
effects from the absence of countercyclical monetary policy into inflation expectations, leading to a
deflationary mechanism which amplifies and propagates the initial impulse. This feedback effect through
the expectations channel is, however, at odds with several features of recent years. First, neither inflation
nor inflation expectations have fallen significantly since 2008 so the deflationary mechanism does not
appear to have been operating in a meaningful way during the Great Recession. Second, Bachmann, Berg
and Sims (2013) find no evidence that households with higher inflation expectations want to purchase
more, holding other household characteristics and beliefs constant. Third, Wieland (2012) considers three
additional and distinct tests of the expectations channel underlying the deflationary spiral and finds no
empirical evidence for this channel, casting doubt on the primary mechanism through which very non-
linear effects of the ZLB could arise. While these three pieces of evidence do not support the deflationary
spiral mechanism, the absence of countercyclical monetary policy at the ZLB is still a source of
asymmetry. In the next section, we therefore consider whether differences in monetary or fiscal policy
responses to the 1990, 2001 and 2007 recessions can account for the rising persistence in U.S.
unemployment.

3.2. The Contribution of Monetary and Fiscal Policies to Rising Unemployment Persistence
Since financial shocks seem unable to account for the rising persistence of unemployment experienced by
the U.S. since the 1980s, we turn to a second factor often suggested: differences in policy responses. We
focus on both monetary and fiscal policies. For monetary policy, we again follow the approach of Romer
and Romer (2004) after extending their dataset to December 2012.7 We estimate the same reaction
function as Romer and Romer (2004) until December 2008 when the zero bound on interest rates became
binding. We interpret the reaction function as capturing the average or systematic response of the Federal
Reserve to real-time economic conditions, and the residuals as the innovations to monetary policy. We
then construct the cumulative sum of residuals for each recession since 1969 as a measure of unusual
monetary policy actions taken in each recession. We plot the resulting series for the 1990, 2001, and 2007
recessions as well as the average across pre-1990 recessions in the left-hand graph of Panel A in Figure 3.
         Monetary policy shocks averaged out in the first 12 months of the pre-1990 recessions, but
thereafter interest rates progressively fell by two percentage points more than would have been expected
given economic conditions. While we observe a similar pattern of shocks averaging out to zero over the
first twelve months of the 1990 and 2001 recessions, differences arise thereafter. In the 1990 recession,
monetary policy shocks continue to average around zero, such that monetary policy ultimately was two
percentage points more contractionary than during the average pre-1990 recession. The 2001 recession is
similar, except that monetary policy averaged an extra half-percentage points above and beyond what
would have been expected from economic conditions. Hence, monetary policy in both the 1990 and 2001
recessions was more contractionary than in previous recessions.
         For the Great Recession, we observe a more rapid decline in interest rates over the first twelve
months than expected from economic conditions, leading to a cumulative decline in interest rates of one

7
 Forecasts from January 1997 to December 2007 are from the Greenbooks. However, because more recent
Greenbooks have not yet been released by the Board of Governors, we use forecasts from the Blue Chip Survey of
Forecasters starting in 2008.

                                                                                                           12
percentage below the experience in other recessions. Thus, through December 2008 when the zero-bound
became binding, monetary policy was unusually expansionary. To construct monetary policy shocks after
2008, we construct a predicted path of interest rates for FOMC meetings starting in January 2009 under
the assumption that the Federal Reserve would have followed the estimated reaction function in
subsequent periods absent the ZLB. From this sequence of predicted rates, we define the shocks each
month as the negative of the FFR changes that would have been decided upon had monetary policy-
makers been free to lower interest rates further. This leads to the sequence of shocks plotted in the figure,
which point toward a dramatic and continuing sequence of contractionary monetary policy shocks as the
economy continued to deteriorate but monetary policymakers were unable to implement traditional
monetary policy responses. Our estimates imply that the inability to lower interest rates starting in 2009
led to a sequence of monetary policy shocks summing to over 3 percentage points over a two-year period.
         To assess differences in the stance of fiscal policy, we focus on changes in the cyclically adjusted
Federal budget balance normalized by potential GDP. Cyclically adjusted balances are needed to control
for automatic changes in spending and revenues as business cycle conditions change. We normalize these
measures by potential GDP (rather than actual GDP) because this normalization is largely insensitive to
business cycle conditions. We plot the changes in cyclically adjusted balances relative to their levels in
the quarter prior to the start of each recession in the right-hand side graph of Panel A in Figure 3. As with
monetary policy measures, we present these responses for the 1990, 2001 and 2007 recessions as well as
an average across pre-1990 recessions.
         The average pre-1990 recession is characterized by little change in the cyclically adjusted budget
balance over the first year of the recession, after which a 1-1.5 percentage point decline in the budget
balance occurs and is maintained over the subsequent two years. During the 1990 recession, there was a
sharp increase in the budget balance over the first few quarters of the recession which was sustained
relative to the pre-1990 recessions for the next two years. Ten quarters after the start of the recession,
there was a second and sustained increase in the budget balance leading to a 3% point gap between the
budget balances after the 1990 recession and pre-1990 recessions. Hence, fiscal policy was distinctly
more contractionary in the 1990 recession than the average over previous recessions. In contrast, both the
2001 and 2007 recessions were followed by significant increases in cyclically adjusted deficits,
approximately 4% points of potential GDP after two years. In both cases, these deficits were gradually
reduced over the subsequent two years.
         To quantify how policy responses may have contributed to rising unemployment persistence, we
construct counterfactual paths of unemployment in which monetary and fiscal policies are set equal to the
pre-1990 averages. We proceed as follows. For monetary policy, we estimate the impulse response of
unemployment to monetary policy shocks (using the extended sample of shocks from 1969-2008) with 24
monthly lags of unemployment and 36 lags of monetary policy shocks, as in Romer and Romer (2004).
For each of the 1990, 2001 and 2007 recessions, we use these estimated impulse responses to predict the
path of unemployment coming from the difference in monetary policy shocks between each of these
recessions and the pre-1990 recessions, which constitutes the contribution of “unusual” monetary policy
to unemployment in each recession. These contributions are plotted in Panel B of Figure 3 for each of the
three recent recessions. For example, the fact that monetary policy was more contractionary during the
1990 recession than during pre-1990 recessions points to a cumulative increase in unemployment over the
course of the recession and beyond, ultimately pushing the unemployment rate approximately 0.70
percentage points higher four years after the start of the recession than it would have been had policy
followed the same path as in pre-1990 recessions. Monetary policy similarly contributed to higher


                                                                                                          13
unemployment after the 2001 recession, albeit by less than in the 1991 recession. The zero-lower bound,
on the other hand, is estimated to have contributed much more to unemployment in the Great Recession,
adding approximately 1.5 percentage points to the unemployment rate after four years. Note that this
increase in unemployment is estimated not to have begun until two years after the recession, which
reflects the fact that the zero-bound was not reached until one year into the recession and that monetary
policy shocks have delayed effects on economic activity, including unemployment rates. Thus, for each
recession, monetary policy contributed to the persistence of unemployment relative to pre-1990
recessions by raising unemployment rates two years after the start of each recession.
         To quantify the contribution of fiscal policy, we follow a simpler approach and assume
instantaneous effects of changes in the cyclically adjusted fiscal balance on output growth, with a dollar
multiplier of 1.5. This follows Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) who document business cycle
variation in the government spending multiplier, with multipliers being significantly higher in downturns
than during expansions. A multiplier of 1.5 is also in line with a number of studies which estimated
multipliers specifically during the Great Recession, including e.g. Romer and Bernstein (2009), Blanchard
and Leigh (2012), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2011). The results are again presented in Panel B of
Figure 3. For the 1990 recession, the fact that the cyclically adjusted balance was approximately 1%
point higher (in terms of potential GDP) than in pre-1990 recessions leads to a prediction of a 0.5% point
higher unemployment rate over the first two years, before rising to 1% point higher as the cyclically
adjusted balance increased further relative to the pre-1990 recession. For the 2001 recession, the fact that
the cyclically adjusted balance was significantly more expansionary than the pre-1990 average yields an
unemployment rate lower by almost a full percentage point over much of the four-year period following
the start of the recession. In the case of the Great Recession, the large decline in the cyclically adjusted
balance over the first two years of the recession is predicted to have lowered unemployment by nearly a
full percentage point, but this was almost completely reversed within the next two years as the cyclically
adjusted balance converged back toward the pre-1990 average. Thus, as with monetary policy, fiscal
policy likely contributed to higher persistence in unemployment by raising unemployment rates in later
years of each recession episode relative to pre-1990 fiscal policies.
         Can these effects quantitatively account for the increased unemployment persistence observed in
Figure 1? We construct counterfactual paths of unemployment for each recession assuming that both
monetary and fiscal policies had followed their pre-1990 averages. We then present in Panel C of Figure
3 the original dynamics of unemployment (normalized by predicted peak levels) as well as the
counterfactual dynamics of unemployment (normalized by counterfactual peak levels) in which monetary
and fiscal policies are held at their pre-1990 average responses. For the 1990 recession, monetary and
fiscal policies can account for much of the excess persistence in unemployment. Four years after the
recession, for example, unemployment with pre-1990 fiscal and monetary policies is predicted to have
been even lower than in pre-1990 recessions. However, adjusting for fiscal and monetary policies cannot
account for the delayed peak in the unemployment rate. The latter also obtains for both the 2001 and
2007 recessions. However, the rate of decline in unemployment after the peak is significantly faster once
one accounts for the differences in monetary and fiscal policies: in each case, unemployment four years
after the start of the recession is at 40% of the peak level after controlling for policy differences, whereas
actual unemployment rates had only fallen to approximately 60% and 70% of peak levels in the 2001 and
2007 recessions respectively. Thus, unusually contractionary monetary and fiscal policies in the years
following the official ends of each recession appear to have played an important role in generating



                                                                                                           14
lackluster recoveries in employment, explaining approximately one-third of the excess unemployment
persistence.8
         However, there are several reasons to think this is likely an upper bound on the contribution of
policy differences to rising unemployment persistence. First, there is evidence that monetary policy
shocks have smaller effects than normal in economic downturns (Tenreyro and Thwaites 2013), which
would imply that we could overstate the effects of the unusually contractionary monetary policy
responses in the 1990, 2001 and 2007 recessions. Second, monetary policymakers in the Great Recession
have undertaken a number of non-traditional actions—such as quantitative easing and forward
guidance—which we do not attempt to quantify but which likely contributed modestly to the economic
recovery. Third, we assume fairly large fiscal multipliers. While there is significant evidence that
government spending multipliers are larger than normal during downturns, it is not clear whether these
multipliers should apply two to four years after the start of the recessions.9 Lower multipliers in the later
stages of economic recovery periods would tend to lower the contribution of fiscal policy to
unemployment persistence. Thus, while monetary and fiscal policy differences over time have almost
certainly played an important role in accounting for the rising persistence of U.S. unemployment, much of
the rise in unemployment persistence remains unexplained.

IV       What Propagation Mechanisms May Have Changed Over Time?
Given that neither financial factors nor policy responses can fully account for the rise in unemployment
persistence, we turn to factors which determine how long-lived the effects of an economic shock of a
given size are, i.e. propagation mechanisms. While one can entertain a very broad spectrum of
possibilities, we present some additional facts about how the U.S. economy has changed in recent decades
to discipline our choice of potential propagation mechanisms. We emphasize four potentially related
facts: the declining sensitivity of inflation to real economic conditions, the rising importance of long-term
unemployment, the decline in regional labor market convergence, and the changing cyclicality of
disability claims. One potential explanation for these facts is downward wage rigidity, but we provide
new evidence that this explanation is unlikely to lie at the root of these facts. So we suggest and
document other propagation mechanisms which might account for these stylized facts and the rising
persistence of unemployment.

4.1. Other Changing Features of the U.S. Economy

8
  This conclusion is qualitatively not altered if we use measures of total government employment rather than federal
budget balances to compare historical responses of fiscal policy. In Panel A of Appendix Figure 1, we show that the
evolution of total government employment (relative to population) after each recession yields similar conclusions
about the relative stance of fiscal policies across recessions. In Panel B of Appendix Figure 1, we plot the
counterfactual normalized path of unemployment in the 2007 recession assuming pre-1990 monetary and fiscal
policies, but using government employment for the fiscal policy stance. We assume that changes in government
employment affect private employment by a factor of 0.5, such that total employment rises by 1.5 when government
employment rises by 1, similar to our assumption of fiscal multipliers of 1.5. The results point to a slightly larger
decline in unemployment after the 2007 recession than in our baseline. This reflects the fact that government
employment shrank more sharply after 2009 than did cyclically adjusted deficits. But because total government
employment measures are not adjusted to control for the size of the downturn, total changes in government
employment in the 2007 recession likely overstate the discretionary changes in fiscal policy.
9
  Appendix Figure 2 plots the normalized counterfactual unemployment paths in each recession in which we assume
a fiscal multiplier of 0.5 instead of 1.5 when setting policy responses equal to pre-1990 averages. The results are
qualitatively similar to our baseline, albeit with somewhat smaller policy contributions, so that the results do not
appear overly sensitive to assumptions about the fiscal multiplier.

                                                                                                                  15
We consider four characteristics of the Great Recession which have received a lot of attention. In each
case, we show that these features are not unique to the Great Recession but rather are a continuation of
ongoing trends visible in the 1990 and 2001 recessions as well. These specific characteristics of the Great
Recession are also particularly notable because they recall stylized features of the European
unemployment experience of the early 1980s, at least qualitatively, and are significant departures from
U.S. behavior over the same period.
         First is the well-known case of the “missing disinflation,” the fact that large output gaps of the
Great Recession should have led to much larger declines in inflation than what was actually observed
(Ball and Mazunder 2011, Hall 2013). We illustrate this notion in the two figures of Panel A in Figure 4
using an expectations-augmented Phillips curve. We present a scatter plot of the quarterly unemployment
rate gaps (deviations from CBO estimate of long-term unemployment) against inflation net of inflation
expectations. In the left panel, we model inflation expectations as backward looking, using the average
over quarterly inflation rates in the previous four quarters. In the right panel, we use a forward-looking
measure of inflation expectations, the median forecast of inflation in the subsequent quarter from the
Survey of Professional Forecasters. In each case, we can see that many of the observations since 2008
have displayed unusually high levels of inflation relative to expectations given the high levels of
unemployment. Since this result obtains with professional forecasts and not just backward looking
expectations, the missing disinflation remains puzzling even after accounting for the anchoring of
expectations that has occurred since the 1990s.
         For both measures of inflation expectations, we plot the average slope of the relationship between
inflation net of expectations and unemployment for two sub-periods: the period up to the mid-1980s and
the mid-1980s until immediately before the Great Recession. In each case, we observe a decline in the
slope of the Phillips curve over time, such that there is little missing disinflation left during the Great
Recession using the estimated slope of the Phillips curve from the mid-1980s on. This suggests that there
has been a gradual decline in the slope of Phillips curve which has been ongoing since the early to mid-
1980s. Appendix Figure C3 confirms this through rolling regressions of the slope of Phillips curve. The
missing disinflation therefore, need not be interpreted as a puzzle which is unique to the Great Recession,
but rather as part of a broader trend toward a declining sensitivity of U.S. inflation toward real economic
activity which has been occurring since the early 1980s. Furthermore, missing disinflation was also noted
as a puzzling feature of the West European experience of the early 1980s (Blanchard and Summers 1986),
which suggests that there may be a systematic link between unemployment persistence and how strongly
inflation responds to changes in economic activity.
         A second feature of the Great Recession which has received much attention is the rise in long-
term unemployment. The share of long-term unemployed (27 weeks and over) was less than twenty
percent in the first quarter of 2007 but climbed as high as 45% of all unemployed in the second quarter of
2010, a feature which recalls the rise of long-term unemployment in many West European countries in the
early 1980s (Machin and Manning 1999). In contrast, the share of the long-term unemployed in the U.S.
during the early 1980s peaked at only 26% in the second quarter of 1983.
         In the left graph of Panel B in Figure 4, we plot quarterly U.S. output gaps (log deviations of real
GDP from the CBO measure of potential GDP) against quarterly unemployment rates. The striking
feature of this figure is that the relationship between output gaps and total unemployment has remained
remarkably stable over time, with no difference in slope across subsamples, and with the rise in
unemployment during the Great Recession being entirely in line with previous episodes given the size of
the decline in the output gap (see also Ball, Leigh, and Loungani 2012). In the right graph of Panel B in


                                                                                                          16
Figure 4, we plot the equivalent historical relationships between the output gap and the long-term rate of
unemployment. Unlike with total unemployment rates, the Great Recession stands out in terms of how
high long-term unemployment rates have been relative to the size of the output gap. But as with the
missing disinflation, this pattern was already evident in the 1990 and 2001 recessions, with the slope of
the relationship between long-term unemployment and output gaps having become much steeper even
prior to the Great Recession. Note that we illustrate this pattern using nonlinear (exponential) slopes
because long-term unemployment rates do not fall much as output gaps become increasingly positive but
a similar pattern obtains if we use linear relationships and restrict observations to those with negative
output gaps. As with the missing disinflation, the puzzle of high long-term unemployment during the
Great Recession is therefore much reduced if one compares it to the experience since the early 1980s,
which again suggests that the unusual features of the Great Recession largely appear to be a continuation
of longer-term trends in U.S. business cycle behavior but made more visible by the sheer size of the
recent recession.
           A third unusual property of the Great Recession relative to traditional U.S. recessions lies in the
behavior of regional U.S. labor markets. As noted in Blanchard and Katz (1992) for the Volcker
recession, changes in unemployment across states in the years after 1982 were systematically negatively
correlated with the magnitude of the rise in unemployment over the prior years. Blanchard and Katz
argued that the high degree of labor mobility in the U.S. led workers to move from high unemployment
regions to low unemployment regions, thereby facilitating the adjustment of the labor market in the U.S.
In contrast, Decressin and Fatas (1995) documented that the adjustment of European regional labor
markets to regional shocks was not characterized by the same degree of regional mobility, leading to
more persistence in unemployment rates. Panel C of Figure 4 illustrates the relationship between the
initial rise in unemployment from 1979 to 1982 and the subsequent decline in unemployment rates
between 1984 and 1982 for U.S. states emphasized by Blanchard and Katz (1992).10 Like them, we find a
strong negative correlation between the initial rise in unemployment and the subsequent change in
unemployment. But when we replicate this analysis during the Great Recession, using the change in
unemployment from 2007 to 2010 relative to the change between 2012 and 2010, we find a much weaker
relationship between the two (the difference in slopes across samples is significant at the 10% level), with
the slope of the relationship being cut in half since the mid-1980s: regional convergence in labor markets
during the Great Recession has been significantly slower than what was experienced in traditional
recessions. But as with the missing disinflation and the rising share of long-term unemployment, this
characteristic is not unique to the Great Recession but was already visible in previous recessions. To see
this, we also plot the equivalent state-level increases in the first two years of the 1990 and 2001 recessions
against the subsequent declines in unemployment. For both recessions, the slope of the relationship is
indistinguishable from that of the Great Recession. Hence, the slow convergence in regional labor
markets during the Great Recession appears to be in line with that experienced in the previous two
recessions.
         Finally, we consider the behavior of disability claims over the cycle. A well-known fact is that
Social Security disability claims have spiked during the Great Recession, with the ratio of claimants to
insured workers rising by 30% from 2007 to 2010. This is particularly striking because, during the early
1980s, disability claims also went up dramatically in many West European countries, whereas no such
rise occurred in the U.S. (Emerson and Dramais 1988). While the absence of a rise in disability claims in

10
  Wisconsin is a larger outlier because its unemployment rate rose sharply between 1982 and 1983 rather than
peaking in 1982, so it is not included in the Figure for the 1982 recession.

                                                                                                           17
the U.S. in the early 1980s likely reflected in part policy changes designed to reduce the incidence of
disability claims (Autor and Duggan 2003), there was no strong relationship between disability claims per
1,000 insured workers and unemployment prior to these policy reforms either. For example, between
1972 and 1973, disability claims per 1,000 insured workers rose 10 percent while the unemployment rate
fell from 5.6 to 4.9%. Then, during the subsequent recession, as the unemployment rate spiked from
5.6% in 1974 to 8.5% in 1975, disability applications per 1,000 insured workers fell seven percent. Panel
D of Figure 4 plots all annual changes in disability claims per 1,000 insured workers against annual
changes in unemployment rates from 1965 to 1985 and confirms that there was little cyclicality in
disability claims during this early period, in sharp contrast to the European experience described in
Emerson and Dramais (1988).
         In contrast, disability claims per insured workers have been strongly countercyclical since then.
Panel D of Figure 4 illustrates a strong positive correlation between annual changes in disability claims
and annual changes in unemployment rates from 1986 to 2007, as noted in Duggan and Imberman (2009).
Annual changes in disability since 2008 have been almost completely predictable given annual changes in
unemployment over this period, when using the relationship between the two from 1986 to 2007.11
Hence, once again, the experience of the Great Recession appears to have very closely followed that of
the 1990 and 2001 recessions, but for the scale of the crisis.
         Jointly, these four changing properties of the U.S. economy conform in timing to the rising U.S.
unemployment persistence documented in section 2. Each also represents a growing qualitative similarity
with the West European experience of the 1980s, in which very high levels of unemployment persistence
were a defining characteristic. This gradual evolution in some of the properties of the U.S. labor market
and business cycle more broadly, which increasingly resembles well-documented patterns from the
Western European experience of the 1980s, suggests that the underlying explanation is likely to be rooted
in slow-moving fundamental factors driving up the propagation of economic shocks rather than some of
the unique forces at work during the Great Recession. To explore this possibility, we turn to some of the
possible underlying forces which could potentially account for this evolution in U.S. business cycle
properties.

4.2. Can Downward Wage Rigidities and Low Inflation Rates Explain These Patterns?
One potential source of additional propagation has been extensively discussed in conjunction with the
missing disinflation, namely a combination of downward wage rigidities and low inflation rates. Since at
least Tobin (1972), economists have recognized that wages tend to be downwardly rigid, as employees
chafe at nominal wage declines, and that in a low inflation environment, downward wage rigidity can
prevent declines in real wages from occurring during downturns, potentially leading to unusually high and
persistent unemployment. The absence of wage declines would in turn lead to very little disinflationary
pressures, thereby potentially accounting for the missing disinflation of the Great Recession. Given that
the share of workers receiving no change in wages reached over 16% in 2011 –more than twice the share
in 1981— and that inflation rates have come down significantly since the early 1980s, this interpretation


11
   In 1984, the Disability Benefits Reforms Act expanded the types of ailments which allowed one to qualify for
disability and shifted the criteria for eligibility to broader measures of a person’s ability to work, thereby making it
easier to qualify for disability (CBO 2012). So one possibility is that workers who experience long-term
unemployment have been increasingly filing claims for disability since 1984 upon the expiration of their
unemployment benefits. Rothstein (2013), however, finds no link between the expiration of extended unemployment
benefits and disability claims.

                                                                                                                     18
has not surprisingly become a leading explanation for the missing disinflation (Daly, Hobijn and Lucking
2012).
         One can, however, make at least two counterarguments. First, if an economic downturn calls for a
decline in real wages, the severity of downward wage rigidity should be captured by the change in the
incidence of zero wage changes across the population, capturing the extensive margin of more workers
not seeing their nominal wages cut. Using the data on the incidence of zero wage changes across all
workers constructed by Daly, Hobijn and Lucking (2012), we quantify the change in this incidence for the
1990, 2001, and 2007 recessions relative to their initial levels and compare them to the change in the
incidence of zero wage changes in the recession starting in July 1981 (the only pre-1990 recession
covered in the dataset of Daly et al.). As illustrated in the left-hand graph in Panel A of Figure 5, the rise
in the incidence of zero wage changes during the Great Recession exceeds that of the 2001 and 1990
recessions, but is in line with what was observed during the 1982 recession. If we normalize the change in
the incidence of zero wage changes by the maximum rise in unemployment over the course of each
recession (to control for the size of the recession and therefore the necessary decline in wages), the 1982
recession had a larger rise in the incidence of zero wage changes than any of the subsequent three
recessions. So while recent recessions may have started at higher initial levels of zero wage changes
across workers, it is during the 1982 recession that we observed the largest increase in the share of wages
being restricted by downward wage rigidity.
         A second issue is that if downward wage rigidity was preventing wages from falling as rapidly as
in the past given economic conditions in the Great Recession, then one would expect to observe a missing
wage disinflation puzzle along with the missing price disinflation puzzle. While the latter has already
been well-documented, there has (to our knowledge) been much less emphasis placed on the former. To
determine whether wages have been in any way unusual in recent years, we present in Panel B of Figure 5
a scatter plot of quarterly unemployment rates against annualized quarterly wage changes net of
expectations. We model expectations as backward-looking and equal to the average over annualized
quarterly wage changes over the previous four quarters. There are two key features of the data worth
emphasizing. First, unlike with price Phillips curves, there is no evidence of a change in the slope of the
wage Phillips curve since the early 1980s. Second, wage changes during the Great Recession line up very
closely with what historical experience would have predicted from the run-up in unemployment rates
since 2007. Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2013) document similar results for alternative wage measures and
expectations of wage changes from professional forecasters. Hence, there is no missing wage disinflation
puzzle to match the missing price disinflation puzzle. This strongly suggests that downward wage rigidity
is unlikely to be the key factor underlying the missing disinflation of the Great Recession.

4.3. Other Potential Explanations: Changes in Key Structural Characteristics
Given that financial shocks, monetary and fiscal policies, and downward wage rigidity all seem
insufficient to account for the rising persistence in U.S. unemployment, we turn to long-term trends in key
structural characteristics which could potentially explain this phenomenon through propagation
mechanisms. We specifically consider three possibilities: (1) declining labor mobility, (2) changing age
composition of the population and (3) the declining culture of “trust” in the U.S.
         The apparent decline in regional convergence across U.S. states points toward changing mobility
patterns as a potential explanation. Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2013) document that mobility in the
U.S. has declined since the early 1990s, with the fall in mobility rates being as high as one-half for some
measures of mobility. This decline is visible for immigrants, individuals of all ages, single and dual earner


                                                                                                           19
households, low and high levels of education, and for different occupational groups. Using Decennial
Census, American Community Survey (ACS) and Current Population Survey (CPS) data for the U.S., we
plot in Panel A of Figure 6 the evolution of the interstate turnover mobility rate in the U.S. since 1970,
where turnover mobility is defined as the (population-weighted) mean of each state’s inmigration and
outmigration rates. This rate was stable between 1970 and 1980 but has been falling since. Mobility as
reported in the Census has declined by about 20% since 1980, while declining by a more dramatic 40-
50% in the CPS since 1982 (the first year the turnover migration rate can be calculated in the CPS). While
the sources of the decline in U.S. mobility are not fully understood and could be an endogenous response
to changing economic patterns, one can also consider causal effects of exogenous variation in mobility
rates, due perhaps to the types of declining information costs suggested by Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl
(2013). An exogenous decline in mobility over time could naturally account for declining regional
convergence after recessions and could potentially account for other features of the data. For example, if
falling mobility reduces the expected quality of job matches, then firms may choose to delay hiring more
during recovery periods if there are costs to subsequent separations. One might also expect to see more
long-term unemployment if workers are less willing to move away from the most seriously affected
regions. This increase in expected duration of unemployment would also tend to increase the appeal of
receiving disability payments, thereby potentially accounting for the changing cyclicality of disability
claims over time.
         Another factor consistent with a mobility explanation is that, in the early 1970s, the U.S. stood
out relative to most West European countries in terms of how high its mobility rate was. A decline in
mobility therefore represents a growing similarity with one of the defining characteristics of West
European economies during this early period. This is illustrated in Panel A of Figure 6: we plot the
mobility rates of several West European countries in 1970 (see the data appendix for details on
construction of these measures). These were all significantly lower than the U.S. at the time, but our
mobility estimates for the U.S. imply that the declining mobility in the U.S. since 1980 has closed
between 40-100% of the gap between the U.S. and what West European countries observed circa 1970,
depending on whether we are using the Census or CPS migration data.
         A second changing characteristic of the U.S. economy is the age composition of its workforce. In
1970, the U.S. stood out relative to West European countries in terms of its age distribution: it had a
larger share of young people (0 to 24 years old) and a smaller share of seniors (over 65) than any West
European country other than Spain. But as illustrated in Panel B of Figure 6, this age composition has
changed significantly over time, with the share of 0-24 year olds falling from 45% in 1970 to 34% in
2010. Over the same period, the share of 55-65 year olds has gone from 19% in 1970 to 25% in 2010. The
age structure of the labor force can be important because the experience of losing a job affects people
differently depending on their age groups. For example, Johnson and Butrica (2012) document how,
during the Great Recession, unemployment durations have been significantly longer for older workers
than for younger workers and are associated with larger declines in earnings upon reemployment. Since
older workers are also less mobile on average (Plane 1992), this could account for declining regional
convergence. It could also be consistent with the rising cyclicality of disability claims, since the higher
expected duration of unemployment for older workers raises the benefit of receiving disability, and older
workers may find it easier to justify claiming for disability by appealing to a wider range of health
impairments than younger workers.
         A third changing feature of the U.S. lies in its cultural characteristics. The U.S. has long been an
outlier among developed economies along a number of cultural dimensions such as religiosity or views on


                                                                                                          20
private enterprise and the role of the state. Another metric along which the U.S. has traditionally differed
from other developed economies is in people’s perspectives toward claiming government benefits, and
broader measures of trust toward others. For example, as illustrated in Panel D of Figure 6, Americans in
the early 1980s were much less likely to report in the World Values Survey that it was ever acceptable to
claim government benefits for which one did not qualify than citizens of major West European countries.
A greater unwillingness to claim benefits can have direct effects on labor markets: workers are more
likely to accept job offers when unemployed to minimize the time spent receiving unemployment
benefits, and are less likely to claim disability benefits when they do not necessarily qualify for them.
Thus, this cultural difference could have played a role in explaining why the U.S. experience was so
different from that of major West European economies in the early 1980s. Interestingly, this cultural
feature of the U.S. has changed over time, as illustrated in Panel D of Figure 6, as Americans increasingly
report that it is sometime acceptable to claim benefits which one does not qualify for. By 2006, the share
of Americans reporting this had risen to the same level as reported, on average, by West Europeans in
1981. Thus, like mobility and age composition of the population, this cultural more is a dimension along
which the U.S. was unusual in the 1970s and 1980s relative to West European economies and has
gradually converged toward the levels reported by these economies.
         These three factors—declining mobility, age composition and cultural values—are not meant to
be an exhaustive list of potential factors underlying the changing propagation of shocks in the U.S.
Clearly, many other factors could be behind the change.12 But we view these three patterns as consistent
with the other stylized facts about the U.S. economy which we have documented, and therefore they
constitute a natural starting point. However, because of the gradually evolving nature of these factors,
there is little hope of measuring their effects through time series methods. So instead, our strategy is to
exploit the variation in labor market outcomes not just across countries but also across regions within
countries over the course of the 1970s and 1980s, a time characterized by large common macroeconomic
shocks, to shed light on the quantitative impact of each factor on unemployment outcomes.

V        Quantifying Propagation Mechanisms through the Experience of the 1970s and 1980s
In this section, we use the cross-sectional variation in labor market outcomes from the 1970s through the
1980s to quantify the extent to which labor mobility, age composition of the population and cultural
values affect unemployment persistence. A key novelty of our analysis is that we focus on the variation
across regions within West European countries, Canada and the United States. Whereas most previous
work has focused on variation across countries, our approach significantly increases the size of the cross-
section which allows us to more precisely isolate the contributions of each factor to unemployment
persistence. To do so, we construct a novel dataset of regional labor market variables, across fourteen
advanced economies, as well as a wide range of control variables designed to help isolate the marginal
effects of labor mobility, age composition and cultural factors after controlling for the multitude of other
factors affecting labor market outcomes.

5.1. Regional Labor Markets and Unemployment Persistence
A central component of our analysis is the construction of a dataset of regional unemployment rates going
back to 1970 for fourteen countries: Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, (West)

12
  Some previous work, for example, has pointed to unionization as a potential explanation (e.g. Blanchard and
Summers 1986, Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote 2006). However, U.S. unionization rates have fallen since the early
1980s, so this seems like an unlikely explanation for rising unemployment persistence over this period.

                                                                                                             21
Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, U.K., and the U.S. For most European
countries, the smallest regional unit the unemployment series and other variables of interest are typically
available is at the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS)-2 region level. NUTS regions
refer to the modern statistical areas of Europe. When they were created in the 1970s, NUTS regions were
based primarily on institutional divisions that already existed in a country. The three levels of regional
units are NUTS-1, NUTS-2 and NUTS-3. Modern NUTS-2 regions, which are smaller than NUTS-1 and
bigger than NUTS-3 regions, typically range in size between 800,000 and 3 million people. Examples of
NUTS-2 regions include the 39 government regions (or equivalents) of Germany, the 19 autonomous
communities and cities of Spain, the 26 administrative regions of France plus the Départements d'Outre
Mer, etc. Our study also includes the 48 states of the continental United States, and the 10 provinces of
Canada, yielding a total of 233 regions.13 A detailed description of the sources of the data is in Appendix
A. For most countries, regional unemployment rates are available at the annual frequency although for
some countries (e.g. Switzerland, U.K.), comparable unemployment rates are only available in Census
years or other select years before 1996.
         Early work on the differences in unemployment patterns over the course of the 1980s emphasized
the contrast between the United States and Western Europe as a whole (e.g. Blanchard and Summers
1986). While broad comparisons of Anglo-Saxon vs. West European averages are consistent with
hysteresis explanations stemming from high labor and product market regulations in the latter, subsequent
work emphasized that differences across West European countries are also large (Nickell 1997, Blanchard
and Wolfers 2003). The Netherlands, for example, saw its unemployment rate catch up to Anglo-Saxon
countries by the late 1990s despite the fact that by most metrics, its policies followed the West European
model of high marginal tax rates, a large government, high unemployment benefits, and costly barriers to
layoffs.
         Differences in labor market outcomes within countries are even more challenging to explain in
terms of aggregate policies and labor market institutions. In Belgium, for example, the North (Flemish)
and South (Walloon) regions experienced diverging unemployment paths over the course of the 1980s
despite a common set of aggregate institutions and policies. While both had similarly low rates of
unemployment in the early 1970s, the South saw a larger increase in unemployment over the course of the
late 1970s and the gap continued to widen from then on. By 1990, the North of Belgium had seen its
unemployment rate decline to less than 6% from over 10% in 1980, whereas the unemployment rate in the
South was still over 10% (see Figure C1 in Appendix C). Indeed, while the northern regions experienced
a labor market recovery nearly as rapid as the U.S., the South displayed the same type of hysteresis as
characterized France and Germany during this period. Within one country, one can therefore find
approximately the same range of labor market outcomes as across countries.
         This within-country heterogeneity in labor market outcomes is not limited to Belgium. Italy is
another well-known example of a country exhibiting large regional disparities in unemployment since the
1970s, particularly during the late 1980s during which the Northern regions experienced progressive
declines in unemployment while the South of Italy saw a sharp rise in unemployment. Other countries
also experienced widening regional disparities over this time period, including among others France,
Germany and Spain. In contrast, a few countries saw only limited and transitory regional disparities arise
over the course of the 1970s and 1980s, such as Austria and Sweden.

13
  In addition to Alaska and Hawaii, we exclude islands (e.g., Azores), West Berlin and Washington DC. Because
some regions were split or merged over time, we combine regions in a handful of instances where available data did
not allow us to create consistent series for a region that was merged or split over time.

                                                                                                               22
        To quantify the relative magnitudes of within and across country dispersion in unemployment,
Figure 7 plots three measures of dispersion in unemployment rates from 1970 to 1995. First is the cross-
sectional standard deviation in aggregate country unemployment rates.14 Second, we plot the average
(across countries) population-weighted standard deviations of regional unemployment rates within
countries. In the early 1970s, cross-country dispersion in unemployment rates was approximately twice
as large as within-country dispersion. But as cross-country dispersion fell over the course of the mid-
1970s while within-country dispersion remained stable, the two were of almost identical magnitude by
1978. At that point, both measures began to rise in almost identical proportion and continued to do so
through the entire decade of the 1980s. This illustrates that the heterogeneity in labor market outcomes at
the aggregate level during the 1980s was matched by almost identical heterogeneity in labor market
outcomes within countries. Finally, Figure 7 also plots the total population-weighted dispersion in
regional unemployment rates across all countries. After remaining relatively constant over the course of
the 1970s, total dispersion in unemployment across all regions rose progressively over the course of the
1980s as both within and across country unemployment dispersion rose. Total dispersion was
approximately 50-80% larger than unemployment dispersion across country means or within countries
during the 1980s. This large cross-sectional variation is what we will exploit to better understand the
sources of hysteresis in unemployment, in contrast to most previous work which has focused either only
on cross-country variation or regional variation within a country.
         To measure the persistence of unemployment at the regional level, we focus on multi-year
averages of unemployment rates for each region because of concerns about measurement error in regional
unemployment rates at the annual frequency (this follows Blanchard and Wolfers 2003). Specifically, we
                  ,           ,           ,           ,             ,           ,       ,        ,                 ,
calculate             ≡                                       ,         ≡                             ,   and           ≡
         ,    ,           ,           ,                   ,
                                              where           is the annual rate of unemployment in year t for region i in
country c.15 For some regions, data is not available for all years, so we use available data to construct
     ,
   . From these multi-year averages, we construct our primary measure of unemployment persistence or
hysteresis , for region i in country c as
                                          ,       ,                 ,       ,
                                  ln 1
                                  ,                       ln 1
The first term measures the change in unemployment over the 1980s whereas the second measures the
change in unemployment over the course of the 1970s. High values of , denote regions with more
hysteresis, i.e. regions in which unemployment fell only gradually (or even rose) relative to the initial rise
in unemployment during the 1970s. We take logs to ensure a balanced distribution and minimize outliers.
In Appendix B, we show how , can be related to the persistence of unemployment measured by the
magnitude of the AR(1) coefficient. We prefer our measure of hysteresis over alternative measures based
on time series regressions because our measures minimizes the influence of short term fluctuations,
measurement errors, and missing observations in the series and thus provides a robust metric of
persistence.

14
   We do not include Spain in Figure 7 because its reported unemployment rates dwarf those of other countries
during this time sample so that almost all variation in unemployment dispersion is driven by Spain.
15
    The timing of the multi-year averages was determined by data availability as well as macroeconomic
developments in Europe. Specifically, we include an additional year in calculating the average unemployment rate
before the mid-1970s to improve the precision as earlier years have more missing observations. We shift the timing
of the average for 1990 by one year because later years were marked with crises and recessions in Europe (ERM
crises, collapse of trade with the Soviet Union, German reunification, etc.).

                                                                                                                       23
         Figure 8 displays the resulting values of hysteresis for each region on a map. There are clear
differences in hysteresis both across and within countries. For example, the U.S. and Canada both have
relatively low levels of hysteresis on average, although there is some variation across regions. For
example, in the U.S., southern states experienced more hysteresis than others, whereas northwestern states
and New England states had the lowest. In Canada, Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, two sparsely
populated provinces, stand out for having experienced significantly more hysteresis than the rest of the
country. In Europe, Sweden experienced by far the least hysteresis, with very little interregional variation
to be found, and Finland had a similar experience albeit with higher hysteresis on average. There are two
other general regions of Europe in which hysteresis was relatively mild: central Europe (including
Austria, Switzerland, northern Italy and southern Germany) and the south of the U.K. The Atlantic coast
of Europe had significantly higher hysteresis on average, with hysteresis growing gradually as one
descends further south. Denmark is an exception, with much higher hysteresis levels than neighboring
regions. Finally, the most extreme regions of hysteresis are in the far south of Spain and Italy, with some
high hysteresis outliers along the Atlantic coast of Spain (e.g. Basque region).
         Importantly, there appears to be a systematic relationship between the average level of hysteresis
in a country and the cross-sectional dispersion in unemployment outcomes, i.e. labor market disparities
within and across countries appear to be closely related phenomena. To see this, we construct five year
averages of annual cross-regional population-weighted standard deviations of unemployment rates for
each country. We then present scatter plots of changes in cross-sectional dispersion of unemployment
rates within each country over different time periods against the average population-weighted hysteresis
for that country in Figure 9. By 1980, there is a clear relationship between the rise in within-country
dispersion in unemployment rates and subsequent hysteresis, and this relationship continues throughout
the 1980s and into the early 1990s. This positive relationship between hysteresis in a country and a rise
in regional disparities in labor market outcomes is not driven only by Spain and Italy, but can be seen
across the other countries as well. This motivates our empirical approach of treating the regional
variation in labor market outcomes as a laboratory to quantify the effects of different factors on
unemployment outcomes.

5.2. Controlling for Regional and Aggregate Determinants of Unemployment Hysteresis
To precisely estimate the effect of labor mobility, age composition, and cultural factors on employment
persistence, we need to disentangle these effects from other potential sources of variation. While
aggregate differences can be captured through country fixed effects, one would expect many factors to be
potentially related to regional variation in unemployment rates. Thus, a second key element of our
analysis is the construction of a set of “reduced form” pre-determined regional controls. We refer to these
as reduced form controls because they are not meant to identify precise causal mechanisms. Rather, we
expect these controls to be correlated with many of the channels which have been suggested in the
hysteresis literature, so that controlling for them should allow us to evaluate the marginal contribution of
labor mobility, age composition and cultural values.
        We use ten regional control variables, each of which is plotted (against each region’s level of
unemployment hysteresis) in Figure 10. Each of these variables is for 1970 or the nearest available year,
as described in the data appendix. The first three include average education (years of schooling) in 1970,
the log of GDP per capita (in PPP U.S. dollars from Penn World Tables) in 1970, and the share of female
employment in total employment in 1970. As illustrated in Figure 10, all three measures are extremely
highly correlated with subsequent regional labor market outcomes, with higher hysteresis regions being


                                                                                                         24
initially poorer, less educated, and with fewer women participating in the labor force. A fourth control is
the “net migration rate”, defined as the annual net inflow (i.e. inmigration – outmigration) of people
normalized by total population. We interpret this measure as capturing average flows into (or out of) a
region due to trend growth differentials or inherent appeal (or lack thereof) of a region. Figure 10 reveals
little correlation between these regional net migration rates and subsequent labor market outcomes. The
next set of controls consist of the industry composition of employment in the region in 1970. We plot in
Figure 10 correlations of regional hysteresis with the share of the primary sector in employment
(agriculture, fishing, mining, and energy), with the share of the secondary sector in employment
(manufacturing and construction), and with the share of the tertiary sector in employment (all other
sectors, e.g. services, government). Regions which experienced more unemployment hysteresis had, on
average, larger shares of primary sector and smaller shares of tertiary sector. There is little visible
relationship between the size of the secondary sector and unemployment hysteresis. We also include as
controls motorways density, household size, home ownership rates, and the share of the population living
in urban environments. None of these display strong unconditional correlations with unemployment
hysteresis. Finally, we also include dummy variables for regions which consist of a larger metropolitan
area (e.g. Hamburg) and another dummy variable for regions in which the capital city is located.
          A striking feature of these regional controls is that they can account for much of the regional
variation in unemployment persistence. For example, we regress regional unemployment hysteresis on
these predetermined regional controls with no aggregate controls or fixed effects,
                                              ,           ′ ,       ,
where        ,  is the vector of  regional controls  just  described   (not including the redundant share of
employment in the tertiary sector). Our baseline methodology is to place equal weight on each country
while weighting regions within countries by their population. We apply equal weights on countries to
avoid having the results being dominated by the U.S. Weighting regions by population serves to avoid
placing undue weight on smaller regions where measurement error is more likely to be an issue. But as
we document in Appendix Table C2, none of our results are particularly sensitive to assumptions about
the weighting of different observations. This regression yields an R2 of 0.71, implying that much of the
variation in labor market outcomes is very highly correlated with the set of regional controls included
here. This is surprisingly high given that this specification makes no attempt to control for aggregate
policy differences across countries, different institutions, different shocks hitting the economy, etc.
          We can also include country-fixed effects in the specification above as a simple way to capture
these cross-country differences in policies, shocks, and institutions:
                                             ,      ′ ,              ,
where are fixed effects for different countries. Including country fixed effects only raises the R2 of the
regression to 0.85. Furthermore, the estimated coefficients on country dummies are almost all not
statistically significantly different from zero, which confirms that our regional control variables are
successful in accounting for both the within and between country variation in unemployment outcomes,
leaving little room for improvement in terms of controlling for aggregate variables. The main exception to
this finding is Denmark, which experienced significantly more hysteresis than would have been predicted
by regional controls.

5.3. The Effects of Mobility, Demographics and Culture on Unemployment Hysteresis
To assess how labor mobility, demographics and culture affect unemployment persistence, we construct
regional measures of each. For labor mobility, our primary measure is the 1970 turnover migration rate,

                                                                                                         25
the sum of inflows and outflows of a region normalized by the population of the region and divided by
two. As illustrated in the top left panel of Figure 11, there appears to be a weak negative relationship
between mobility and hysteresis, due to the fact that high mobility countries tended to have relatively low
hysteresis (especially U.S. and U.K.) whereas both high and low hysteresis outcomes are visible for low
mobility countries. The first column of Table 1 presents results from regressing regional hysteresis on
regional labor mobility. The coefficient is negative but insignificantly different from zero.
         To estimate the effect of mobility on unemployment hysteresis after conditioning on other factors,
we estimate the following regressions:
                                   ,                    ,     ′ ,             ,
where             , is the turnover  migration  rate of region i in country  c. We estimate this specification
with and without country-fixed effects ( ) and report results in columns 2 and 3 of Table 1. In both
cases, we find a positive estimate of        which is statistically different from zero only at the 10% level.
This implies that higher regional labor mobility is associated with, if anything, more hysteresis, which is
the opposite result of what one would need for falling labor mobility to account for rising U.S.
unemployment persistence.
         The absence of a negative relationship between labor mobility and hysteresis is a robust finding.
The figures in the middle and bottom rows of column 1 in Table 11 show scatter plots of hysteresis and
regional labor mobility after partialling out the effects of the regional controls and the effects of both the
controls and country-fixed effects respectively. In both cases, it is clear that the absence of a negative
relationship between labor mobility and unemployment hysteresis is not driven by outliers but simply
reflects the very weak correlation between the two. The results are also robust to alternative measures of
mobility (e.g. aggregate mobility, inflow rates vs. outflow rates) and to including interactions (e.g.
interacting aggregate or regional mobility with the change in a region’s unemployment rate over the
1970s relative to that of other regions in that country). In all cases, the average effect of mobility on
unemployment persistence is positive and of limited statistical significance.
         One might have expected higher mobility to lower hysteresis, as regions with higher mobility
should achieve higher quality and quicker job matches than others, resulting in lower unemployment
persistence. However, most moves are short-distance moves to close by or neighboring regions. Given the
spatial correlation of hysteresis shown in Figure 8, such short-distance moves will have less of an
equilibrium effect on harmonizing unemployment rates across regions than longer-distance moves to
areas with more favorable labor markets. In addition, other factors can push in the opposite direction.
For example, jobs are frequently found through personal networks, but those who move to new areas will
generally have much smaller personal networks. A loss of a job may therefore mean much longer
unemployment durations and ultimately more hysteresis.
         To measure the effects of demographic makeup of the population, we decompose regional
populations in 1970 into three groups: the share of 0-24 year olds, the share of 25-54 year olds (prime
age), and the share of people 55 and older. Since these shares are measured in 1970, the first category can
be interpreted as capturing the share of young workers in the labor force in the mid-1980s, the second
category corresponds to the share of older workers (i.e. approaching or reaching retirement age) over the
1980s, while the third group captures the share of retirees in the 1980s. The two middle panels in the top
row of Figure 11 present scatter plots of the share of 0-24 year olds and the share of 55+ year olds for
each region against subsequent hysteresis outcomes. Neither suggests a clear relationship between
hysteresis and demographic composition. Countries with relatively low shares of young people and high
shares of older people in 1970 tended to experience mid-level ranges of hysteresis, but we can find

                                                                                                           26
countries with high shares of young people which experienced low hysteresis (U.S., Canada) and high
hysteresis (Italy, Spain), and the reverse finding obtains when looking at countries with low shares of
older people (55+ years old). The fourth column of Table 1 presents regression results for these two
measures of age composition with no regional controls or fixed effects. Both age groups are associated
with higher hysteresis on average, but the explanatory power of these two variables is limited.
         To assess how age composition affects unemployment persistence after controlling for other
factors, we estimate
                          ,               ,                ,       ′ ,            ,
where , and , are the shares of under 25 year olds and over 54 year olds for region i in country c
respectively. We estimate this specification with and without country fixed effects and report the results
in columns 5 and 6 of Table 1. For both variables, we find positive effects of their shares on hysteresis,
although the effects are much stronger when (and only statistically significant) we include country fixed
effects. Both coefficients imply that larger shares of 25-54 year olds in 1970 are therefore associated with
lower rates of unemployment hysteresis. As with labor mobility, this is the opposite effect of what one
would need to explain the rising persistence of U.S. unemployment from the demographic transition to an
older workforce: the decline in the share of 0-24 year olds and the increase in the share of 55+ year olds
was such in the U.S. that the share of prime-aged population actually increased by the 2000s. The panels
in the two middle columns and two bottom rows of Figure 11 present scatter plots of regional age
distributions against regional hysteresis, after partialling out regional controls and after partialling out
both regional controls and country fixed effects. For the share of 0-24 year olds, we continue to see a
strong positive relationship with regional hysteresis after regional controls and country fixed effects are
taken into account, with no evidence of this being driven by outliers. For the share of 55+ year olds, the
positive relationship only appears after controlling for country fixed effects.
         These results can be interpreted in (at least) two different ways. One interpretation is that the
coefficients reflect differential impacts of job losses on different age groups. For example, the positive
coefficient on the share of 55+ year olds in 1970 means that when the share of 55+ year olds in 1970 is
low (and therefore the number of 25-54 year olds in 1970 is high), then the share of older workers in the
mid-1980s is high (since 25-54 year olds in 1970 are approaching/reaching retirement age in the mid-
1980s). This can lower hysteresis in unemployment if workers near retirement age are more likely to drop
out of the labor force when they lose their jobs, such as through early retirements or claiming disability,
thereby not being counted as unemployed (van Horn et al. 2011). Similarly, the positive coefficient on the
share of 0-24 year olds in 1970 means that when the share of 0-24 year olds in 1970 is low (and therefore
the number of 25-54 year olds in 1970 is high), then the share of older workers in the mid-1980s is high.
This can lower hysteresis by the same logic. But the fact that the coefficient on 0-24 year olds is larger
than the coefficient on 55+ year olds suggests that there is an additional effect stemming from the share of
younger workers in the labor force. This could represent the scarring effects of job losses on the young,
who lose valuable job experience and acquired human capital, thereby making them less desirable hires in
the future (e.g. Gregory and Jukes 2001, Gregg 2001).
          An alternative interpretation is that these coefficients reflect the effects of rigid wages and net
job flows. A relatively large share of 0-24 year olds in 1970 relative to 25-55 year olds implies that there
would be a relatively larger net inflow of new workers into the labor force relative to retirement outflows.
If wages are not flexible enough to accommodate these changes in the net supply of workers, then a long-
term rise in unemployment could result. Note that unlike the participation explanation, the net flow
explanation suggests a rise in the natural rate of unemployment rather than a rise in cyclical

                                                                                                          27
unemployment. But the data currently available do not allow us to distinguish between these two
hypotheses.
          Finally, we turn to measuring the effect of culture, and specifically trust, on unemployment
hysteresis. To construct a measure of trust, we aggregate over three different questions from the World
Values Survey (WVS) that are directly related to civic attitudes about trust. The questions relate to
whether it is ever acceptable to claim benefits which one does not qualify for, whether others can be
trusted, and whether others will try to take advantage of you (see Appendix Table D3 for more details).
From these three questions, we create a regional index of “trust” as described in Appendix D. In addition,
we create two additional indices of regional cultural values. “Value of work” is constructed from
questions related to how important individuals think work is in their life and how important work ethic is
as a moral value relative to other values. “Individualism” is based on questions related to the importance
of self-dependence and support for private ownership/competition relative to government
involvement/regulation. The resulting cultural indices are only moderately correlated with one another.
The work value variable, in particular, is almost uncorrelated with the other two at the regional level,
whereas the correlation between trust and individualism is 0.49. All three measures—value of work,
individualism, and trust—are positively correlated with income per capita at the regional level, with
correlations ranging from 0.33 to 0.46.16
         One limitation of these cultural measures is that regional information on culture is only available
at the NUTS-level in the 2008 wave of the WVS, with previous surveys providing only coarser regional
or country-level information.17 As a result, endogeneity of cultural variables with respect to prior
economic conditions is a concern. For example, periods of high unemployment could tend to lower
societal trust or reduce (or raise) the importance that people place on work. To investigate this possibility,
we use the time-variation in aggregate values to each type of question and assess whether these are
correlated with recent economic conditions, which is similar to the test in Stevenson and Wolfers (2011).
For this purpose, we focus primarily on questions which have been asked since at least the 1980 or 1990
waves of the WVS and for which we can therefore measure some time variation. For each question              at
time t for country c, we regress it on the unemployment rate for that country in that year

and pool across all countries for each question, allowing for country fixed effects δc. We run this
regression for two questions in each class of cultural variables as well as the cultural index value for that
country, constructed in the same way as the regional indices (but using questions as they become
available). We fail to find consistent and robust evidence that survey responses or indexes of cultural
dimensions are sensitive to unemployment fluctuations, which is consistent with cultural factors not
responding strongly to short-term economic conditions (see Appendix Table D2).



16
   Previous research (e.g. Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2011), Blanchard and Philippon (2006), Doepke and
Zilibotti (2008), Gorodnichenko and Roland (2010)) argued that these dimensions can be important determinants of
labor supply, provision of public goods, and economic exchanges and, hence, can influence the degree of hysteresis
in unemployment. In the interest of space, we focus on the index of trust. Results for other cultural dimensions are
available upon request.
17
   Data for the U.S. & Canada come from the 2006 wave of the WVS. Regional data begins in 1990 for these two
countries. For the U.S. in all WVS waves, the data is only available at the aggregation of the nine census divisions
(New England, Middle Atlantic, South Atlantic, East South Central, West South Central, East North Central, West
North Central, Mountain, Pacific [Excluding California], plus California). We tie the same responses from each
Census division to each of the states within the division.

                                                                                                                 28
          Given this lack of strong correlation between culture and the level of unemployment, we explore
whether regional levels of trust are related to unemployment persistence over the 1970s and 1980s. The
top right panel in Figure 11 is a scatterplot of our regional trust index against regional hysteresis: there
appears to be a strong negative correlation such that areas with less trust experienced more unemployment
hysteresis. As reported in column (7), this relationship is significant at the 1% level and trust single-
handedly accounts for 12% of the cross-sectional variation in hysteresis. We then report estimates from
the following specification allowing for regional controls and country fixed effects
                                       ,              ,    ′ ,            ,
when          , is the index of trust for region i in country c. Columns  8 and 9 of Table 1 report estimated
coefficients for this specification with and without country fixed effects. The results are sensitive to the
inclusion of the latter. In their absence, the coefficient on regional trust is close to zero and insignificant,
whereas when fixed effects are included, the estimated coefficient is negative and significant at the 1%
level. The panels in the middle and bottom rows of the right column in Figure 11 shed some light on this
sensitivity. After partialling out both regional controls and country fixed effects, there is clear negative
relationship between regional trust and hysteresis in the data, but not removing country fixed effects
leaves a much noisier relationship with a number of clear outliers, particularly Denmark. As noted earlier,
Denmark is the one country for which our regional controls do not capture the average country fixed
effect, with the Danish level of hysteresis being unaccountably high. But with Denmark also having the
highest levels of trust of any country in our sample, this leads to the outliers visible in Figure 11 which
account in large part for the difference between estimates with and without fixed effects. Thus, unlike
labor mobility and demographics, the estimated effect of trust on hysteresis is consistent with its time
variation in the U.S. potentially accounting for the time variation in U.S. unemployment persistence.
         These baseline results—i.e., only trust seems to affect hysteresis in a manner consistent with it
potentially accounting for rising U.S. unemployment persistence over time—are robust to a wide range of
checks. For example, in columns 10 and 11 of Table 1, we estimate the effects of mobility, demographics
and culture on hysteresis jointly with and without fixed effects and find little variation relative to the
baseline results. In Table 12, we reproduce baseline results with and without fixed effects dropping, in
turn, different subsets of countries. Dropping the U.S. and Canada, for example, has no qualitative effect
on the results. This is an important point as it suggests that regional variation in the U.S. is accounted for
by regional variables in a similar manner as other countries, i.e. there is little reason to believe that
different coefficients on controls are needed to explain European and North American regional variation
in hysteresis. Dropping Italy and Spain generally reduces the estimated coefficients but does not
otherwise affect our qualitative results. Since Spain and Italy are large outliers in terms of hysteresis
outcomes, one might have expected them to drive the empirical results but this is not the case. Dropping
France and Germany also does not qualitatively alter the results, other than rendering the estimated
coefficient on mobility statistically insignificant, as does dropping the Nordic countries. The Nordic
countries have a more substantial effect on the estimated effects of trust: dropping these leads to a large
negative and statistically significant effect of trust on hysteresis even when fixed controls are not
included. This reflects the sensitivity to Denmark which has already been noted. We also considered
using equal weights across all observations, applying population weighting to all regions without
imposing equal country weights, or using Huber robust regressions: none qualitatively affected the results
(Appendix Table C2).
         Another possibility is that interaction effects are important in accounting for cross-sectional
hysteresis patterns. For example, low trust might only have negative implications for unemployment

                                                                                                             29
persistence in countries where unemployment benefits are high, or the effects of age composition on
hysteresis could depend on the degree of employment protection. Using the country-level employment
protection index and replacement rates (from 1970) from Blanchard and Wolfers (2003), we incorporate
interactions for each of our explanatory variables in turn (but not regional controls) with either the
employment protection index (Panel A of Table 3) or replacement rates (Panel B of Table 3). The
statistical gains from incorporating interaction effects are very small, and most values of the Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC) are only a notch lower than in our baseline specification, suggesting that the
marginal contribution of these interactions is not large. The results do suggest that our baseline effects are
more pronounced in countries with high employment protections, but the results with replacement rates
are extremely mixed and do not suggest any robust interaction effects. In summary, interactions with
labor market institutions do not yield striking quantitative improvements nor do they change the
qualitative interpretation of the baseline results.
         Of course, interactions of mobility, demographics and trust with labor market institutions are but
a small subset of the possible nonlinear or interaction effects which one could consider. There could
conceivably be interaction effects between these variables and some of the controls, with each other, or
with the nature and size of the shocks hitting each economy. To assess whether any quantitative gains in
prediction can be achieved by incorporating additional interactions, we present in Table 4 the quantitative
gains (measured in R2 increment or by BIC criterion) that can be achieved through a wide range of
interactions with shocks, institutions, controls, and additional cultural forces. For shocks, we use
Blanchard and Wolfers (2003) estimates of country-level TFP, labor demand and real interest rate shocks
and focus on the change in these variables in the late 1970s relative to the early 1970s, which we interpret
as capturing the impulse to each economy. The labor market institutions are employment protection index
and unemployment replacement rates, as in Table 3. The additional cultural variables include our
“individualism” and “value of work” indices described previously. In specifications without country fixed
effects, large gains in predictive power are achieved when regional controls are interacted with shocks
(especially interest rate shocks and TFP shocks) or cultural variables (especially trust and individualism).
These gains approximate, and sometimes exceed, those from including fixed effects, but they are very
small quantitatively once fixed effects are included. This absence of large predictive gains, above and
beyond country fixed effects, suggests that interaction effects are not a central feature of the cross-
sectional variation in unemployment hysteresis.

5.3. Implications for Rising U.S. Unemployment Persistence
With estimates of the quantitative effect of labor mobility, demographics and culture on hysteresis, we
can quantify how the time variation in each of these factors would be expected to have affected
unemployment persistence in the U.S. in recent years, assuming that the estimated effects of each on
unemployment persistence have not evolved over time.
        For labor mobility and demographics, we replace their 1970 values for each U.S. state with their
2000 values. Holding constant other controls, we can then construct a counterfactual level of hysteresis
for each state and aggregate these with population weights into a counterfactual U.S. level of hysteresis.
For culture, regional data for the U.S. in the WVS does not begin until 1990, so we cannot track the
regional evolution of culture since the early 1980s. Instead, we lower the level of trust in each state by
one standard deviation (i.e. moving from the U.S. level of trust to the lowest level of trust in our sample
of countries). This corresponds to the historical variation in U.S. responses to the question of whether it is
ever justifiable to claim benefits which one does not qualify for, but is larger than the historical variation


                                                                                                           30
in responses to the question of whether others can be trusted. Since the third question used in the trust
index is not available going back to 1982, we cannot measure the historical change in the overall trust
index for the U.S. But the time variation in the first two questions suggests that assuming a one-standard
deviation decline in trust likely presents an upper bound on the possible historical variation in trust in the
U.S. We present the results from this exercise in Table 5, both for changes in each factor individually as
well as jointly, using the estimates with and without fixed effects.
         Changes in U.S. labor mobility have trivial effects on the predicted level of U.S. hysteresis,
reflecting both the small estimated coefficients in Table 1 and the modest decline in labor mobility
documented in Figure 6. The changing demographic makeup of the U.S. population predicts lower
hysteresis in the U.S., modestly if we use the estimates without country-fixed effects and dramatically if
we use the estimates with fixed effects. The former is equivalent to reducing the level of hysteresis from
French levels to Belgian levels, whereas the latter is equivalent to reducing the level of hysteresis from
French levels to levels of Austria or Switzerland. The effects of demographics are primarily driven by the
changing share of 0-24 year olds, reflecting both its large decline over time as well as the fact that its
estimated coefficient is higher than that on the share of 55 year olds and over. Both labor mobility and
demographic changes predict declines in U.S. unemployment persistence, given the estimated effects of
each on hysteresis from Table 1.
         The decline in trust in the U.S. is the only variable among the three which is predicted to raise
U.S. hysteresis when fixed effects estimates are used. But its quantitative effect is also modest. A large
change in trust (moving from U.S. in 1980 to Spain in 1980) raises hysteresis by 1 point, or the equivalent
of going from U.S. levels of hysteresis to those of Austria or Switzerland. Converted to AR(1) equivalents
using the formula in Appendix B, this corresponds to moving from a quarterly unemployment persistence
of 0.92 (the estimate from 1950-1980 in Figure 1) to a quarterly persistence of 0.98. This actually exceeds
the increase in persistence found for the U.S. between the 1980s and 2010s, so by itself, the historical
change in trust can account for the observed rise in U.S. unemployment persistence. But as documented
in the last row of Table 5, this predicted increase in persistence from culture is dwarfed by the effect of
demographics and mobility when we construct joint counterfactuals for all three. So appealing to a
cultural explanation for the change in unemployment persistence would require ignoring these other
factors (or finding new structural factors which could offset the effects of demographics on the predicted
level of persistence).

V        Conclusion
There is a clear pattern: the response of the U.S. economy to recessions has become increasingly sclerotic
starting with the 1990 recession, and the Great Recession appears to be continuing a trend toward rising
unemployment persistence. Understanding the sources of this rising persistence is a key question for
economists, as its continuation suggests a future in which post-recession unemployment outcomes
increasingly resemble the Eurosclerosis experience of the 1980s rather than the rapid recoveries which
characterized the U.S. economy through most of the post-World War II era.
         This paper has ruled out many of the usual suspects. We document that commonly suggested
explanations for the persistence of unemployment in the Great Recession cannot fully explain this
unfortunate new characteristic of U.S. business cycles. Financial shocks do not mechanically lead to more
unemployment persistence than monetary policy shocks, so it is doubtful that the underlying explanation
stems from a changing nature of shocks driving the cycle. And while monetary and fiscal policies can
account for a significant component of the rising unemployment persistence, much remains unexplained.


                                                                                                           31
This suggests that much of the answer must lie in the economic mechanisms that underlie the propagation
of shocks through the economy. We test three potential propagation factors that are commonly discussed
in the literature—declining labor mobility, changing demographic composition of the U.S. population,
and changing cultural mores—which could account for rising unemployment persistence as well as
explain other changes in U.S. business cycle properties. While a changing U.S. perspective on claiming
government benefits and trusting others can quantitatively account for the observed rise in persistence, its
predicted effect should have been more than offset by the other factors.
         Our interpretation of these results is that there must be additional, and more powerful, factors at
work. Identifying these other forces should be a key priority for the research agenda of macroeconomists.
There is no shortage of places to look. A striking number of features of the U.S. economy changed circa
1980. We highlighted four such changes in cyclical patterns in Section 4.1; Garin, Pries and Sims (2013)
emphasize another: the changing cyclicality of labor productivity. But there are also pronounced changes
in trends for a range of variables all of which appeared around 1980. An incomplete list includes rising
economic inequality (Piketty and Saez 2003), a declining share of labor income (Karabarbounis and
Neiman 2013), changes in the demand for skills (Jaimovich and Siu 2013), and a higher frequency of
financial crises (Romer 2013).
         These results also have implications for policy responses to business cycles. First, we find a non-
trivial contribution of monetary and fiscal policies toward the higher unemployment persistence of recent
recessions. This suggests that improvements in the implementation of fiscal and monetary responses
could go some way in reversing the trends toward more sclerotic labor market outcomes after recessions.
More fundamentally, if future U.S. downturns can be more long-lived than pre-1990 recessions, then the
nature of fiscal policy responses might need to be revisited. In the pre-1990 environment in which
recessions were short-lived events, there was little reason to implement discretionary countercyclical
fiscal policies, other than perhaps highly transitory ones such as the rebate checks of 2001, because the
long decision lags involved in the legislative process meant that any positive effects of stimulus would
likely occur too late. But if business cycles have become systematically more protracted affairs, then there
could be a role for discretionary fiscal policy responses that target longer-lived projects rather than
transitory transfer payments since the former tend to have larger stimulative effects per dollar (e.g.
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012, Leduc and Wilson 2012) and do not require legislators to vote on
multiple “stimulus” packages.




                                                                                                         32
References
Alesina, Alberto F., Edward L. Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote, 2006. "Work and Leisure in the U.S. and
        Europe: Why So Different?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005(20), 1-100.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012. "Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy,"
        American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(2), 1-27.
Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan, 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
        Unemployment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118(1), 157- 206.
Bachmann, Rüdiger, Tim O. Berg, and Eric R. Sims, 2012. "Inflation Expectations and Readiness to
        Spend: Cross-Sectional Evidence," NBER Working Papers 17958.
Ball, Laurence, and Sandeep Mazumder, 2011. “Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession,” Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity 42(1) 337-405.
Ball, Laurence, Daniel Leigh and Prakash Loungani, 2012. “Okun’s Law: Fit at 50?” manuscript.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Thomas Philippon, 2006. “The Quality of Labor Relations and Unemployment,”
        manuscript.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Justin Wolfers, 2003. “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of
        European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,” Economic Journal 110(462) 1-33.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence F. Katz, 1992. “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on
        Economic Activity 23(1) 1-76.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence H. Summers, 1986. “Hysteresis and the European Unemployment
        Problem,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Stanley Fischer, ed. Vol 1, Fall 1986, Cambridge:
        MIT Press. Pp. 15-78.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Daniel Leigh, 2013. “Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers,” IMF
        Working Paper No. 13/1.
Coibion, Olivier, 2012. "Are the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks Big or Small?" American Economic
        Journal: Macroeconomics 4(2), 1-32.
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2013. “Is the Phillips curve alive and well after all? Inflation
        expectations and the missing disinflation.” Manuscript.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO), 2012. “Policy Options for the Social Security Disability Insurance
        Program,” manuscript.
Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, and Brian Lucking, 2012. “Why Has Wage Growth Stayed Strong?” FRBSF
        Economic Letter 2012-10, April 2, 2012.
Dao, Mai, Davide Furceri, and Prakash Loungani, 2013. “Regional Adjustments and Labor Mobility,”
        manuscript.
Decressin, Jorg, and Antonio Fatas, 1995. “Regional Labor Market Dynamics in Europe,” European
        Economic Review 39(9) 1627-1655.
Doepke, Mathias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2008. “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2), 747-793.
Duggan, Mark and Scott A. Imberman, 2009. “Why are the disability rolls skyrocketing? The contribution
        of population characteristics, economic conditions, and program generosity,” in David M. Cutler
        and David A. Wise, eds. Health at Older Ages: The Causes and Consequences of Declining
        Disability Among the Elderly. University of Chicago Press, pp. 337-379.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman, 2012. "Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-
        Minsky-Koo Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1469-1513.
Emerson, Michael and Andre Dramais, 1988. What Model for Europe? MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Erceg, Christopher J., and Andrew T. Levin, 2013. “Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in
        the Wake of the Great Recession,” manuscript.
Garin, Julio, Michael Pries, and Eric Sims, 2013. “Reallocation and the Changing Nature of Economic
        Fluctuations,” manuscript.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2012. "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations," American
        Economic Review 102(4), 1692-1720.


                                                                                                       33
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Gerard Roland, 2010. "Culture, Institutions and the Wealth of Nations,"
        NBER Working Papers 16368.
Government Accountability Office, 2012. “Unemployed Older Workers: Many Experience Challenges
        Regaining Employment and Face Reduced Retirement Security,” Report to the Chairman, Special
        Committee on Aging, U.S. Senate. GAO-12-445. 2012 (April).
Gregory, Mary, and Jukes, Robert, 2001. "Unemployment and Subsequent Earnings: Estimating Scarring
        among British Men 1984-94," Economic Journal 111(475), F607-625.
Gregg, Paul, 2001."The Impact of Youth Unemployment on Adult Unemployment in the NCDS,"
        Economic Journal 111(475), F626-653.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. 2011. "Civic Capital as the Missing Link." In Social
        Economics Handbook, edited by Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin and Matthew O. Jackson, vol. 1,
        417-480. Elsevier.
Hall, Robert E., 2013. The Routes into and out of the Zero Lower Bound, manuscript.
Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry Sui, 2013. “The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless Recoveries,”
        manuscript.
Johnson, Richard W., and Barbara Butrica, 2012. "Age Disparities in Unemployment and Reemployment
        During the Great Recession and Recovery," Issue Briefs 2012-03, Urban Institute, Program on
        Retirement Policy.
Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor. 2011. “Financial Crises, Credit Booms, and External
        Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons.” IMF Economic Review, 59: 340–378.
Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, 2012. “Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate
        Migration,” NBER Working Papers 18507.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, 2013. “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,” manuscript.
Leduc, Sylvain, and Daniel Wilson, 2012. "Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory and
        Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment," Federal Reserve Bank of San
        Francisco, Working Paper 12-04.
Matheson, Troy and Emil Stavrev, 2013. “The Great Recession and the Inflation Puzzle,” Economics
        Letters 120(3): 468-472.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2011. "House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US Household
        Leverage Crisis," American Economic Review 101(5): 2132-2156.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson, 2011. "Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from U.S.
        Regions," NBER Working Papers 17391.
Nickell, Stephen. 1997. “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus North America,”
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3), 55-74.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez, 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States: 1913-1998,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 1-39.
Plane, David A., 1992. “Age-Composition Change and the Geographical Dynamics of Interregional
        Migration in the U.S.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 82(1), 64-85.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009a. “The Aftermath of Financial Crises.” American
        Economic Review, 99(2): 466–72.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009b. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of financial
        folly. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
        Implications.” American Economic Review 94: 1055-1084.
Romer, Christina, and Jared Bernstein, 2009. “The Job Impact of the American Recovery and
        Reinvestment Plan”, January 8, 2009.
Romer, David, 2013. “Preventing the Next Catastrophe: Where Do We Stand?” International Monetary
        Fund Conference, Rethinking Macro Policy II: First Steps and Early Lessons, Panel Discussion,
        April 2013.
Rothstein, Jesse, 2013. “Unemployment Insurance and Disability Insurance in the Great Recession,”
        manuscript.

                                                                                                    34
Stephen, Machin, and Alan Manning, 1999. "The causes and consequences of long-term unemployment
       in Europe," in: O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, edition 1, volume
       3, chapter 47, pages 3085-3139, Elsevier.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, 2011. "Trust in Public Institutions over the Business Cycle,"
       American Economic Review 101(3), 281-287.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, 2011. "Trust in Public Institutions over the Business Cycle,"
       American Economic Review 101(3), 281-287.
Tenreyro, Silvana, and Gregory Thwaites, 2013. "Pushing On a String: US Monetary Policy is Less
       Powerful in Recessions," CEP Discussion Papers dp1218, Centre for Economic Performance,
       LSE.
Van Horn, Carl E., Nicole Corre, and Maria Heidkamp, 2011. “Older Workers, The Great Recession, and
       the Impact of Long-term Unemployment,” Research Brief, John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce
       Development, February 2011.
Wieland, Johannes. 2012. “Are Negative Supply Shocks Expansionary at the Zero Lower Bound?”
       manuscript.




                                                                                                  35
                            FIGURE 1: THE CHANGING PERSISTENCE OF U.S. UNEMPLOYMENT

                                  Panel A: The Great Recession and the 1980s Recessions




                              Panel B: Scaled Unemployment Patterns across U.S. Recessions




                                  Panel C: Rolling Estimates of Unemployment Persistence




Notes: The top panel plots annual unemployment rates for Europe (average for twelve West European countries in our sample) and the U.S.
relative to their levels in 1979 and annual unemployment rates for U.S. in the Great Recession relative to 2007 level. Values from 2013-
2015 are forecasts from Survey of Professional Forecasters. Panel B plots unemployment rates across U.S. recessions relative to their level
in the quarter prior to the start of the recession and normalized by the peak increase in unemployment in each recession. The pre-1990
average is average value across all recessions since 1948 and prior to 1990, dropping all periods following one recession which become
part of the subsequent recession. The third panel plots rolling estimates of the sum of AR(2) coefficients for unemployment estimated over
30-year periods, along with one standard deviation confidence intervals.



                                                                                                                                   36
                                                                                       FIGURE 2: FINANCIAL SHOCKS AND UNEMPLOYMENT PERSISTENCE

                                                                                  Panel A: Do Financial Shocks Imply High Persistence in Unemployment?
                                          1                                                                                                                                     1

                                        0.8                                                                                                                                    0.8
   Unemployment relative to Peak Rise




                                                                                                                                      Unemployment relative to Peak Rise
                                        0.6                                                                                                                                    0.6

                                        0.4                                                                                                                                    0.4

                                        0.2                                                                                                                                    0.2

                                          0                                                                                                                                     0

                                        -0.2                                                                                                                               -0.2

                                        -0.4                            UE Persistence after   Monetary Policy Shock                                                       -0.4
                                                                        UE Persistence after   Monetary Policy Shock (90% CI)                                                              UE Persistence in Average Pre-1990 Recessions
                                        -0.6                            UE Persistence after   Financial Shock                                                             -0.6            UE Persistence in 2007 Recession
                                                                        UE Persistence after   Financial Shock (90% CI)                                                                    UE Persistence after Financial Shock (90% CI)
                                        -0.8                                                                                                                               -0.8
                                               0                         2             4          6          8         10        12                                                  0      2             4          6          8         10      12
                                                                        Quarters after Peak Effect of Shock on Unemployment                                                                Quarters after Peak Effect of Shock on Unemployment

                                                                       Panel B: Contribution of Financial Shocks to Unemployment in 2001 and 2007 Recessions
                                                                       1.5                                                                                                      1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Actual (Normalized) UE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted UE from Financial Shocks
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Unexplained UE
                                                                         1                                                                                                           1
                                                   Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                                                                           Unemployment Rate




                                                                       0.5                                                                                                      0.5



                                                                         0                                                                                                           0



                                                                       -0.5                                                                                                     -0.5
                                                                         2000   2001    2002       2003    2004   2005    2006                                                      2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
                                                                                                          Panel C: Household Leverage after U.S. Recessions




Notes: The left figure of Panel A plots the estimated median and 90% confidence interval (C.I.) of unemployment responses to
financial and monetary policy shocks in periods after the peak rise in unemployment. The right figure of panel A plots the same
90% C.I. of unemployment rates for financial shocks after the peak rise in unemployment, as well as the actual paths of
unemployment in the 2007 and pre-1990 recessions after the peak rise in unemployment. The figures in Panel B plot the
contributions of financial shocks to unemployment in the 2001 and 2007 recessions. Panel C plots the cumulative change in the
ratio of household debt to income in U.S. recessions relative to their level in the quarter prior to the start of each recession.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             37
                                                                                                                         FIGURE 3: THE CONTRIBUTION OF POLICY DIFFERENCES TO UNEMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES

                                                                                                                             Panel A: Historical Differences in Monetary and Fiscal Policy Responses to Recessions
                                                                                          3                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                   Pre‐1990 Recessions                       1990 Recession
                                                                                        2.5
                                          Cumulative monetary shocks during recession




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Change in Cyclically Adjusted Budget Balance
                                                                                                                   2001 Recession                            2007 Recession                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                          2

                                                                                        1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‐1
                                                                                        0.5

                                                                                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‐2

                                                                                        ‐0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ‐3
                                                                                         ‐1

                                                                                        ‐1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ‐4

                                                                                         ‐2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pre-1990 Recessions                                                    1990 Recession              2001 Recession             2008-09 Recession
                                                                                                   0           3         6       9        12       15       18    21     24                                     27       30       33    36                                                                              ‐5
                                                                                                                                     Months after start of NBER‐dated recession                                                                                                                                              ‐1    0       1       2       3                         4                    5    6     7     8      9    10 11           12   13     14    15    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Quarters after start of recession



                                                                                                            Panel B: Contribution of Monetary and Fiscal Policy Response Differences to Unemployment Gaps
                                          2                                                                                                                                                                2                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                   Fiscal                                                                                                                Fiscal                                                                                                                                                                                     Fiscal
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                                                        2
         Contribution of policies to UE




                                                                                                                                                                          Contribution of policies to UE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Contribution of policies to UE
                                          2                                                        Monetary                                                                                                              Monetary                                                                                                                                                                                   Monetary
                                                                                                   Total Policy                                                                                            1             Total Policy                                                                                                                                                               1               Total Policy
                                          1                                                                                                                                                                1                                                                                                                                                                                        1

                                          1                                                                                                                                                                0                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‐1                                                                                                                                                                                       ‐1
                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ‐1                                                                                                                                                                                       ‐1

                                          ‐1                                                                                                                                                               ‐2                                                                                                                                                                                       ‐2
                                                                                         0     1       2   3       4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                              0   1    2   3    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                                                                                                         0   1    2   3       4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                    Quarters into 1990 recession                                                                                    Quarters into 2001 recession                                                                                                                                                                  Quarters into 2007 recession



                                                                                                                     Panel C: Unemployment Gap after Recessions Setting Policies at Pre-1990 Recession Levels
                1.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.2
                1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UE gap after policy adjustment




                0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8
                0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.6
UE gap




                0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
                0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.2
                0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                             Pre‐1990 recession                     1990 recession                                                                                                                                                                         Pre‐1990 recession                                                             1990 recession
         ‐0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐0.2
                                                                                                                             2001 recession                         2007 recession                                                                                                                                                                         2001 recession                                                                 2007 recession
         ‐0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐0.4
                                                                                         ‐1        0        1        2       3   4       5     6        7   8    9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                                                                                                                                       ‐1       0       1       2       3                                    4       5       6        7    8    9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                                      Quarters after start of NBER‐dated recession                                                                                                                                                                                     Quarters after start of NBER‐dated recession

                                                                                                       Notes: Panel A shows cumulative shocks to monetary policy (identified as in Romer and Romer (2004)) and to
                                                                                                       fiscal policy (identified as changes in cyclically adjusted fiscal balance in percent of potential output; source: CBO).
                                                                                                       Panel B shows the contribution of monetary and fiscal policy to unemployment rate. The contribution of the
                                                                                                       monetary policy is calculated from the sequences of shocks to monetary policy and estimated impulse response
                                                                                                       function of unemployment to monetary policy shocks. The contribution of fiscal policy is calculated with the
                                                                                                       estimated Okun’s law (sample period 1949:2013) and output multiplier of government spending assumed to be equal
                                                                                                       to 1.5. Panel C shows actual (left) and counterfactual (right) dynamics of unemployment gaps. The counterfactual
                                                                                                       shows the dynamics when the contribution of monetary and fiscal policies is eliminated.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            38
                                                                                                       FIGURE 4: OTHER CHANGING FEATURES OF THE U.S. ECONOMY
                                                                                                                     Panel A: Missing Disinflation
                                                             4                                                                                                                              4
                 Inflation ‐ Expected Inflation (Backward‐




                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                          Inflation ‐ Expected Inflation
                                                             2




                                                                                                                                                            (Professional Forecasters)
                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                             1
                                  Looking)




                                                             0                                                                                                                              1

                                                             ‐1                                                                                                                             0
                                                             ‐2
                                                                                                                                                                                           ‐1
                                                             ‐3
                                                                                        1955‐1985         1986‐2007          2008‐2013                                                     ‐2
                                                             ‐4                                                                                                                                                                                                   1968‐1985       1986‐2007        2008‐2013

                                                             ‐5                                                                                                                            ‐3
                                                                   ‐3         ‐2       ‐1     0        1       2       3     4      5                 6                                          ‐3                                                         ‐2     ‐1       0        1         2      3        4        5
                                                                                   Unemployment Rate ‐ Natural Rate of Unemployment                                                                                                                           Unemployment Rate ‐ Natural rate of Unemployment



                                                                                                                Panel B: Rising Share of Long-Term Unemployment
                                                     12                                                                                                                                    5
                                                     11                                                                               1955‐1985                                           4.5                                                                                                              1955‐1985
                                                                                                                                      1986‐2007

                                                                                                                                                            Long term unemployment rate
                                                     10                                                                                                                                    4                                                                                                               1986‐2007
                           Total unemployment rate




                                                                                                                                      2008‐2013
                                                             9                                                                                                                            3.5                                                                                                              2008‐2013
                                                             8                                                                                                                             3
                                                             7                                                                                                                            2.5
                                                             6                                                                                                                             2
                                                             5                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                             4                                                                                                                             1
                                                             3                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                             2                                                                                                                             0
                                                                  ‐10                    ‐5                0                    5                    10                                         ‐10                                                                ‐5               0                 5                10
                                                                                                       Output gap                                                                                                                                                               Output gap

                                                                        Panel C: Diminishing Regional Convergence                                                                               Panel D: Changing Cyclicality of Disability Claims
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1966‐1985         1986‐2007          2008‐2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Change in Disability Claims (per 1000 workers)




                                                 2                                                                                           1982 recession
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                             1990 recession
Subsequent Two Years of Recession




                                                 1
 Change in State Unemployment in




                                                                                                                                             2001 recession                                                                                       2
                                                 0                                                                                           2007 recession
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                           ‐1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                           ‐2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‐1
                                           ‐3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‐2
                                           ‐4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‐3
                                           ‐5                                                                                                                                                                                                          ‐3         ‐2       ‐1       0         1        2           3        4
                                                             ‐1           0           1        2      3       4         5       6       7        8        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Annual Change in Unemployment rate
                                                                                   Rise in State Unemployment in First Two Years of Recessions


            Notes: Panel A plots quarterly unemployment rates against the difference between quarterly changes in wage inflation and expected inflation. In the
            left figure, expected inflation is the average of the previous four quarterly changes in wage inflation while in the right panel we use expected inflation
            for the subsequent quarter from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. Panel B plots quarterly deviations of output from the CBO measure of
            potential against total unemployment rates (left figure) and long-term unemployment rates (right figure). Panel C plots, for each state and each
            recession, the rise in unemployment rate from the year prior to the start of the recession to two years into the recession (x-axis) versus the change in
            unemployment rate over subsequent two years (y-axis). Lines show average relationships between the two for each recession. Panel D plots annual
            changes in unemployment rates against annual changes in the number of disability claims per 1,000 insured workers from 1968-2012. See section
            4.1 for details.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              39
                                                     FIGURE 5: EVIDENCE ON WAGE RIGIDITIES

                    Panel A: Rise in incidence of zero wage-changes during last 4 U.S. recessions

Actual Rise in Incidence of Zero Wage-Changes                                    Rise Normalized by Maximum Change in UE




                                                   Panel B: Wage Phillips Curves 1960Q1-2013Q1
                                          10
                                                                                             1960‐1985
                                           8
                                                                                             1986‐2007
              Unexpected Wage Inflation




                                           6
                                                                                             2008‐2013
                                           4

                                           2

                                           0

                                          ‐2

                                          ‐4

                                          ‐6
                                               2        4           6           8            10          12
                                                                  Unemployment Rate


Notes: The left-hand figure in Panel A plots the change in incidence of zero-wage changes during the last four U.S.
recessions relative to their level in the month prior to the start of the recession. The right-hand figure of Panel A
normalizes the change in incidence in zero-wage changes during each recession by the maximum rise in the
unemployment rate that occurred in each recession. Panel B plots a scatter of quarterly unemployment rates against
quarterly unexpected wage inflation. The wage series is the average hourly earnings of production and
nonsupervisory employees in manufacturing (variable code in the FRED database: CES3000000008). Trend lines
for 1960Q1-1985Q4 and 1986Q1-2007Q4 are shown as the blue and red lines respectively. See section text for
details.




                                                                                                                   40
                                    FIGURE 6: CHANGING AMERICAN MOBILITY RATES, AGE STRUCTURE AND CULTURE


                                      Panel A: Turnover mobility rate                               Panel B: Share of population aged 24 or less




                                                                                  48
 1 1.5 2 2.5 3




                                                                                  44
                                                                                  40
                                                                                  36
                                                                                  32
 .5




                        1970          1980          1990      2000        2010               1970         1980          1990          2000         2010
                               Panel C: Share of population aged 55 and over             Panel D: Claim gov't benefits to which you are not entitled
 26




                                                                                 3 3.5
 24
 22




                                                                                 1.5 2 2.5
 20
 18




                        1970          1980          1990       2000        2010 1980                          1990                2000             2010
                                   Panel E: Most people can be trusted
 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35




                                                                                                                 US (Census/ACS/WVS)
                                                                                                                 UK ('70 in Panels A, B, C)
                                                                                                                 FR ('70 in Panels A, B, C)
                                                                                                                 IT ('70 in Panels A, B, C)
                                                                                                                 SE ('70 in Panels A, B, C)
                                                                                                                 DE ('70 in Panels A, B, C)
                                                                                                                 ES ('70 in Panels A, B, C)
                        1980                 1990          2000            2010                                  US (CPS)



Notes: Panels A, B, and C show time series of the migration rate and population share for the U.S. and the levels of migration
rate and population shares for European countries in 1970. Panel A shows migration rates for the U.S. from two sources: i)
U.S. Censuses and American Community Surveys (solid, thick, black line) and ii) Current Population Survey (thin, dashed,
black line). Panel D shows time variation in the average response to the question “Please tell me for each of the following
actions whether you think it can be justified: Claiming government benefits to which you are not entitled” in the World
Values Surveys. The possible responses range from 1 (never justifiable) to 10 (always justifiable). Panel C shows time
variation in the average response to the question “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that
you need to be very careful in dealing with people?” in the World Values Surveys. The possible responses range from 1
(most people can be trusted) to 0 (can´t be too careful).




                                                                                                                                              41
                               FIGURE 7: CROSS-SECTIONAL DISPERSION IN UNEMPLOYMENT RATES




                     4
          standard deviation
            2        1     3




                               1970       1975           1980      1985           1990         1995

                                       disp. of country means   within-country disp.     total disp.



Notes: The dashed black line shows the annual average standard deviation of unemployment rates within
countries (population-weighted across regions) over time for the U.S., U.K., Canada, Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland. The red line shows the
annual standard deviation of unemployment rates across these countries. The dotted line shows the
annual standard deviation of unemployment rates across all regions in these countries.




                                                                                                       42
                   FIGURE 8: GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF UNEMPLOYMENT HYSTERESIS




Notes: The figure shows the degree of hysteresis (as defined in the text) for each region. Higher values denote
more hysteresis.



                                                                                                        43
       FIGURE 9: HYSTERESIS AND CHANGES IN THE WITHIN-COUNTRY DISPERSION OF UNEMPLOYMENT


                                                 Panel A                                                                          Panel B
                  1.5




                                                                                                    3
                                                                          ES
                                  FI                                                                                                                  ES
  1975 - 1970




                                                                                    1980 - 1970
                  1




                                                                                                    2
                                                   BE
                                                                                                                               NLUK IT
                             CA              NL         IT                                                                   DE BE DK
                                           DE                                                                          FI
                  .5




                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                         FR
                                                            FR                                                    CA
                                                                                                                 US
                             US       AT                                                                                AT
                                                                                                            SE         CH
                  0




                                                                                                    0
                        SE

                        0                    5                   10            15                           0                5                 10          15
                                                 hysteresis                                                                       hysteresis
                                                 Panel C                                                                          Panel D
                  4




                                                                                                                                        IT




                                                                                                    5
                                                        IT                ES
                                                                                                                                                      ES




                                                                                                    4
                                                 UK
                  3
  1985 - 1970




                                                                                    1990 - 1970
                                                   BE


                                                                                                    3
                                           DE                                                                                      BE
                  2




                                                                                                    2                             UK

                                                            FR                                                               DE
                              CA FI
                  1




                                              NL                                                                       FI                FR
                                                        DK
                                                                                                    1


                                  AT                                                                                                    DK
                                                                                                                  CH          NL
                             US                                                                                 CA AT
                                                                                                            SE
                                                                                                    0




                        SE
                  0




                                                                                                               US

                        0                    5                   10            15                           0                5                 10          15
                                                 hysteresis                                                                       hysteresis



Notes: Regional measures of hysteresis are aggregated to the country with population weights. The within-country
dispersion of unemployment rate is calculated as follows. First, for each country & year, calculate standard deviation
(population weighted) of regional unemployment rates:        . Second, calculate five year averages of        for each
country:                . For example,                  ,             ,         ,                       ,               ,          ,     . Third, calculate the
difference:              ,        ,        and plot it against hysteresis.




                                                                                                                                                                44
                                                FIGURE 10: CORRELATIONS OF REGIONAL CONTROLS WITH REGIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT HYSTERESIS




                       20




                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                             15




                                                                                        15




                                                                                                                                                 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
              Hysteresis (RAW)




                                                                         Hysteresis (RAW)




                                                                                                                                  Hysteresis (RAW)




                                                                                                                                                                                                Hysteresis (RAW)
                       10




                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                5




                                                                           5




                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                       0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                  2      4       6     8     10   12                         750        800       850       900                       10     20      30      40     50                              -4     -2      0        2          4
                                             Years of schooling                                    Log GDP p.c. x100, PPP                              Share of females in employment                                      Net migration rate
                       20




                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                             15




                                                                                        15




                                                                                                                                                 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
              Hysteresis (RAW)




                                                                         Hysteresis (RAW)




                                                                                                                                  Hysteresis (RAW)




                                                                                                                                                                                                Hysteresis (RAW)
                       10




                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                5




                                                                           5




                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                       0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                  0     10     20     30     40     50                       10    20    30     40    50    60                        20      40        60       80       100                        -10   -8    -6   -4     -2        0
                                      Empl. share in primary sector                           Empl. share in secondary sector                              Empl. share in tertiary sector                                   Log road density
                       20




                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                           20
                             15




                                                                                        15




                                                                                                                                                 15
              Hysteresis (RAW)




                                                                         Hysteresis (RAW)




                                                                                                                                  Hysteresis (RAW)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    US           UK               CA
                       10




                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DE           AT               CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BE           NL               FR
                5




                                                                           5




                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IT           ES               SE
                       0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FI           DK

                                  2      2.5     3    3.5     4   4.5                        20       40    60     80       100                       0      20    40     60    80    100
                                               Household size                                         Home ownership                                        Share of urban population


Notes: Each panel shows a scatter plot of (our measure of hysteresis in the unemployment rate) vs. a given control variable. Each point corresponds to a region. Each
country has a country-specific marker.        See Appendix A for definitions of variables as well as details on how these variables are constructed.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           45
                                                         FIGURE 11: CORRELATIONS OF REGIONAL CONTROLS WITH REGIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT HYSTERESIS




                                     20




                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                     15




                                                                                          15




                                                                                                                                        15




                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                          10




                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                        Raw
                                     5




                                                                                          5




                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                     0




                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                    0    2          4            6    8         20     30       40       50       60          10    15      20    25     30      35         -6         -4            -2         0       2
                                                                 Migration                       Population share of 0-24 years old             Population share of 55+ years old                                   Trust
                                     10




                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                        Partial out controls
                                       5




                                                                                          5




                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                             0




                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                     -5




                                                                                          -5




                                                                                                                                        -5




                                                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                                    -2       0            2           4         -10        -5          0          5           -5          0           5          10         -2        -1        0           1       2   3
                                                                 Migration                        Population share of 0-24 years old            Population share of 55+ years old                                   Trust
                                     10




                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                        Partial out controls & FE
                                             5




                                                                                          5




                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                     0




                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                           -5




                                                                                          -5




                                                                                                                                        -5




                                                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                     -10




                                                                                          -10




                                                                                                                                        -10




                                                                                                                                                                                      -10
                                                    -2       0               2        4           -5         0           5         10         -10        -5           0           5              -1         0          1        2       3
                                                                 Migration                        Population share of 0-24 years old            Population share of 55+ years old                                   Trust




                                                                                 US   UK         CA      DE       AT      CH       BE          NL      FR       IT     ES      SE           FI        DK
Notes: Each panel shows a scatter plot of (our measure of hysteresis in the unemployment rate) vs. a given control variable. Each point corresponds to a region. Each country
has a country-specific marker. The first row shows the relationship between variables when no adjustments to the variables are made. The second row shows the relationship when
the effects of controls (see Table 1 for the list of controls) are partialed out (as in Table 1, population weights are used when controls are partialled out). The second row shows the
relationship when the effects of controls and country fixed effects are partialed out (as in Table 1, population weights are used when controls and country fixed effects are
partialled     out).    See    Appendix        A      for    definitions     of     variables     as   well    as     details  on     how      these     variables     are   constructed.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            46
                                     TABLE 1: THE EFFECTS OF MOBILITY, AGE STRUCTURE AND CULTURE ON UNEMPLOYMENT HYSTERESIS
VARIABLES                               OLS        OLS          FE           OLS          OLS           FE           OLS          OLS          FE            OLS          FE
                                        (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)           (10)         (11)
Turnover migration rate                 -0.34      0.43*        0.41*                                                                                        0.37         0.29
                                        (0.37)     (0.26)       (0.24)                                                                                       (0.27)       (0.22)
Population share 0-24 years                                                  0.16         0.18          0.60***                                              0.14         0.58***
                                                                             (0.15)       (0.13)        (0.13)                                               (0.13)       (0.12)
Population share 55+ years                                                   0.18         0.17          0.42***                                              0.17         0.42***
                                                                             (0.18)       (0.14)        (0.13)                                               (0.14)       (0.12)
Trust                                                                                                                -1.34***     0.08         -0.97***      0.16         -1.00***
                                                                                                                     (0.45)       (0.30)       (0.34)        (0.33)       (0.32)
Controls

        Years of schooling                         -0.87***     -1.67**                   -0.94***      -1.60**                   -0.88***     -1.55**       -0.98***     -1.57**
                                                   (0.15)       (0.66)                    (0.15)        (0.64)                    (0.17)       (0.66)        (0.17)       (0.63)
        Share of employment in the                 0.05         0.02                      0.03          -0.01                     0.02         -0.00         0.04         -0.01
           primary sector                          (0.04)       (0.03)                    (0.04)        (0.03)                    (0.04)       (0.03)        (0.04)       (0.03)
        Share of employment in the                 -0.02        -0.05**                   -0.03         -0.07***                  -0.05*       -0.07***      -0.02        -0.06**
           secondary sector                        (0.03)       (0.03)                    (0.03)        (0.02)                    (0.03)       (0.02)        (0.03)       (0.02)
        Women’s share in employment                -0.20***     -0.26***                  -0.19***      -0.21***                  -0.18***     -0.28***      -0.18***     -0.23***
                                                   (0.04)       (0.09)                    (0.04)        (0.08)                    (0.04)       (0.09)        (0.04)       (0.08)
        Household size                             -0.23        -0.67                     -0.60         -2.48**                   -0.32        -0.65         -0.08        -2.13*
                                                   (0.74)       (0.72)                    (0.91)        (1.17)                    (0.72)       (0.69)        (0.76)       (1.18)
        Home ownership rate                        -0.05***     -0.04*                    -0.05***      -0.04*                    -0.05***     -0.02         -0.05***     -0.03
                                                   (0.02)       (0.02)                    (0.02)        (0.02)                    (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)
        Net migration rate                         -0.39        -0.26                     -0.35         -0.11                     -0.40        -0.26         -0.34        -0.10
                                                   (0.27)       (0.21)                    (0.28)        (0.20)                    (0.28)       (0.21)        (0.27)       (0.18)
        Share of urban population                  0.01         0.03**                    0.01          0.03**                    0.01         0.03**        0.01         0.04***
                                                   (0.01)       (0.01)                    (0.02)        (0.01)                    (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)
        Log(Income p.c.) × 100                     -0.05***     -0.04**                   -0.04***      -0.02                     -0.05***     -0.03*        -0.04***     -0.01
                                                   (0.01)       (0.02)                    (0.01)        (0.02)                    (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.02)
        Road density                               0.46***      0.49***                   0.35**        0.48***                   0.42**       0.47***       0.44**       0.44***
                                                   (0.16)       (0.12)                    (0.17)        (0.13)                    (0.20)       (0.12)        (0.21)       (0.14)
        City region                                3.50***      0.40                      3.52***       0.57                      3.52***      0.88          3.33***      0.47
                                                   (0.56)       (0.82)                    (0.69)        (0.91)                    (0.59)       (0.81)        (0.63)       (0.92)
        Capital                                    -0.05        0.50                      -0.12         0.42                      -0.31        0.28          -0.01        0.35
                                                   (0.51)       (0.50)                    (0.60)        (0.46)                    (0.54)       (0.49)        (0.59)       (0.46)
Observations                            232        232          232          232          232           232          232          232          232           232          232
R-squared                               0.01       0.71         0.85         0.01         0.71          0.86         0.12         0.70         0.85          0.71         0.87
BIC                                     5.690      4.741        4.415        5.712        4.772         4.342        5.570        4.759        4.355         4.803        4.286

Notes: Regression is estimated with population weights where weights are constructed in such a way that regions within a country receive weights proportional to their population but at the
same time all countries have the same weight. Country fixed effects are included (but not reported) in columns “FE”. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, ***
significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%.



                                                                                                                                                                                          47
                                                                   TABLE 2: ROBUSTNESS TO COUNTRY SELECTION
                                                                                                                                          Exclude France and
                                                        Baseline           Exclude U.S. and Canada         Exclude Italy & Spain                                     Exclude Nordic countries
                                                                                                                                               Germany
VARIABLES                                        OLS             FE           OLS             FE            OLS             FE            OLS            FE             OLS              FE
                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)             (9)            (10)
Turnover migration rate                        0.37           0.29          0.17           0.43*          0.39           0.07           0.35          0.29            0.36           0.24
                                              (0.27)         (0.22)        (0.28)         (0.25)         (0.24)         (0.16)         (0.31)        (0.23)          (0.22)         (0.27)
Population share 0-24 years                    0.14           0.58***       0.26*          0.59***        0.25**         0.29***       -0.14          0.68***         0.20*          0.58***
                                              (0.13)         (0.12)        (0.15)         (0.14)         (0.13)         (0.11)         (0.18)        (0.13)          (0.11)         (0.12)
Population share 55+ years                     0.17           0.42***       0.12           0.39***        0.32**         0.25**        -0.14          0.47***         0.31**         0.38***
                                              (0.14)         (0.12)        (0.16)         (0.14)         (0.13)         (0.10)         (0.20)        (0.13)          (0.13)         (0.12)
Trust                                          0.16          -1.00***      -0.09          -1.05***        0.36          -0.61**         0.15         -1.55***        -1.14***       -0.91***
                                              (0.33)         (0.32)        (0.32)         (0.32)         (0.31)         (0.24)         (0.39)        (0.44)          (0.30)         (0.32)
Controls

        Years of schooling                   -0.98***        -1.57**       -0.85***       -1.62*         -0.95***      -1.64***       -0.56**        -1.55**        -0.63***       -1.22*
                                             (0.17)          (0.63)        (0.20)         (0.85)         (0.17)        (0.45)         (0.27)         (0.67)         (0.17)         (0.63)
        Share of employment in the primary    0.04           -0.01          0.07           0.01           0.08**        0.03           0.08*         -0.02           0.05           0.01
           sector                            (0.04)          (0.03)        (0.05)         (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.03)         (0.05)         (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.04)
        Share of employment in the           -0.02           -0.06**       -0.05          -0.08***       -0.00         -0.06***       -0.00          -0.06**        -0.04          -0.04
           secondary sector                  (0.03)          (0.02)        (0.04)         (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.02)         (0.04)         (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.03)
        Women’s share in employment          -0.18***        -0.23***      -0.14***       -0.22***       -0.07**       -0.15***       -0.24***       -0.24**        -0.24***       -0.23***
                                             (0.04)          (0.08)        (0.04)         (0.08)         (0.04)        (0.04)         (0.05)         (0.11)         (0.05)         (0.09)
        Household size                       -0.08           -2.13*        -0.96          -2.43*         -1.03         -1.74**        -0.83          -3.27**         2.21***       -2.21
                                             (0.76)          (1.18)        (0.90)         (1.32)         (0.71)        (0.87)         (0.99)         (1.50)         (0.85)         (1.34)
        Home ownership rate                  -0.05***        -0.03         -0.01          -0.03          -0.08***      -0.03**        -0.04*         -0.04          -0.07***       -0.07***
                                             (0.02)          (0.02)        (0.03)         (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)
        Net migration rate                   -0.34           -0.10         -0.42          -0.23          -0.13         -0.07          -0.46           0.03          -0.13           0.05
                                             (0.27)          (0.18)        (0.33)         (0.23)         (0.22)        (0.16)         (0.30)         (0.21)         (0.26)         (0.22)
        Share of urban population             0.01            0.04***       0.01           0.05***        0.00          0.01           0.01           0.04***        0.06***        0.04***
                                             (0.01)          (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
        Log(Income p.c.) × 100               -0.04***        -0.01         -0.03*         -0.01          -0.03***       0.01          -0.07***       -0.02          -0.04***       -0.04**
                                             (0.01)          (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.01)         (0.02)
        Road density                          0.44**          0.44***       0.78***        0.39***        0.67***       0.46***        0.45**         0.42**        -0.09           0.48**
                                             (0.21)          (0.14)        (0.25)         (0.14)         (0.19)        (0.11)         (0.21)         (0.17)         (0.18)         (0.19)
        City region                           3.33***         0.47          3.54***        0.55           2.21***       0.83           3.77***       -0.79           1.80*          1.54
                                             (0.63)          (0.92)        (0.76)         (0.91)         (0.65)        (0.63)         (0.78)         (0.95)         (0.93)         (1.38)
        Capital                              -0.01            0.35         -0.16          -0.25          -0.08          0.30          -0.11           0.75           0.17           0.49
                                             (0.59)          (0.46)        (0.78)         (0.52)         (0.47)        (0.28)         (0.64)         (0.47)         (0.48)         (0.48)
Observations                                 232             232           175            175            197           197            183            183            215            215
R-squared                                    0.71            0.87          0.71           0.87           0.64          0.87           0.72           0.88           0.82           0.87
BIC                                          4.803           4.286         4.887          4.436          4.386         3.642          4.954          4.376          4.432          4.366

Notes: Regression is estimated with population weights where weights are constructed in such a way that regions within a country receive weights proportional to their population but at the
same time all countries have the same weight. Country fixed effects are included (but not reported) in columns “FE”. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, ***
significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%.


                                                                                                                                                                                          48
        TABLE 3: INTERACTIONS OF MOBILITY, AGE STRUCTURE AND CULTURE WITH LABOR INSTITUTIONS
                                       OLS        FE          OLS          FE          OLS         FE          OLS          FE
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)
Panel A: Employment protection (EP)
Turnover migration rate                 0.46      -0.11        0.37         0.31        0.40         0.25       0.43        -0.12
                                       (0.40)     (0.28)      (0.25)       (0.21)      (0.28)       (0.22)     (0.33)       (0.30)
Population share 0-24 years             0.14       0.58***    -0.31*        0.17        0.25*        0.58***   -0.20         0.20
                                       (0.15)     (0.12)      (0.18)       (0.18)      (0.15)       (0.12)     (0.20)       (0.17)
Population share 55+ year               0.16       0.41***    -0.04         0.19        0.25         0.42***    0.04         0.24
                                       (0.17)     (0.12)      (0.21)       (0.19)      (0.17)       (0.12)     (0.22)       (0.19)
Trust                                   0.19      -1.01***     0.03        -0.89***     1.41***     -0.01       0.79*       -0.03
                                       (0.33)     (0.31)      (0.30)       (0.31)      (0.46)       (0.46)     (0.46)       (0.43)
EP                                     -0.02                  -10.74**                 -1.30**                 -10.42**
                                       (0.57)                 (4.76)                   (0.54)                  (4.98)
EP × Turnover migration rate           -0.07       0.27*                                                       -0.03         0.27
                                       (0.21)     (0.16)                                                       (0.21)       (0.18)
EP × Population share 0-24 years                                0.22***     0.18***                             0.20***      0.16**
                                                               (0.07)      (0.07)                              (0.08)       (0.07)
EP × Population share 55+ years                                 0.08        0.13                                0.07         0.09
                                                               (0.10)      (0.09)                              (0.11)       (0.08)
EP × Trust                                                                             -0.57**     -0.42*      -0.35        -0.37*
                                                                                       (0.23)      (0.23)      (0.24)       (0.22)
Observations                           232        232         232          232         232         232         232          232
R-squared                              0.71       0.88        0.75         0.88        0.72        0.88        0.75         0.89
BIC                                    4.847      4.290       4.729        4.267       4.814       4.283       4.762        4.274

Panel B: Replacement Rate (RR)
Turnover migration rate                 0.24      -0.04        0.53*        0.36        0.32         0.29       0.73        -0.09
                                       (0.66)     (0.37)      (0.28)       (0.22)      (0.26)       (0.22)     (0.62)       (0.39)
Population share 0-24 years             0.12       0.60***    -0.03         0.56***     0.08         0.58***   -0.09         0.60***
                                       (0.14)     (0.13)      (0.19)       (0.11)      (0.15)       (0.12)     (0.19)       (0.12)
Population share 55+ year               0.15       0.43***    -0.38         0.20        0.16         0.42***   -0.41         0.27*
                                       (0.14)     (0.12)      (0.26)       (0.14)      (0.14)       (0.12)     (0.25)       (0.15)
Trust                                   0.14      -1.00***     0.24        -0.94***    -0.99        -1.53      -1.07*       -1.12
                                       (0.30)     (0.32)      (0.29)       (0.30)      (0.68)       (1.02)     (0.63)       (0.95)
RR                                     -0.04                  -93.53                    9.35                   -87.94
                                       (4.36)                 (56.63)                  (6.16)                  (59.15)
RR × Turnover migration rate            0.50       1.36                                                        -0.94         2.02
                                       (2.30)     (1.43)                                                       (2.20)       (1.58)
RR × Population share 0-24 years                                0.87       -1.03**                              0.92        -1.23**
                                                               (0.87)      (0.43)                              (0.91)       (0.48)
RR × Population share 55+ years                                 2.69**      0.08                                2.87**      -0.24
                                                               (1.04)      (0.45)                              (1.11)       (0.55)
RR × Trust                                                                              4.20        2.16        4.94**       0.70
                                                                                       (2.65)      (3.74)      (2.34)       (3.48)
Observations                           232        232         232          232         232         232         232          232
R-squared                              0.71       0.87        0.74         0.88        0.72        0.87        0.76         0.88
BIC                                    4.848      4.304       4.763        4.274       4.814       4.304       4.757        4.310

  Notes: The table reports results for the baseline specification augmented with interactions with the index of employment
  protection in 1970 (EP, source: Blanchard and Wolfers 2003) and with wage replacement rate for unemployed workers in
  1970 (RR, source: Florence Jaumotte). Controls shown in Table 1 are included but not reported. Regression is estimated with
  population weights where weights are constructed in such a way that regions within a country receive weights proportional to
  their population but at the same time all countries have the same weight. Country fixed effects are included (but not reported)
  in columns “FE”. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%.




                                                                                                                              49
                                                                       TABLE 4: ADDITIONAL INTERACTIONS
                                                         Shocks                                    Labor Institutions                              Cultural
                                                           Real
                                           Labor                                             Replacement      Employment           Value of
               Blocks of variables                       interest             TFP                                                                   Trust      Individualism
                                          demand                                                 rate          protection           Work
                                                           rate
                                             (1)            (2)                (3)                (4)              (5)                (6)            (7)             (8)
           Panel A: Change in R2, no country fixed effects
              Age distribution             0.009**       0.000               0.002             0.000            0.000               0.003          0.000          0.005
              Mobility                     0.012**       0.038***            0.011*            0.030***         0.038***            0.027***       0.010*         0.009
              Cultural                     0.014***      0.101***            0.074***          0.010            0.010**             0.009*         0.063***       0.102***
              Controls                     0.072***      0.169***            0.096***          0.104***         0.069***            0.046***       0.140***       0.142***

           Panel B: BIC, no country fixed effects
              Age distribution             4.806              4.813          4.785             4.848            4.847               4.834          4.826          4.831
              Mobility                     4.820              4.693          4.778             4.763            4.729               4.772          4.816          4.843
              Cultural                     4.794              4.261          4.508             4.834            4.843               4.857          4.543          4.404
              Controls                     4.806              4.134          4.617             4.657            4.830               4.931          4.419          4.424

           Baseline (no interactions)          4.816          4.792          4.770             4.825            4.825               4.823          4.803          4.826

           Panel C: Change in R2, country fixed effects
              Age distribution             0.000              0.001          0.000             0.002*           0.002*              0.001          0.001          0.000
              Mobility                     0.001              0.011***       0.001             0.007**          0.008**             0.007**        0.005*         0.002
              Cultural                     0.018***           0.012**        0.014***          0.001            0.010**             0.013***       0.008*         0.007
              Controls                     0.033***           0.043***       0.012             0.029***         0.019*              0.023**        0.037***       0.023***

           Panel D: BIC, country fixed effects
              Age distribution             4.308              4.302          4.309             4.302            4.290               4.323          4.299          4.302
              Mobility                     4.322              4.239          4.328             4.290            4.267               4.299          4.292          4.312
              Cultural                     4.200              4.256          4.243             4.361            4.275               4.271          4.293          4.293
              Controls                     4.266              4.158          4.469             4.320            4.402               4.386          4.222          4.357

           Baseline (no interactions)          4.286          4.286          4.286             4.298            4.286               4.308          4.286          4.278


Notes: Panels A and C show the change in R2 when interaction of the variable in a given column with variables in the block indicted in the left column are introduced relative to
the specification which includes all variables in the baseline specification as well as the variable indicated in the column. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance of interactions
(joint F-test) at 10%, 5%, and 1%. Panels B and D present values of the Bayesian Information Criterion (                                       2 log                   #
log #                 / #                  ) when interaction of the variable in a given column with variables in the block indicted in the left column are introduced. The last row of
Panel B and Panel D reports BIC for the specification which includes all variables in the baseline specification as well as the variable indicated in the column but no interactions.
Shocks and Employment protection (for 1970) are taken from Blanchard and Wolfers (2003). Wage replacement rate for unemployed workers (for 1970) is from Florence Jaumotte.
Construction of cultural indexes Value of Work and Individualism is described in Appendix Table A2.



                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                     TABLE 5: COUNTERFACTUAL LEVELS OF HYSTERESIS FOR THE U.S.
                                                                                         Specification used
 Scenario                              Predicted hysteresis                                for prediction
                                                                                          OLS          FE
                                                                                           (1)         (2)
    (1)      All variables have values from 1970                                          0.37         0.60
                                                                                         (0.18)       (0.20)
             Counterfactuals
    (2)             Migration rate is from 2000, all other variables have values           0.30        0.55
                          from 1970                                                       (0.19)      (0.20)
    (3)             Demographic shares are from 2000, all other variables have            -0.83       -4.91
                          values from 1970                                                (0.25)      (0.27)
    (4)             Reduced index of trust, all other variables have values from           0.21        1.61
                          1970                                                            (0.19)      (0.21)
    (5)             Migration rate and demographic shares are from 2000, reduced          -1.06       -3.97
                          index of trust, all other variables have values from 1970       (0.26)      (0.28)


Notes: the table reported predicted hysteresis for various scenarios. For column (1), we use estimated
specification in column (10) of Table 1 to predict hysteresis. For column (2), we use estimated specification
in column (11) of Table 1 to predict hysteresis. Scenario (1) uses actual values of the variables from 1970s to
predict hysteresis. Scenario (2) uses U.S. migration rate from 2000 while all other variables continue to have
their 1970 values. Scenario (3) uses U.S. demographic shares (0-24 and 55+) rate from 2000 while all other
variables continue to have their 1970 values. Since the trust index is not available for 1970s, Scenario (3)
assumes that the trust index fell by one standard deviation (the standard deviation is calculated from the
cross-section of U.S., Canadian and European regions in 2000s; the standard deviation by construction is
approximately one) while all other variables continue to have their 1970 values. Scenario (5) combines
changes in Scenarios (2)-(4) where only control variables continue to have their 1970s values. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                            51
APPENDIX




           52
                                                APPENDIX A: DATA
Countries in the sample include Austria (AT), Belgium (BE), Canada (CA), Switzerland (CH), Germany (DE), Denmark
(DK), Spain (ES), Finland (FI), France (FR), Italy (IT), Netherlands (NL), Sweden (SE), United Kingdom (UK), and the
United States (US). An English translation of a source table or source title is provided only where a translation was
provided in English in the original source; otherwise the table title or source title is reported in the original source
language.

All links checked to be working as of 9/6/13.


I. Population and Labor Force Variables
Different sources report labor force variables in a variety of ways. A source might report the number unemployed, the
number employed, the number in the labor force, or the number economically active; in other cases, labor force
participation, unemployment rates, or activity rates are reported. From rates or levels, we determine the number of
unemployed and employed. When variables from multiple sources overlapped, we take the average across sources.
        All sources of labor market data come from household surveys, i.e. censuses or labor force surveys.

BE, DE, FR, IT, NL:
   1970: “5. Population by age groups, total,” pp. 148-155 and “9. Population by category of activity”, pp. 186-193
          (Eurostat 1973).
   1973: “5. Population by age groups, total,” pp. 148-155, and “19. Population par category of activity in 1973:
          hommes/femmes,” pp. 250-257 (Eurostat 1975)
   1975: “6. Population by age groups, total – 1975,” pp. 192-199, and “10. Population by category of activity: total –
          1975,” pp. 232-239.
   1977: “10. Population by category of activity: total - 1977”, pp. 228-235 (Eurostat, 1979).
   1979: “II.1. “Principal characteristics of population activity, total – 1979,” pp. 60-65 (Eurostat 1981);
BE, DE, DK, ES, FR, IT, NL:
   1981: “II.1. “Principal characteristics of population activity, total – 1981,” pp. 51-53 (Eurostat 1984);
   1983: “II.1 “Principal characteristics of population activity – 1983,” p. 51-53 (Eurostat 1985);
   1985: “II.1 “Principal characteristics of population activity,” p. 51-53 (Eurostat 1986);
   1985-6: “II.1. “Principal characteristics of population activity,” pp. 46-49, and “II.4. Unemployment,” pg. 66-73
          (Eurostat 1987).
   1986-7: “II.1. Principal characteristics of activity,” pp. 59-53, and “II.4. Unemployment,” pg. 70-77 (Eurostat 1988).
   1987-8: “II.1. Principal characteristics of activity,” pp. 50-53, and “II.4. Unemployment,” pg. 70-77 (Eurostat 1989).
BE, DK, DE, ES, FR, IT, NL:
   1988-1989: “Unemployment Rates in April (%)” (Eurostat 1989b)
BE, DK, DE, ES, FR, IT, NL:
   1989-1990: “Unemployment Rates in April” (Eurostat 1990b)
   1990-1: “Unemployment Rates in April” (Eurostat 1991)
BE, DE, DK, ES, FR, IT, NL:
   1990-1: “II.1. Principal characteristics of activity,” pp. 38-41, and “II.4. Unemployment,” pg. 58-65 (Eurostat 1993).
   1991-2: [No table title] (Eurostat 1993b)
BE, DE, DK, ES, FR, IT, NL:
   1992-3: “II.1. Principal characteristics of activity,” pp. 54-57, and “II.4. Unemployment” pg. 74-81 (Eurostat 1994a).
BE, DE, ES, FR, IT, NL, UK:
   1992-3: [No table title] (Eurostat 1994b)
BE, DE, ES, FR, IT, NL:
                                                                                                                       53
    1993-4: “II.1. Principal characteristics of activity,” pp. 58-64, and “II.4. Unemployment,” pg. 84-93 (Eurostat 1995a).
AT, BE, DE, ES, FI, FR, IT, NL, SE, UK:
    1993-4: [No table title] (Eurostat 1995b)
BE, DE, DK, ES, FI, FR, IT, NL:
    1994-5: “II.1. Principal characteristics of activity,” pp. 58-63, and “II.4. Unemployment,” pg. 84-93 (Eurostat 1996).
    1995-6: “II.1. Principal characteristics of activity,” pp. 58-63, and “II.4. Unemployment,” pg. 84-93 (Eurostat 1997).
AT, BE, CH, DK, DE, ES, FI, FR, IT, NL, SE, UK:
    1990 – 2011: “Population on 1 January by five years age groups and sex - NUTS 2 regions” (European Commission,
           n.d.); “Population on 1 January by broad age groups and sex - NUTS 3 regions” (European Commission, n.d.);
           “Annual average population (1 000) by sex - NUTS 3 regions” (European Commission, n.d.); “Economically
           active population by sex and age, at NUTS levels 1 and 2 (1000), reg_lfh2act” (European Commission, n.d.);
           “Economically active population by sex, age and NUTS 2 regions (1 000) (lfst_r_lfp2act)” (European
           Commission, n.d.); “Economically active population by sex and age, at NUTS levels 1, 2 and 3, Age from 15
           to 24 (1000), lfst_r_lfp3pop” (European Commission, n.d.); “Employment by sex and age, at NUTS levels 1
           and 2 (1000), reg_lfh2emp” (European Commission, n.d.); “Employment by sex, age and NUTS 2 regions (1
           000) (lfst_r_lfe2emp) (European Commission, n.d.)
AT:
    1971, 1981: Censuses (Statistics Austria, n.d.)
    1974 – 2011: “Microcensus Time Series Since 1974” (Statistics Austria, n.d.)
CA:
    1971 – 2012: “Table 051-0001 - Estimates of population, by age group and sex for July 1, Canada, provinces and
           territories, annual (persons unless otherwise noted),” (Statistics Canada, n.d.).
    1976 – 2012: “Table 282-0087 Labor force survey estimates (LFS), by sex and age group, seasonally adjusted and
           unadjusted, annual (persons unless otherwise noted)”, (Statistics Canada, n.d.).
CH:
    1970, 1980, 1990, 2000: Census, Federal Statistical Office (FSO), accessed via IPUMS-International.
DK:
    1970: Unpublished data kindly made available by Anita Lange at Statistics Denmark.
    1971 – 1985: “BEF1: Population 1. January by municipality, sex, age and marital status (DISCONTINUED) (1971-
           2002)” (Statistics Denmark, n.d.)
    1981 – 2006: “RAS1: Population by living-region, socioeconomic status (3 groups), ancestry, age and sex
           (DISCONTINUED) (1981-2006),” (Statistics Denmark, n.d.)
ES:
    1970: “14. Población económicamente activa según el sexo, la rama de actividad económica y la situación
           profesional” (Instituto Nacional de Estadistica, 1974)
    1970-1980: “1.4 Evolution of the population of Spain between the censuses 1970 and 1981 by reference date,
           autonomous community, sex, age group and year” (Spanish Statisticso Office, n.d.)
    1976 – 2004: “Encuesta de Población Activa. Principales Resultados: 4.- Resultados provincials: Población de 16 y
           más años por sexo, provincia y relación con la actividad económica (6).” (INE Instituto Nacional de
           Estadística (España) [Spanish Statistical Office], n.d.)
    1981-1990: “1.4 Evolution of the population of Spain between the censuses 1981 and 1991 by reference date,
           autonomous community, sex, age group and year.”
    1991-2000: “1.4 Evolution of the population of Spain between the censuses 1991 and 2001 by reference date, sex,
           autonomous community, five year age group and year.”
    2002-2012: “2.3 Population, by reference date, Autonomous Community, sex and five-year age group”
FI:


                                                                                                                         54
    1970: “22. Economically active population by industry, by province on 31 Dec. 1970,” pg. 47 (Finland Bureau of
          Statistics, 1972)
    1977-1984: “Population of working age, labour fore and persons not in labour force by age and province” [various
          table numbers and pages], (Finland Bureau of Statistics, 1977-1984)
    1985– 2009: “Labour force and persons not in labour force by age and province” [various table numbers and pages]
          (Finland Bureau of Statistics, annually 1985-2009)

FR:
    1974 – 1985: “Taux de chomage regionaux et departementaux en moyennes annuelles de 1980 a 1985,” pg. 3 and
           “Taux de chomage regionaux en moyennes annuelles de 1974 a 1979,” pg. 4 (Marc and Marchand, 1986)
    1982 – 2011, “Localised regional unemployment rates (Metropolitan France),” (Insee, n.d.)
IT:
    1968 – 2010: “Table 2.3.2 - Resident population (a) at the 1st of January and average by region and geographical area
           - Years 1952-2010 [Average Population]” (Istat, n.d.)
    1969-1995: (Obstfeld & Peri 1998)
SE:
    1968-2011: “BE0101N1- Population by region, marital status, age, sex and period,” (Statistics Sweden, n.d.)
    1971 – 1975: “Tabell 6. Relativa arbetskarftsta for olika kons-och civilstandskategorier samt regioner. Procenttal,
           standard-avvikelser for skattningarna inom parents”; “Tabell 7. Relativa arbetsloshetstal for olika kons- och
           civilstandskategorier samt regioner. Procenttal, standard-avvikesler for skattningarna inom parentes”
           (Statistiska meddelanden, 1971a-1975a).
    1976 – 2011: “Population aged 16-64 years (AKU), 100-tal efter region, arbetskraftstillhörighet och tid.” Non-
           publicly-available data, kindly made available by the Swedish statistical office;
UK:
    1971, Census of Population (Casweb, n.d.)
    1981, 1991, Census of Population (nomis, n.d.)
US:
    1968-1990: “State Population Estimates and Demographic Components of Change: 1900 to 1990 Total Population
           Estimates” (U.S. Census Bureau, n.d.)
    1968-1975: March CPS, accessed via IPUMS-CPS
    1976-2012: Series LASST01000003-LASST56000003 (BLS, n.d.)
    1990-2000: “1990 to 1999 State Population Estimates: Annual Time Series” (U.S. Census Bureau, n.d.)
    2000-2011: “Intercensal Estimates of the Resident Population by Sex and Age for States: April 1, 2000 to July 1,
           2010” (U.S. Census Bureau, n.d.)




                                                                                                                       55
Table 1. Sources for time series of unemployment rates

  Year         AT           BE           CA              CH    DE     DK     ES     FI     FR    IT     NL    SE      UK     US
  1970                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     
  1971                                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
  1972                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                      
  1973                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                     
  1974                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                     
  1975                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                     
  1976                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                   
  1977                                                                                               
                                                                                                                     
  1978                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                    
  1979                                                                                               
                                                                                                                     
  1980                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                    
  1981                                                                                           
                                                                                    
  1982                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     
  1983                                                                                            
                                                                                                                       
  1984                                                                                            
                                                                                                                       
  1985                                                                                            
                                                                                                                       
  1986                                                                                            
                                                                                                                       
  1987                                                                                            
                                                                                                                       
  1988                                                                                           
                                                                                                                       
  1989                                                                                         
                                                      
  1990                                                                                    
  1991                                                                                       
                                                         
  1992                                                                                         
                                                         
  1993                                                                                        
                                                         
  1994                                                                                       
                                                         
  1995                                                                                         
                                                                                                                      
  1996                                                                        

  1997                                                                                 
                                                          
  1998                                                                               
                                                          
  1999                                                                            
                                                          
  2000                                                                            
  2001                                                                           
                                                                                                                                  56
 2002                                                                       
 2003                                                                       
 2004                                                                         
 2005                                                                         
 2006                                                                        
 2007                                                                         
 2008                                                                          
 2009                                                                         
 2010                                                                            
 2011                                                                            


Notes

     - National statistical agency, aggregate data, public web database.
       - National census/statistical yearbook, accessed via library resources (book/microfilm).
       - National census/labor force survey microdata, accessed via IPUMS/ other online database

       - Eurostat Yearbooks/ Focus/Rapid Reports
       - Eurostat web database

 - (Obstfeld & Peri, 1998)
   - Unpublished data, received through private correspondence with country statistical agency.




                                                                                                                           57
II. Age Structure

AT:   1971: “Population Census, time series 1971-2001 by regional criteria,” Census (Statistics Austria,
      n.d.)
BE, DE, FR, IT, NL:
      1970: “Table 5, Population par groups d’age, total,” pp. 148-155 (Eurostat, 1973)
CA:   1971: Census, Statistics Canada, accessed via IPUMS-I.
CH: 1970: “4.10. Wohnbevölkerung der Kantone nach Fünfjahresklassen und Geschlecht,” pp. 60-61
      (Eidgenössisches Statistisches Amt Switzerland 1971)
DK: 1970: “Population 1. January by region, age and time,” (Statistics Denmark, n.d.)
ES:   1971: Census (Spanish Statistical Office, n.d.)
FI:   1970: “1. (001) Population by main language (Finnish, Swedish), education and age by 5 years;
      whole country, provinces, regional planning areas, city regions, Coast Region of Vaasa, communes
      and localities,” pp. 52-59, (1970 Census)
SE:   1970: “Population by region, age and period” (Swedish Statistical Office, n.d.)
UK: 1971: Annual population data not publicly available, kindly made available by Bob Watson at the
      U.K. Office for National Statistics.
US:   1970: Census, U.S. Census Bureau, accessed via IPUMS-USA.


III. Educational Attainment

We assign years of schooling equivalent to educational attainment of the population reported in each source,
then use these values to approximate a region’s average years of schooling. There are a number of country
specific sample universe issues, discussed briefly below for each country. An addendum is available upon
request that provides detailed breakdowns of years of schooling classifications specific to each country’s
system.

AT:     1971: Universe restricted to population aged 15+ not in school. 1971 Census, National Bureau of
        Statistics, accessed via IPUMS-I.
BE:     1970: Universe is population aged 14+ not in school. 1970 Census, “Table 21. Population de 14 Ans
        et Plus, Ne Suivant Plus Un Enseignement de Plein Exercice, Par Sexe et Genre D’enseignement
        Suivi en 1961 et 1970. Chiffres par Province, Arrondissement et Region Linguistique.”

CA:     1971: Universe restricted to population aged 15+ not in school. 1971 Census, Statistics Canada,
        accessed via IPUMS-I.
CH:     1970: Universe restricted to population aged 15+ not in school. 1970 Census, Federal Statistical
        Office, accessed via IPUMS-I
DE:     1970: Universe adjusted to approximate those not currently in school. “5. Wohnbevölkerung nach
        höchstem Schulabschluß,” pp. 98-101, (Statistisches Bundesamt Bundesrepublik Deutschland,
        1970a)
DK:     Universe is population aged 16–59. Adjusted to reflect 1971 levels based on national trend. “Table
        52. Population aged 16-59 years by size-class of urban areas in municipalities, by county and by
        level of completed vocational education” (Europe—Denmark, 1970).
ES:     Universe restricted to population aged 15+ in 1971 (25+ in 1981). 1981 Census, National Institute of
        Statistics, accessed via IPUMS-I.
FI:     “Population aged 15 or over by level of education, municipality, gender and age 1970-2011,”
        (Finland Bureau of Statistics, 1970).


                                                                                                         58
FR:    1968: Census, National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies, Accessed via IPUMS-I.
IT:    1971: Universe adjusted to approximate those not currently in school. “Tavola 7.1.1- Popolazione
       residente in età da 6 anni in poi per grado di istruzione, regione e ripartizione geografica ai
       censimenti - Censimenti 1951-2001 (valori assoluti in migliaia e composizione percentuale” (Istat,
       n.d.)

NL:    1971: Universe is population aged 14+ not in school. “Tabel 1 - Bevolking van 14 jaar en ouder
       geen dagonderwijs volgend naar onderwijsniveau en geslacht” (DANS n.d.)
SE:    1970: Universe is population aged 16-59. “Tabell 15, Befolkningen i åldern 16—59 år efter högsta
       utbildning och kön. länsvis år 1970,” pp. 160-163 (Statistiska centralbyrån Sweden, 1973b).
UK:    1978: The universe is persons born between 1919 and 1963 (people between the ages of 16-60 in
       1979). Adjusted to reflect 1971 levels based on national trend. Labor Force Survey microdata (ONS,
       n.d.)
US:    1970: Universe restricted to population aged 15+ not in school. 1970 Census, U.S. Census Bureau,
       accessed via IPUMS-USA


IV. GDP

Each country’s GDP is converted to comparable purchasing power parity (PPP) in 1970 U.S. dollars, using
Penn World Tables.

AT:   1971: “Brutto-Inlandsprodukt 1971,” pg. 61 (Geldner and Jeglitsch, 1976)
BE, DE, FR, IT, NL:
      1970: “Gross domestic product per inhabitant (1970)” (Statistical Office of the European
      Communities, 1973).
CA:   1970: “TABLE I. Provincial Income and Provincial Gross Domestic Product,” pp. 2-23 (Statistics
      Canada, 1988).
CH: 1970: “Volkseinkommen der Kantone 1965-1985 (in Mio. Franken, zu laufenden Preisen) / Revenu
      des cantons 1965-1985 (en millions de francs, aux prix courants)” (Bundesamt fur Statistik Schweiz
      1986)
DK: 1983: “Gross income by region and time,” (Statistics Denmark, n.d.)
ES:   1980: “Spanish Regional Accounts. Base 1986. Series 1980-1996: Gross domestic product per
      region (GDPR): Gross domestic product (current prices) by autonomous communities and provinces
      and year” (Instituto Nacional de Estadistica 2012)
FI:   1975: “234. Number, income and taxes of individuals by province in 1975,” pg. 237 (Finland
      Tilastokeskus, 1977)
SE:   1973: “Tab. 396: Income earners by total income in 1973 and other persons aged 15 and above at the
      beginning of 1974, by county,” (Statistiska centralbyrån, 1974b)
US:   “Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by State,” (BEA n.d.)
UK:    1977: "2. GDP by county for selected years between 1977-1996: file gdpcty7796." (ONS n.d.)


V. Household Size and Ownership

AT:    1971 (household size); 1981 (home ownership): 1971, 1981 Censuses, National Bureau of Statistics,
       accessed via IPUMS-I.




                                                                                                            59
BE:    1970: “5. LOGEMENTS PRIVÉS HABITÉS À TITRE DE RÉSIDENCE PRINCIPALE PAR LE
       PROPRIETAIRE, LE COPROPRIÉTAIRE OU L'USUFRUITIER, COMPARAISON ENTRE 1961
       ET 1970” (Institut national de statistique, 1973); 15. MÉNAGES PRIVES SELON LA TAILLE.
       COMPARAISON ENTRE 1961 ET 1970 (suite) (Institut national de statistique, 1973).
CA:    1971: “Table 4.24 Households by type, 1961, 1966, and 1971” (Statistics Canada, 1975); “Table
       4.27 Families and persons per family, by province, 1961, 1966, 1971,” 171 (Statistics Canada,
       1975).
CH:    1970: Census, Federal Statistical Office, accessed via IPUMS-I
DE:    “2. PRIVATHAUSHALTE NACH KREISFREIEN STAEDTEN, LANDKREISEN UND
       HAUSFALTSGROESSE” (Statistisches Bundesamt Bundesrepublik Deutschland, 1970b);
       “Bewohnte Wohnungen ohne Zweit- und von Angehörigen ausländischer Streitkräfte privatrechtlich
       gemietete Wohnungen” (Statistisches Bundesamt Bundesrepublik Deutschland, 1970c)
DK:    1970: “Table 5, Number of dwellings with: (Table 5)”; “Table 7, Home Ownership - Type of
       Tenancy” (Europe—Denmark, 1970).
ES:    1970: Census 1970, (Instituto Nacional de Estadistica, n.d.)
FI:    1975: “113. Dwelling units by housing density, number of,” pp. 128-9 (Finland Bureau of Statistics,
       1977) (Finland Tilastokeskus, 1977)
FR:    1986: Census, National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies, Accessed via IPUMS-I.
IT:    1971: (Istituto centrale di statistica [Italy])
NL:    1971: “Table 28, A6A, 14th General Census: annex housing census, February 28, 1971” (DANS,
       2011); “Table 35, A6A, 14th General Census: annex housing census, February 28, 1971” (DANS,
       2011); “Households and families by size and county, per 1000 households, respectively. per 1000
       households in each province, February 28, 1971” (DANS, 2011); “Household composition and
       singles (def.1960) per county, per 1000 households in each province, 2-28-1971” (DANS 2011).
SE:    1970: “1. Dwellings by type of building, type of ownership, year of construction, size and quality
       group. Co-operating communes and localities” (National Central Bureau of Statistics Sweden,
       1973); “2. Dwellings by type of building, type of ownership, year of construction, size and quality
       group. Individual communes in units of co-operating communes” (National Central Bureau of
       Statistics Sweden, 1973b).
UK:    1971, Great Britain Small Area Statistics (Casweb, n.d.)
US:    1970 Census, U.S. Census Bureau, accessed via IPUMS-USA.


VI. Industry Structure
The Eurostat Yearbooks report industry breakdowns according to the Nomenclature des Activités
Économiques dans la Communauté Européenne (NACE) 1970 codes. The data are broken down into the
following categories:

Agriculture

Industry
        Energy
        Mining (includes chemicals)
        Construction
        Metals Manufacturing
        Other Manufacturing




                                                                                                        60
Service Sector
        Commerce
        Transport
        Credit
        Administration
        Other service

For countries not in the Eurostat Yearbooks, we create categories that correspond to the NACE 1970 codes.
We combined industries to fall into three sectors: the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors. Primary
includes the agriculture, energy and mining sectors. Secondary includes metals and other manufacturing and
construction. The tertiary sector includes all service sector employment.

AT:   1971: National Bureau of Statistics, Austria, Accessed via IPUMS-International.
BE, DE, FR, NL, IT:
      “Table 11. Emploi par sexe et secteur d’activite economique en 1968 et 1973,” 198-205, (Eurostat,
      1974)
CA:   Industry data are for firms having 20 or more employees in any month of the year and are from
      1971-2 (Statistics Canada, 1971; Statistics Canada, 1972). Agriculture and service sector data come
      from the 1971 census. 1971 Census, Statistics Canada, accessed via IPUMS-I.
CH: 1970: “5.06 Erwerbsgruppen nach Kantonen,” pg. 74-5 (Statistiska centralbyrån, 1971).
DK: 1971: “Employment Structure by Industry (Table 9)” (Europe—Denmark, 1970).
ES:   1970: Census 1970, “12. Economically active population by occupation,” (Instituto Nacional de
      Estadistica, n.d.)
FI:   1972: “22. Economically active population by industry, by provinces on 31 Dec. 1970,” (Finland
      Tilastokeskus, 1972)
SE:   1970: “Tab 25. Economically active population by industry, by county”, pg. 49. (Statistiska
      centralbyrån 1970)
UK: 1981 data from the Special Workplace Statistics are more detailed than the 1971 Small Area
      Statistics, and include breakouts of employment in energy, metals manufacturing, and credit. 1981
      employment from the Special Workforce Statistics is scaled downward to reflect 1971 shares in
      agriculture, construction, industry and services from the Small Area Statistics. The Special
      Workplace Statistics exclude Scotland. A more detailed industry breakdown for Scottish NUTS-2
      regions is estimated using industry shares for the larger NUTS 1 region of Scotland given in Eurostat
      (1973).
      1971, Great Britain Small Area Statistics (Casweb, n.d.)
      1981, Census of Population, Special Workplace Statistics (nomis, n.d.)
US:   Adjustments are made to make data comparable across NAICS to SIC codes.
      1970-2011: “Total full-time and part-time employment by industry (SA25)” (BEA n.d.)

VII. Migration
By migration, we refer to internal migration from one region to another within the same country. The “net
migration rate” is defined as the annual net inflow (i.e. inmigration – outmigration) of people normalized by
population of the region. Turnover migration is the average of inmigration and outmigration of a region
normalized by the population of the region.

Migration data can be reported over varying intervals (i.e. 1 year, 5 year). Annualizing migration data that
occurs over longer periods by simply taking the average is not going to be comparable with one-year flow



                                                                                                          61
data because the average fails to account for return and continued migrations that occur within the five-year
period. Migration over periods longer than one year is converted into an estimate of 12 month mobility as
follows:
                                                           inmigrationr
                                                             yearsr0.7
                                     inmigration _ rater 
                                                               popr
Where inmigration_rate is the inmigration rate, inmigration is the number of inmigrations to region r, years
is the number of years over which the migration occurred, and pop is population of the region. Outmigration
is defined similarly. The adjustment is based on relationships observed in the United States and Canada. For
further discussion on reconciling and translating migration data collected over different time intervals, see
Rogers, Raymer, and Newbold (2003).

AT:     1976 – 1981: “Austria, migrated at the age of 5 years and over by county of residence and place of
        origin (foreign), 1976-1981,” (Austria, Central Statistical Office, 1990).
BE:     1973: “Table 8. Inter-regional migrations,” pp. 174 (Eurostat 1975).
CA:     5 year inmigration is adjusted by dividing by 3.31, the ratio of 5 yr to 1 yr flows for Canada in the
        early eighties from Rogers, Raymer and Newbold (2003)
        outmigration = inmigration – net interprovincial migration.
        1966-1971 (Outmigration): Census, Statistics Canada, accessed via IPUMS-I.
        1971 (Net inter-provincial migration): “Table 051-0004 Components of population growth, Canada,
        provinces and territories annual (persons)” (Statistics Canada, n.d.).
CH:     Table for lifetime migration is rescaled downward using the adjustment factor of the share of
        immigration that occurred in 1 year.
        1970: “7.03 Wohngebiet und Heimatkanton” (Statistiska centralbyrån, 1971); “7.12 Heutige
        Wohnbevolkerung nach Wohnortsklasse vor 1 und vor 5 Jahren” (Statistiska centralbyrån, 1971).
DE:     1970: “10. Wanderungen 1970 nach kreisfreien Stadten und Landkreisen,” pp. 40-50 and “11.
        Wanderungen zwishcen ausgewahlten Kreisen des Bundesgebietes 1970,” pp. 51-118. (Statistisches
        Bundesamt Bundesrepublik Deutschland 1970d).
DK:     1974: “Table 8. Inter-regional migrations,” pp. 176 (Eurostat, 1975).
ES:     1971 – 1975: “Spain, inter-regional migration, 1971-75,” (Instituto Nacional de Estadística, 1978)
FI:     1970: “Table 55: Internal migration of population between different provinces in 1970,” p. 77
        (Finland Tilastokeskus, 1972).
FR:     1968 – 1975: “Tableau 1: Migrations interregionales de population totale entre le 1er janvier 1968 et
        le 20 fevrier 1975 et personnes en provenance de hors metropole,” pp. 55-56 (Statistique generale de
        la France).
IT:     1973: “Table 8. Inter-regional migrations,” pp. 174-5 (Eurostat, 1975).
NL:     1973: “Table 8. Inter-regional migrations,” pp. 175 (Eurostat, 1975).
SE:     1973: “Sweden internal migration, 1973,” pp. 14-51 (Official Statistics of Sweden 1974).
UK:     1971: “Table 1A Migrants within one year preceding census by area of former usual residence, area
        or usual residence at census and sex,” various pages across volumes (Office of Population Censuses
        and Surveys, 1975); “Table 2A Migrants within one year preceding census by area of former usual
        residence (region), area of usual residence (regions and conurbations in the rest of Great Britain) at
        census and sex,” various pages across volumes (Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, 1975);
        “Table 1A. Migrants within one year preceding census by area of former usual residence, area or
        usual residence at census and sex,” pp. 1-2, (General Register Office (Edinburgh), 1977); “Table 1A
        Migrants within one year preceding census by area of former usual residence, area or usual residence



                                                                                                           62
        at census and sex,” pp. 1-2, (General Register Office [Edinburgh], 1977); “Table 2B Migrants within
        one year preceding census by area of former usual residence (Scotland), area of usual residence
        (regions and conurbations in England and Wales) at census and sex, pp. 3-6 (General Register Office
        [Edinburgh], 1977)
US:     1965-1970: 1970 Census, Form 2, U.S. Census Bureau, accessed via IPUMS-USA.
        1975-1980: 1980 Census, U.S. Census Bureau, accessed via IPUMS-USA.
        1985-1990: 1990 Census, U.S. Census Bureau, accessed via IPUMS-USA.
        1995-2000: 2000 Census, U.S. Census Bureau, accessed via IPUMS-USA.
        2000-2011: American Community Survey, U.S. Census Bureau, accessed via IPUMS-USA.

VIII. Motorways
The Eurostat definition of "motorway" is “a road that is especially designed and built for motor traffic, which
does not serve properties bordering on it, and which: is provided, except at special points or temporarily,
with separate carriageways for traffic in two directions, separated from each other, either by a dividing strip
not intended for traffic, or exceptionally by other means; has no crossings at the same level with any road,
railway or tramway track, or footpath; is especially sign-posted as a motorway and is reserved for specific
categories of roadmotor vehicles."

Sources by country:
AT, BE, CH, DE, DK, ES, FI, FR, IT, NL, SE, UK:
       1978-2012: “ Road, rail and navigable inland waterways networks by NUTS 2 regions (tran_r_net),”
       (European Commission, n.d)
CA:    Motorways for Canada is reported highway miles.
       1978: (Census and Statistics Office Canada et al., 1979)
US:    Motorways for the United States is the sum of municipal, rural and federal highway mileage.
       1978: "Table 1104. Municipal and Rural Highway Mileage, 1970 to 1978, and Federal Aid Highway
       Mileage, 1978-States," (United States, 1980)


IX. Urban Density
Each region, r, is split into “centroids” (roughly squares of 1x1 km). Population and density are known for
each centroid. We classify a centroid as urban if its density is greater than a threshold of 500 people per
square km. We aggregate all centroids in a region as follows to determine the region’s urban density,
density:

                                              ∑∈                   1              500
                                                          ∑∈

Source of data: (CIESIN, IFPRI, The World Bank, CIAT, n.d.)




                                                                                                              63
References:
Bundesamt fur Statistik Schweiz/ Office federal de la statistique Suisse / Ufficio federale di statistica.
         (1986). Statistische berichte/ etudes statistiques: Die volkseinkommen der kantone / les revenus des
         cantons: Analyse der reihe 1965-1985 / analyse de la serie 1965-1985. Bern:
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Regional economic accounts. Retrieved from
         http://www.bea.gov/regional/downloadzip.cfm
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Local area unemployment statistics. Retrieved from
         http://www.bls.gov/lau/
Canada Census and Statistics Office, Canada Dominion Bureau of Statistics, General Statistics Branch,
         Canada Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Information Services Division, Canada Year Book Section,
         Canada Year Book, Handbook and Library Division, Canada, & Statistics Canada. (1979, 1980). The
         Canada Year Book. Ottawa.
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN)/Columbia University, International
         Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), The World Bank, and Centro Internacional de Agricultura
         Tropical (CIAT). (2011). Global rural-urban mapping project, version 1 (GRUMPv1): Population
         density grid. . Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC).
Data Archiving and Networked Services (DANS). (2011). Volkstellingen 1795-1971 [dutch censuses 1795-
         1971]. Retrieved from http://www.volkstellingen.nl/en/index.html
Eidgenössisches Statistisches Amt Switzerland. (1971). Eidgenössische volkszählung 1970. recensement
         fédéral de la population 1970. Bern: Eidgenössisches Statistisches Amt.
European Commission. (2013). Main tables: Regional statistics. Retrieved July, 2013, from
         http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/region_cities/regional_statistics/data/main_tables
Eurostat. (1973). Regional statistics, 1972. Luxembourg/ Bruxelles: Statistical Office of the European
         Communities.
Eurostat. (1975). Regional statistics, 1973. Luxembourg/ Bruxelles: Statistical Office of the European
         Communities.
Eurostat. (1976). Regional statistics, 1972-1974. Luxembourg/ Bruxelles: Statistical Office of the European
         Communities.
Eurostat. (1981, 1983, 1984, 1985). Yearbook of regional statistics. Luxembourg/ Bruxelles: Statistical
         Office         of        the       European         Communities.                  Retrieved       from
         http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/publications/regional_yearbook/previous_editions
         _sub
Eurostat. REGIONS: Statistical yearbook. (1986-1990a, 1994-1997, 1999). Luxembourg/ Bruxelles:
         Statistical       Office     of      the       European       Communities.          Retrieved     from
         http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/publications/regional_yearbook/previous_editions
         _sub
Eurostat. (1989-1994b). Rapid Reports. Luxembourg/ Bruxelles: Statistical Office of the European
         Communities.
Eurostat. (1995). Statistics in Focus. Luxembourg/ Bruxelles: Statistical Office of the European
         Communities.
Europe--Denmark [microform], international population census publications. (1970). New Haven, Conn.:
         Research Publications.
Federal Statistical Office (FSO) [Switzerland]. (2010). Neuchâtel / Switzerland database: FSO - STAT-TAB.
         Retrieved from http://www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/portal/fr/index/infothek/onlinedb/stattab/01.html
Finland Tilastokeskus / Finland Tilastollinen päätoimisto [Finland Bureau of Statistics]. (1970-2009).
         Statistical Yearbook of Finland.
Geldner, N., & Jeglitsch, H. (1976). Das inlandsprodukt nach politischen bezirken im jahre 1971. WIFO
         Monatsberichte (Monthly Reports), 49(2), 54-63.
General Register Office (Edinburgh). (1977). Census 1971, Scotland, migration tables. part 4 : (10%
         sample). Edinburgh: H.M.S.O.
Institut National de Statistique (Belgium). (1973). Recensement de la population, 31 Décembre 1970.
         Bruxelles.
Instituto Nacional de Estadística (Spain). (1978). Migraciones interiores en españa: Quinquenio 1971-1975.
         Madrid: El Instituto.


                                                                                                            64
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica [Spanish Statistical Office].Censos de població, censo de 1970.Volúmenes
         provinciales(Tomo II.)
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica [Spanish Statistical Office]. (2012). Spanish regional accounts. Base 1986.
         series 1980-1996: Gross domestic product per region (GDPR). Gross domestic product (current
         prices) by autonomous communities and provinces and year. Retrieved from
         http://www.ine.es/jaxi/tabla.do?path=/t35/p010/a1996/l1/&file=re001.px&type=pcaxis&L=1
Italian National Institute of Statistics (Istat).TimeSeries: Italian historical statistical depository. Retrieved
         from http://timeseries.istat.it/
King, M., Ruggles, S., J., Alexander, T., Flood, S., Genadek, K., Schroeder, M. B., Vick, R. [IPUMS-CPS]
         (2010). Integrated public use microdata series, current population survey: Version 3.0. [machine-
         readable database]. . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Labour Division, Monthly Employment, Payrolls and Labour Income Section. (1975). Estimates of
         employees by province and industry, 1961-1974 (Catalogue 72-514 Occasional ed.). Ottawa:
         Statistics Canada.
Marc, N., & Marchand, O. (1986 (Jan.)). Taux de chomage regionaux et departementaux. Premiers
         Resultats. Institut National De La Statistique Et Des Etudes Economiques. Paris, (49)
Minnesota Population Center [IPUMS-Internationl]. (2013). Integrated public use microdata series,
         international: Version 6.2 [machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
National Central Bureau of Statistics. (1973). Official statistics of Sweden: Population and housing census
         1970: Part 6. Dwellings and households in co-operating communes and localities. Stockholm:
         National Central Bureau of Statistics.
National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (Insee). Localised regional unemployment rates:
         Quarterly                          series.                        Retrieved                         from
         http://www.bdm.insee.fr/bdm2/choixCriteres.action;jsessionid=216E4C213896A0EE4CC7932BA7
         BC0C7D?codeGroupe=712
Obstfeld, Maurice and Giovanni Peri. (1998). “Regional Non-Adjustment and Fiscal Policy.” Economic
         Policy. 13(26).
Official Statistics of Sweden. (1974). Population Changes 1973: Part 2. Migration between communes.
         Stockholm: National Central Bureau of Statistics.
Office for National Statistics (ONS). Nomis Official Labour Market Satistics. Retrieved from
         http://www.nomisweb.co.uk/query/select/getdatasetbytheme.asp?opt=3&theme=&subgrp=
Office for National Statistics (ONS). Regional accounts data, 1971-1999
Office of Population Censuses and Surveys. (1975). Census 1971, England and Wales, migration regional
         report (10 % sample). London: H.M.S.O.
Österreich Statistisches Zentralamt [Austria, Central Statistical Office]. (1990). Volkszahlung 1981 textband,
         beitrage zur osterreichieschen statistik.
Rogers, Andrei, James Raymer, and K. Bruce Newbold. (2003) “Reconciling and Translating Migration Data
         Collected over Time Intervals of Differing Widths.” The Annals of Regional Science 37(4): 581-601.
Ruggles, S., J., Alexander, T., Genadek, K., Goeken, R., Schroeder, M., B., & Sobek, M. [IPUMS-USA]
         (2010).     Integrated     public    use    microdata     series:    Version      5.0 [machine-readable
         database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Statistique Generale de la France. (1978). Annuaire statistique de la France. Paris.
Statistics Austria.STATcube - statistical database of statistics Austria. Retrieved from
         http://www.statistik.at/web_en/statistics/labour_market/index.html
Statistics     Austria:     Population     census,    time     series    1971-2001.            Retrieved     from
         http://www.statistik.at/web_en/statistics/population/population_censuses/index.html
Statistics Canada.CANSIM - canadian socioeconomic database from statistics Canada.
         Retrieved from http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/cansim/home-accueil?lang=eng
Statistics Canada, Employment Section, Statistics Canada, Monthly Employment, Payrolls and Labour
         Income Section., Statistics Canada., Employment and Payrolls Section, Statistics Canada,
         Employment Survey Operations Section, Statistics Canada, Labour Division. (1971). Employment,
         Earnings and Hours, Ottawa.
Statistics Canada, Income and Expenditure Accounts Division. (1988). Provincial economic accounts:
         Historical issue, 1961-1986. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.


                                                                                                              65
Statistics            Denmark.               StatBank              Denmark.             Retrieved       from
         http://www.statbank.dk/statbank5a/default.asp?w=1280
Statistics             Sweden.              Statistical            database.            Retrieved       from
         http://www.scb.se/Pages/SSD/SSD_TreeView____340506.aspx
Statistisches Bundesamt Bundesrepublik Deutschland (1970a). Bevölkerung und kultur. Volkszahlung vom
         27. Mai 1970. Heft 3. Zusammengefabte Daten uber Bevolkerung und Erwerbstatigkeit fur Bund
         und Lander. Verlag W. Kohlhammer, Stuttgard und Mainz.
Statistisches Bundesamt Bundesrepublik Deutschland                (1970b). Bevölkerung und kultur. Heft 4.
         Zusammendefabte Daten Uber Bevolkerung und Erwerbstatigkeit fur nichtadministrative
         Gebietseinheiten. Verlag W. Kohlhammer, Stuttgard und Mainz.
Statistisches Bundesamt Bundesrepublik Deutschland. (1970c). Bauwirtschaft bautätigkeit wohnungen
         gebäude- und wohnungszahlung (Heft 2 ed.). Verlag W. Kohlhammer, Stuttgard und Mainz.
Statistisches Bundesamt Bundesrepublik Deutschland (1970d). Bevölkerung und kultur. Reihe 3
Statistiska centralbyrån Sweden. (1970-1974a). The Labour force surveys. Statistiska Meddelanden,
Statistiska centralbyrån. (1974b). Statistical abstract of Sweden. Stockholm.
Statistiska centralbyrån. (1971b). Population and housing census in 1970: Households and dwellings in
         communes and parishes: First estimates. Stockholm.
Statistiska centralbyrån Sweden. (1972b). Folk-och bostadsräkningen 1970. Stockholm.
U.S.       Census        Bureau.      Population        estimates:      State     tables.     Retrieved from
         http://www.census.gov/popest/data/historical/index.html
U.S. Census Bureau. Population estimates: State intercensal estimates (2000-2010). Retrieved from
         http://www.census.gov/popest/data/intercensal/
U.S. Department of the Treasury, U.S. Bureau of Statistics, U.S. Department of Commerce and Labor, U.S.
Bureau of Statistics, U.S. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, & U.S. Census Bureau. (1980).
Statistical abstract of the United States. Statistical Abstract of the United States,
UK Data Service Census Support. Casweb. Retrieved from http://casweb1.ds.man.ac.uk/




                                                                                                         66
                                    APPENDIX B: DERIVATIONS
In this appendix, we establish how our measure of hysteresis is related to persistence of a series. To simplify
the argument, suppose that unemployment is an AR(1) process:            1                           where    is
a measure of unemployment rate,      is the steady state level of unemployment, and is an error term.

       Suppose there is an impulse Δ                     at time    and we would like to know how much
convergence back to the steady state is achieved after periods. Given the data generating process,
                                           1                       1        Δ is by how much the gap from the
impulse to the steady state is closed. After normalizing the gap by the size of the impulse, one obtains

                                                                  1

        While theoretically this is an appealing measure, Δ               can be very small or even negative
for some regions. Since              and          are relatively small (no more than 0.1 for most cases), one
can use

         1                                                                                       1         Δ     Δ
                                                                                      1
          1                                                 1                                        Δ 1   Δ
                                1                   .
                                           1    Δ

Since Δ is small,
                                          1
                                                                  1      2     .
                                           1

In the data, the distribution of this ratio is somewhat skewed which can lead to estimates sensitive to a
handful of observations. To make it more symmetric, we take the following transformation:
                           1
                     log                            log 1                            log 1
                            1
                                        log 1                          log 1

where the last approximation follows from log 1                       log 1        . By combining the last two
equations, we obtain
                                                                  1
      log 1                     log 1                       log                              log 1    2        2     .
                                                                   1

Hence, our measure of hysteresis ≡ log 1                                     log 1                    can be directly
mapped to the persistence of unemployment.




                                                                                                                         67
APPENDIX C: ADDITIONAL FIGURES AND TABLES




                                            68
         APPENDIX FIGURE C1: MEASURING FISCAL POLICY THROUGH GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT

               Panel A: Historical Differences in Government Employment to Population Ratios
                                                                0.2


                  Cumulative change in government employment    0.1
                    (percent of working age 15‐64 population)

                                                                0.0


                                                                ‐0.1


                                                                ‐0.2
                                                                                     Pre‐1990 Recessions
                                                                                     1990 Recession
                                                                ‐0.3
                                                                                     2001 Recession
                                                                                     2007 Recession
                                                                ‐0.4
                                                                       ‐1             2               5              8                 11                14
                                                                                           Quarters after start of NBER‐dated recession



        Panel B: Robustness of Contribution of Monetary and Fiscal Policies to 2007 UE Persistence
                       1.1
                       1.0
                       0.9
                       0.8
                       0.7
                       0.6
                       0.5
                       0.4
                       0.3
                       0.2
                       0.1
                       0.0
                                                                  -1   0    1    2    3     4    5     6    7    8       9   10   11      12   13   14    15   16
                  -0.1
                                                                       Pre-1990 Recessions: Actual
                                                                       2007 Recession: Actual
                                                                       2007 Recession: Counterfactual (mon. policy + cyclically adjusted budget deficit)
                                                                       2007 Recession: Counterfactual (mon. policy + layoffs of government workers)

Notes: The top panel plots the path of combined federal, state and local government employment (relative to U.S.
population 16 years old and over) for 1990, 2001 and 2007 recessions as well as the average path over pre-1990
recessions. The bottom panel plots the actual path of unemployment in the 2007 recession (normalized by its peak rise),
the normalized path of unemployment in pre-1990 recessions, and two estimates of the counterfactual normalized path
of unemployment assuming monetary and fiscal policies in the 2007 recession had followed their pre-1990 paths. In
one case, fiscal policy is measured using the cyclically adjusted federal budget balance as a share of potential GDP (as
in the text). In the other, fiscal policy is measured using total government employment relative to population. For the
latter we assume that changes in government employment affect private employment by a factor of 0.5 (i.e. one new
government job also creates half a private sector job).




                                                                                                                                                                    69
                                                          APPENDIX FIGURE C2: ROBUSTNESS TO SMALLER FISCAL MULTIPLIERS




Notes: The figure plots counterfactual normalized paths of unemployment for 1990, 2001 and 2007
recessions assuming fiscal and monetary policies in each had followed pre-1990 patterns. Changes in fiscal
balances are assumed to have a multiplier of 0.5.

                   APPENDIX FIGURE C3: ROLLING ESTIMATES OF THE SLOPE OF THE PHILLIPS CURVE
                                     .5
           Phillips curve slope  (rolling regressions)
                 -1.5       -1       -.5
                                     -2          0




                                                          1960       1970       1980        1990        2000        2010

Notes: The figure plots 10-year rolling estimates of the slope of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve.
The dependent variable is quarterly inflation minus expected inflation, where the latter is defined as the
average over quarterly inflation rates in the previous four quarters. The right-hand side is the quarterly
unemployment rate.




                                                                                                                           70
                                                                      APPENDIX FIGURE C4. TIME SERIES OF REGIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT RATES BY COUNTRY.

                                                                             Austria                                                                                                       Belgium
                             10




                                                                                                                                             8 10 12 14 16 18
                             8
unemployment rate




                                                                                                                         unemployment rate
                             6
                             4




                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                             4
                             2




                                                                                                                                             2
                             0




                                                                                                                                             0
                                               1970      1975         1980             1985         1990          1995                                          1970   1975         1980             1985       1990          1995

                                                       Burgenland            Lower Austria            Vienna                                                                                Bruxelles
                                                       Carinthia             Styria                   Upper Austria                                                                         Vlaams gewest
                                                       Salzburg              Tyrol                    Vorarlberg                                                                            Wallonne



                                                                             Canada                                                                                                     Switzerland




                                                                                                                                             12
                    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18




                                                                                                                                             10
unemployment rate




                                                                                                                         unemployment rate

                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                             0




                                               1970      1975         1980             1985         1990          1995                                          1970   1975         1980             1985       1990          1995

                                                      Alberta                British Columbia              Manitoba                                                    Lake Geneva region                   Espace Mittelland
                                                      New Brunswick          Newfoundland                  Nova Scotia                                                 Northwestern Switzerland             Zurich
                                                      Ontario                Prince Edward Island          Quebec                                                      Eastern Switzerland                  Central Switzerland
                                                      Saskatchewan                                                                                                     Ticino




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     71
                                                                       Germany                                                                                                    Denmark




                                                                                                                                     14
                    12




                                                                                                                                     12
               10
unemployment rate




                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                 unemployment rate
      6   8




                                                                                                                          8
  4




                                                                                                                     6
                    2




                                                                                                                 4
                    0




                                                                                                                                     2
                            1970                   1975          1980            1985        1990         1995

                                                Baden-Württemberg          Bayern                Bremen




                                                                                                                                     0
                                                Hamburg                    Hessen                Niedersachsen
                                                                                                                                          1970                1975         1980              1985        1990           1995
                                                Nordrhein-Westfahlen       Rheinland-Pfalz       Saarland
                                                Schleswig-Holstein                                                                                        Hovedstaden     Zealand        South         Central        North



                                                                         Spain                                                                                                     Finland
                     12 16 20 24 28 32
unemployment rate




                                                                                                                 unemployment rate
                                                                                                                                      8 10 12 14
                     8




                                                                                                                                      6
                     4




                                                                                                                                      4
                     0




                                                                                                                                      2



                                         1970       1975          1980           1985        1990         1995
                                                                                                                                      0




                                                           Noroeste                          Noreste
                                                                                                                                                   1970        1975         1980             1985        1990           1995
                                                           Comunidad de Madrid               Centro)
                                                           Este                              Sur                                                            West (Länsi-Suomi)           South (Helsinki-Uusimaa)
                                                           Canarias                                                                                         South (Etelä-Suomi)          North & East (Pohjois- ja Itä-Suomi)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                72
                                                                              France                                                                                                                                Italy

                    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20




                                                                                                                                                0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
unemployment rate




                                                                                                                            unemployment rate
                                                  1970   1975          1980            1985           1990           1995

                                                              Île-de-France                      Paris basin
                                                                                                                                                                                    1970    1975            1980            1985          1990          1995
                                                              Nord-Pas-de-Calais                 East
                                                              West                               South West                                                                                    North West                   South             Islands
                                                              Centre East                        Mediterranean                                                                                 North East                   Centre



                                                                         Netherlands                                                                                                                               Sweden




                                                                                                                                                12
                    14




                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                            unemployment rate
                    12
unemployment rate




                                                                                                                                                8
                    10




                                                                                                                                                6
                    8




                                                                                                                                                4
                    6




                                                                                                                                                2
                    4




                                                                                                                                                0
                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                    1970    1975            1980            1985          1990          1995
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                           Stockholm                                 East Middle Sweden
                                                  1970   1975          1980            1985           1990           1995
                                                                                                                                                                                           Småland and the islands                   South Sweden
                                                         Northern Netherlands                 Eastern Netherlands                                                                          West Sweden                               North Middle Sweden
                                                         Western Netherlands                  Southern Netherlands                                                                         Middle Norrland                           Upper Norrland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               73
                                               United Kingdom                                                                                      USA

4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18




                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                              10
 unemployment rate




                                                                                          unemployment rate
                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                              2
            2
            0




                                                                                                              0
                       1970      1975          1980          1985    1990         1995                             1970      1975           1980          1985       1990         1995

                              N.E. England            N.W. England   Yorkshire & Humber                                   California               East N. Central     East S. Central
                              E. Midlands             W. Midlands    E. England                                           Mid Atlantic             New England         Northwest
                              Greater London          S.E. England   S.W. England                                         Rocky Mountain           South Atlantic      West N. Central
                              Wales                   Scotland       N. Ireland                                           West S. Central




                                                                                                                                                                                         74
                                                          APPENDIX TABLE C1. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS BY COUNTRY
                                                                                                         Country
Variable                                                                                                                                                                                 All
                                        AT         BE         CA        CH        DE        DK         ES        FI         FR        IT         NL        SE       UK          US
Hysteresis                             2.27       5.51       0.81      1.87      4.13       6.97    12.89      1.94        7.57      7.36       4.82     -0.54      5.44       0.60      4.40
                                      (1.21)     (2.74)     (1.35)    (0.70)    (1.74)     (0.92)    (4.03)   (0.81)      (1.55)    (5.62)     (1.42)    (0.33)    (2.18)     (1.18)    (4.13)
Turnover migration rate                0.71       1.28       1.16      0.93      1.71       1.83      0.95     2.13        2.22      1.09       2.12      1.77      3.02       2.78      1.69
                                      (0.32)     (0.92)     (0.69)    (0.27)    (0.70)     (0.43)    (0.32)   (0.49)      (0.47)    (0.27)     (0.62)    (0.35)    (1.29)     (0.93)    (0.93)
Population share 0-24 years          38.27      38.58      48.02     38.74     36.15      39.02     43.00     43.19      39.86     38.90      44.13     35.78     38.27      45.98     40.56
                                      (6.43)     (3.42)     (2.30)    (2.69)    (2.49)     (2.20)    (2.84)   (3.05)      (3.11)    (5.45)     (2.44)    (1.09)    (1.81)     (2.20)    (4.72)
Population share 55+ years           25.66      24.60      16.07     21.64     25.05      23.51     19.03     19.73      24.48     22.28      19.41     25.99     25.18      19.23     22.28
                                      (5.33)     (3.10)     (1.72)    (1.08)    (1.90)     (0.72)    (2.11)   (1.56)      (2.75)    (3.35)     (2.45)    (1.97)    (2.50)     (2.15)    (3.89)
Trust                                 -2.72      -2.46      -2.11     -1.55     -2.20      -0.00     -3.26    -1.46       -3.57     -2.92      -1.13     -1.02     -2.26      -2.76     -2.10
                                      (0.78)     (0.65)     (0.17)    (0.32)    (0.96)     (0.13)    (0.50)   (0.17)      (0.47)    (0.56)     (0.20)    (0.25)    (0.69)     (0.23)    (1.06)
Years of schooling                     9.56       8.17       9.51    10.67       8.64       9.57      3.92     7.89        6.60      4.98       9.24      9.29      9.31     11.73       8.51
                                      (0.39)     (0.33)     (0.59)    (0.20)    (0.29)     (0.27)    (0.89)   (0.47)      (0.41)    (0.67)     (0.36)    (0.47)    (0.25)     (0.51)    (2.09)
Share of employment in the           16.10      14.87      16.82     12.58     15.89      11.86     26.51     22.23      17.99     18.95      12.09       9.35    10.83        7.99    15.29
primary sector                        (8.84)     (4.99)     (6.56)    (3.51)    (4.61)     (7.40)   (16.05) (12.51)       (8.20)    (8.55)     (3.21)    (4.33)    (5.33)     (4.00)    (8.89)
Share of employment in the           41.06      33.20      33.83     43.49     38.68      37.61     34.65     34.24      32.31     40.16      34.41     37.51     34.25      25.24     35.76
secondary sector                      (5.10)     (7.10)     (8.13)    (5.01)    (6.68)     (1.08)   (11.86)   (6.99)      (4.88)   (10.87)     (6.84)    (7.23)    (6.78)     (6.18)    (8.17)
     Women’s share in                38.05      29.52      34.21     33.98     33.38      35.92     19.31     42.63      36.62     26.11      23.19     35.20     36.68      37.26     33.00
          employment                  (3.48)     (3.12)     (1.56)    (1.23)    (3.88)     (3.30)    (4.94)   (3.24)      (3.59)    (4.28)     (1.58)    (3.48)    (2.25)     (1.36)    (6.82)
Household size                         3.40       2.96       3.51      3.57      2.72       2.69      3.89     3.12        3.23      3.35       3.22      2.78      2.86       3.11      3.17
                                      (0.56)     (0.32)     (0.27)    (0.28)    (0.22)     (0.17)    (0.19)   (0.32)      (0.19)    (0.31)     (0.29)    (0.12)    (0.12)     (0.13)    (0.43)
Home ownership rate                  49.88      55.58      70.54     31.70     37.92      51.95     79.03     58.99      43.79     58.04      36.14     53.67     48.30      63.19     52.77
                                     (19.62)    (12.51)     (5.55)    (6.79)   (10.35)    (18.70)    (4.17)   (5.19)      (6.88)    (8.48)    (10.04)    (9.03)   (11.51)     (7.21)   (16.22)
Net migration rate                    -0.00       0.02      -0.01     -0.01      0.01      -0.00     -0.03     0.00       -0.01      0.03      -0.00     -0.00     -0.10       0.02     -0.01
                                      (0.24)     (0.64)     (0.70)    (0.80)    (0.28)     (0.23)    (1.21)   (1.44)      (0.61)    (0.67)     (0.30)    (0.20)    (1.04)     (0.90)    (0.72)
Share of urban population            37.99      63.71      54.78     59.11     68.38      36.79     50.36     25.24      51.63     53.85      75.03     20.56     76.45      67.80     52.98
                                     (35.89)    (18.63)    (15.92)   (12.52)   (20.89)    (33.91)   (26.75) (28.70)      (22.54)   (18.06)    (20.11)   (27.09)   (25.02)    (14.56)   (28.14)
Log(Income p.c.) × 100               824.12     821.54     831.89    870.41    826.69     831.76    793.89 810.52        824.34    811.62     845.35    850.56    809.70     851.28    828.83
                                     (23.28)    (21.88)    (19.14)   (10.99)   (17.49)     (8.57)   (22.43) (26.73)      (23.84)   (30.61)    (14.76)   (10.03)   (15.78)    (13.79)   (27.01)
Road density                          -3.61      -2.83      -1.71     -3.29     -3.09      -3.44     -3.94    -6.42       -4.06     -3.76      -2.76     -5.24     -3.78      -0.94     -3.49
                                      (0.75)     (0.32)     (0.69)    (0.47)    (0.56)     (0.60)    (0.76)   (1.80)      (0.85)    (0.41)     (0.46)    (2.04)    (1.24)     (0.54)    (1.57)
City region                            0.22       0.11       0.00      0.00      0.04       0.33      0.11     0.00        0.19      0.00       0.00      0.00      0.14       0.00      0.08
                                      (0.44)     (0.33)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.21)     (0.53)    (0.33)   (0.00)      (0.40)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.35)     (0.00)    (0.27)
Capital                                0.22       0.11       0.36      0.25      0.00       0.33      0.11     0.22        0.19      0.09       0.17      0.18      0.14       0.00      0.17
                                      (0.44)     (0.33)     (0.51)    (0.47)    (0.00)     (0.53)    (0.33)   (0.48)      (0.40)    (0.29)     (0.40)    (0.41)    (0.35)     (0.00)    (0.38)

Number of regions                        9         11         9          7        28         5         16         4        21         19        11          8        36        48        232

Notes: for each variable, the first row shows mean and the second row shows standard deviation. All moments are calculated using population weights (weights to regions within a country are
proportional to population; equal weights to all countries) . The last column reports statistics for the pooled sample. The last rows reports the number of regions for each country.




                                                                                                                                                                                         75
                       APPENDIX TABLE C2. SENSITIVITY OF ESTIMATES TO ALTERNATIVE WEIGHTING.

                                                                                              Population weights,
                                                                     No population                                          Huber robust
                                             Baseline                                         no normalization at
                                                                       weights                                               regression
                                                                                               the country level
                                         OLS            FE          OLS          FE            OLS          FE            OLS          FE
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)

Turnover migration rate                  0.37        0.29           0.23        0.29*          0.32*       0.35           0.18        0.13
                                        (0.27)      (0.22)         (0.14)      (0.16)         (0.19)      (0.23)         (0.12)      (0.13)
Population share 0-24 years              0.14       0.58***        0.30***     0.47***        0.41***     0.55***        0.20***     0.26***
                                        (0.13)      (0.12)         (0.09)      (0.10)         (0.11)      (0.11)         (0.07)      (0.09)
Population share 55+ years               0.17       0.42***        0.23***     0.36***        0.39***     0.45***        0.23***     0.24***
                                        (0.14)      (0.12)         (0.09)      (0.09)         (0.10)      (0.10)         (0.08)      (0.09)
Trust                                    0.16      -1.00***        -0.26      -0.53***        -0.40       -0.67**       -0.42***     -0.30*
                                        (0.33)      (0.32)         (0.21)      (0.20)         (0.25)      (0.29)         (0.13)      (0.15)
Controls

        Years of schooling             -0.98***     -1.57**       -0.93***     -0.99**       -0.80***     -1.24**       -0.82***    -0.86***
                                        (0.17)      (0.63)         (0.15)      (0.44)         (0.21)      (0.53)         (0.12)      (0.29)
        Share of employment in           0.04       -0.01           0.02        0.00           0.02        0.01           0.01        0.01
           the primary sector           (0.04)      (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.02)      (0.02)
        Share of employment in          -0.02       -0.06**         0.01       -0.00           0.01       -0.00          -0.02       -0.01
           the secondary sector         (0.03)      (0.02)         (0.03)      (0.02)         (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.02)      (0.02)
        Women’s share in               -0.18***    -0.23***       -0.18***    -0.17***       -0.21***    -0.26***       -0.11***    -0.15***
           employment                   (0.04)      (0.08)         (0.03)      (0.06)         (0.05)      (0.08)         (0.02)      (0.04)
        Household size                  -0.08       -2.13*         -0.26       -0.51           0.16       -0.52           0.90*       0.04
                                        (0.76)      (1.18)         (0.68)      (0.89)         (0.80)      (1.08)         (0.49)      (0.73)
        Home ownership rate            -0.05***     -0.03         -0.06***    -0.08***       -0.05***     -0.05*        -0.07***    -0.08***
                                        (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.01)      (0.02)         (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.01)      (0.02)
        Net migration rate              -0.34       -0.10          -0.07       -0.03          -0.35*      -0.25          -0.01        0.06
                                        (0.27)      (0.18)         (0.17)      (0.16)         (0.20)      (0.20)         (0.14)      (0.14)
        Share of urban population        0.01       0.04***        0.03***     0.03***        0.04***     0.05***        0.03***     0.02***
                                        (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)      (0.01)
        Log(Income p.c.) × 100         -0.04***     -0.01         -0.04***    -0.04***       -0.05***     -0.03*        -0.04***    -0.04***
                                        (0.01)      (0.02)         (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)      (0.02)         (0.01)      (0.01)
        Road density                     0.44**     0.44***         0.16        0.34**         0.09       0.48***         0.16       0.31***
                                        (0.21)      (0.14)         (0.11)      (0.13)         (0.15)      (0.18)         (0.10)      (0.11)
        City region                     3.33***      0.47          3.61***      2.12**        3.18***      1.39          2.90***     2.50***
                                        (0.63)      (0.92)         (0.72)      (1.04)         (0.91)      (1.20)         (0.75)      (0.78)
        Capital                         -0.01        0.35           0.13       -0.09           0.04        0.65          -0.13        0.32
                                        (0.59)      (0.46)         (0.46)      (0.50)         (0.50)      (0.56)         (0.60)      (0.61)

Observations                             232         232            232         232             232        232             232        232
R-squared                                0.71        0.87           0.75        0.84            0.84       0.89            0.83       0.87


        Notes: The table shows results for baseline specification estimated with different weighing schemes. Columns (1) and (2)
        correspond to the baseline weighing scheme: assign weights to regions within a country proportional to population and assign
        equal weights to all countries. Columns (3) and (4) present results when each region has the same weight. Columns (5) and (6)
        presents results when regions are assigned weights proportional to population irrespective to which country they belong. In this
        scheme, there is no normalization that countries have equal weights. As a result, smaller countries such as Denmark, Sweden, etc.
        can have weights smaller than regions like California, Texas, Il de France, or Greater London. Columns (7) and (8) present
        results when Huber robust estimation is used to minimize adverse effects of outliers and influential observations. There is no
        weighing by population in this scheme.




                                                                                                                                     76
                          APPENDIX D: CULTURAL VARIABLES
This appendix describes how cultural variables are constructed from the survey questions of the World
Values Survey (WVS). WVS has a number of appealing features.
         First, WVS has been carried out in over 100 countries since 1981. There have been five major waves
of WVS approximately every 5-10 years in a typical country. Second, over time, WVS has not only
increased country coverage but also extended the set of questions in the survey so that researchers can have
finer measures of various cultural aspects. This is an important development as any single question may be
an imperfect proxy of a given cultural dimension but using sets of questions related to this cultural
dimension can greatly improve the measurement of this cultural dimension by constructing indexes (or
averages) across these sets. Third, the questionnaires were standardized across countries which makes data
comparable across countries. Finally, since 2000s, WVS provides geocoding of survey responses so that one
can construct measures of cultural dimensions at the subnational level.
         We focus on three cultural dimensions: i) trust; ii) value of work; iii) individualism. Previous
research (e.g. Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2011), Blanchard and Philippon (2006), Doepke and Zilibotti
(2008), Gorodnichenko and Roland (2010)) argued that these dimensions can be important determinants of
labor supply, provision of public goods, and economic exchanges and, hence, can influence the degree of
hysteresis in unemployment. For each of these dimensions, we construct an index based on a set of related
question. As discussed above, using indexes is likely to reduce measurement errors. Appendix Table D1
provides the list of questions we used for each dimension.
         While one may use a variety of approaches to construct indexes (e.g., simple averages, principle
components, factor analysis), we use the following method as a baseline. Suppose that a cultural dimension
we have questions , , , , … , , . The scale of the responses may vary with questions (e.g., yes/no, 0-4
scale, 1-10 scale). To make units comparable across variables, we scale each variable by its standard
deviation. Then we add up scaled variables into an index where a variable may enter with “+” or “-“ signs
depending on the connotation of a question. Appendix Table D1 shows the sign for each variable. Since
variables are likely to be correlated, we further scale this sum by its standard deviation and obtain an index
that has unit variables. More formally, the index of variable is given by
                                                             ,
                                                  ∑
                                                                 ,

                                                                 ,
                                                   ∑
                                                                     ,
where         denotes the standard deviation of variable . The key advantage of this approach is
transparency. We find similar results when we use specific variables or alternative aggregation approaches
(e.g., principle components).
          Because some countries and questions entered WVS in 2000s, in our regression analyses we use
indexes constructed for 2000s rather than 1980s. One may be concerned that using values from 2000s may
be inappropriate since culture can respond to economic developments. For example, trust can decline if
unemployment stays persistently high. While this is certainly plausible, Roland (2004) emphasizes that
culture is slow moving and it can take a long time (many decades if not centuries) for culture to respond. To
assess more formally the sensitivity of cultural dimensions to fluctuations in unemployment, we follow
Stevenson and Wolfers (2011) and regress a cultural dimension on unemployment rate:

where c and t index countries and time,    is the unemployment rate, is a cultural dimension. Because
geocoding is available only in the recent wave of WVS, we estimate this regression at the country level.
Appendix Table D2 presents results for each index as well as specific variables entering the index and



                                                                                                           77
available in multiple waves. We fail to find consistent and robust evidence that survey responses or indexes
of cultural dimensions are sensitive to unemployment fluctuations.




References

Blanchard, Olivier, and Thomas Philippon, 2006. “The Quality of Labor Relations and Unemployment,”
       manuscript.
Doepke, Mathias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2008. “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2), 747-793.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Gerard Roland, 2010. "Culture, Institutions and the Wealth of Nations," NBER
       Working Papers 16368.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. 2011. "Civic Capital as the Missing Link." In Social
       Economics Handbook, edited by Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin and Matthew O. Jackson, vol. 1, 417-
       480. Elsevier.
Roland, Gerard, 2004. “Understanding Institutional Change: Fast-moving and Slow-moving Institutions.”
       Studies in Comparative International Development 38, 109-131.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, 2011. "Trust in Public Institutions over the Business Cycle,"
       American Economic Review 101(3), 281-287.




                                                                                                         78
                        APPENDIX TABLE D1. CONSTRUCTION OF CULTURAL INDEXES


  Sign   Question                                                                Scale
Value of Work
    -    [a003] Would you say leisure time is important in your life?            1 = very important
                                                                                 2 = rather important
                                                                                 3 = not very important
                                                                                 4 = not at all important

    +    [a004] Would you say work is important in your life?                    1 = very important
                                                                                 2 = rather important
                                                                                 3 = not very important
                                                                                 4 = not at all important

    +    [a030] Here is a list of qualities that children can be encouraged to   0 = not mentioned
         learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to be especially          1 = important
         important? Please choose up to five!
         Quality: hard work

    +    [c037] Please specify for each of the following statements how          1 = strongly agree
         strongly you agree or disagree with it: humiliating to receive          2 = agree
         money without having to work for it                                     3 = neither agree or disagree
                                                                                 4 = disagree
                                                                                 5 = strongly disagree

    +    [c038] Please specify for each of the following statements how          1 = strongly agree
         strongly you agree or disagree with it: people who don´t work turn      2 = agree
         lazy                                                                    3 = neither agree or disagree
                                                                                 4 = disagree
                                                                                 5 = strongly disagree

    +    [c039] Please specify for each of the following statements how          1 = strongly agree
         strongly you agree or disagree with it: work is a duty towards          2 = agree
         society                                                                 3 = neither agree or disagree
                                                                                 4 = disagree
                                                                                 5 = strongly disagree

    +    [c041] Please specify for each of the following statements how          1 = strongly agree
         strongly you agree or disagree with it: work should come first even     2 = agree
         if it means less spare time                                             3 = neither agree or disagree
                                                                                 4 = disagree
                                                                                 5 = strongly disagree

Trust
    -    [a165] Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be        1 = most people can be trusted
         trusted or that you need to be very careful in dealing with people?     2 = can´t be too careful

    +    [a168a] Do you think most people would try to take advantage of         1 = would take
         you if they got a chance, or would they try to be fair?                  …
                                                                                 10 = try to be fair

    -    [f114] Please tell me for each of the following actions whether you     1 = never justifiable
         think it can be justified: Claiming government benefits to which        …
         you are not entitled                                                    10 = always justifiable

(continued on the next page)




                                                                                                                  79
Individualism
    +    [a029] Here is a list of qualities that children can be encouraged to   0 = not mentioned
         learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to be especially          1 = important
         important? Please choose up to five!
         Quality: Independence

    +    [e035] How would you place your views on this                           1 = incomes should be made more
         scale? 1 means you agree completely with the statement on the left;     equal
         10 means you agree completely                                           …
         with the statement on the right; and if your views fall somewhere in    10 = we need larger income
                                                                                 differences as incentives
         between, you can choose any
         number in between: Inequality

    -    [e036] How would you place your views on this                           1 = private ownership of business
         scale? 1 means you agree completely with the statement on the left;     should be increased
         10 means you agree completely                                           …
         with the statement on the right; and if your views fall somewhere in    10 = government ownership of
                                                                                 business should be increased
         between, you can choose any
         number in between: Ownership

    -    [e039] How would you place your views on this                           1 = competition is good
         scale? 1 means you agree completely with the statement on the left;     …
         10 means you agree completely                                           10 = competition is harmful
         with the statement on the right; and if your views fall somewhere in
         between, you can choose any
         number in between: Competition

    -    [e037] How would you place your views on this                           1 = people should take more
         scale? 1 means you agree completely with the statement on the left;     responsibility to provide for
         10 means you agree completely                                           themselves
         with the statement on the right; and if your views fall somewhere in    …
                                                                                 10 = the government should take more
         between, you can choose any                                             responsibility to ensure that everyone
         number in between: Responsibility                                       is provided for


Notes: The table describes how cultural indexes are constructed from the World Values Survey. The column
“Sign” shows how a variable enters an index. Columns “Question” and “Scale” present the wording and
scale of a survey question. All variables are standardized (across countries and regions; these moments are
compute with population weights) before aggregated into indexes.




                                                                                                                     80
            APPENDIX TABLE D2: SENSITIVITY OF CULTURAL VARIABLES TO UNEMPLOYMENT

                                                                           Coef.          Nobs
                                                                           (s.e.)
               Value of Work
                   how important in your life: leisure time                0.009          47
                                                                           (0.006)
                   how important in your life: work                        0.006          47
                                                                           (0.009)
                   learn children at home: hard work                       -0.011*        58
                                                                           (0.006)
                   Index                                                   -0.029         47
                                                                           (0.054)
               Trust
                   people can be trusted/can’t be too careful              0.002          58
                                                                           (0.004)
                   do you justify: claiming state benefits                 -0.040         58
                                                                           (0.028)
                   Index                                                   0.022          58
                                                                           (0.029)
               Individualism
                   private vs. government ownership business               -0.006         42
                                                                           (0.040)
                   individual vs. state responsibility for providing       0.007          47
                                                                           (0.037)
                   equalize incomes vs. incentives for individual effort   -0.131**       41
                                                                           (0.064)
                   Index                                                   -0.097         40
                                                                           (0.170)


Notes: the table reports estimates of in                                           where c and t index countries
and time,     is the unemployment rate,               is a cultural variable. Cultural variables are aggregated to
the country level for any given year.




                                                                                                                 81
