NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE CLOSELY-HELD FIRMS TAX SHELTERS?
Annette Alstadsæter
Wojciech Kopczuk
Kjetil Telle
Working Paper 19609
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19609

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We thank Jeff Brown, Martin Jacob, Eric Toder and participants at the 2013 Tax Policy and the Economy
meeting for helpful comments and suggestions. Financial support from the Research Council of Norway,
grant 217139/H20, is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Annette Alstadsæter, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Kjetil Telle. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Closely-Held Firms Tax Shelters?
Annette Alstadsæter, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Kjetil Telle
NBER Working Paper No. 19609
November 2013
JEL No. D22,G3,H2,H3
ABSTRACT
In 2004 Norwegian authorities announced a reform introducing dividend taxation for personal (but
not corporate) owners to take effect starting in 2006. This change provided incentives to maximize
dividends in 2004 and 2005, and to retain earnings in the following years. Using Norwegian registry
data that cover the universe of non-publicly traded firms, we find that dividend payments responded
very strongly to the anticipated reform, but also that much of the response was compensated by re-injecting
shareholder equity in the same firms. On the other hand, following the reform firms began to retain
earnings. While all categories of assets grow, the increase in durable assets categories that include
equipment, machinery, company cars, planes and boats, is particularly striking. We find that personally
owned firms and those that pursued aggressive dividend maximization policy in anticipation of the
reform exhibit lower profits and economic activity in its aftermath, but retain earnings and accumulated
assets at comparable or faster rate than others. The differential effect on assets is concentrated in financial
(a potential substitute for private saving) and durable (a potential substitute for private consumption)
asset categories.We interpret these results as indicating both the existence of real tax responses and
supportive of the notion that in the presence of dividend taxation closely-held firms partially serve
as tax shelters.

Annette Alstadsæter
University of Oslo
PO Box 1089 Blindern
NO-0317 Oslo
Norway
and Statistics Norway
annette.alstadsater@medisin.uio.no
Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and Statistics Norway
and also NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu

Kjetil Telle
Statistics Norway
Research Department
Box 8131 Dep
0033 Oslo, Norway
tel@ssb.no

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on closely-held Norwegian firms for which the interaction between individual
and firm incentives cannot be ignored. In the absence of arms-length relationship between shareholders and management — a natural situation to consider when a firm has few owners — there is a
possibility that some aspects of the behavior of a firm are motivated by owners’ personal incentives
rather than maximization of the value of the firm. In particular, in the presence of taxation, some
of the firm’s costs may in fact reflect private consumption, and some of its investment activity may
in fact be equivalent to private saving. In other words, a firm may act as a tax shelter on top of or
even instead of its core economic activity. We provide evidence suggesting that this is so by relying
on data from Norway that span a 2006 reform that introduced taxation of dividends to personal
shareholders (dividends to corporations as shareholders remained tax free) and modified incentives
for personal vs corporate ownership of firms.
The reform we study was announced in March of 2004. Prior to the reform, dividends were
effectively not taxable (beyond regular corporate tax liability). As of January 1st 2006, dividends
to personal shareholders that exceeded a risk-free rate-of-return allowance started being subject to
a 28% tax, matching the treatment of personal capital gains. Simultaneously, it was announced
that immediately (as of March 2004) capital gains to corporate shareholders were no longer subject
to taxation. As the result, in the aftermath of the reform, personal shareholders would prefer to
hold shares through a holding firm — due to preference for capital gains at the announcement,
and due to preference for both dividends and capital gains when fully implemented. In this paper,
we document the responses to this introduction of a dividend tax both (1) in anticipation of the
reform and (2) over a longer term after the reform had been fully implemented. Additionally, we
also show some evidence of changes in ownership form, the topic on which we focus in more details
in a companion paper (Alstadsæter et al., 2013).
More specifically, we find that firms responded to the reform before its full implementation by
increasing their dividend payments and by setting up holding companies that allowed for converting
ownership from personal to corporate. Norwegian firms are subject to accounting rules that govern
retaining equity/asset ratio above 10% and that cap dividend payouts at the level of accumulated
retained earnings. We find that for almost half of the personally owned firms with ability to pay
dividends at least one of these two constraints ends up binding in 2005. In other words, many firms
aggressively maximize their dividend payouts. However, we also find that these large outflows of
accumulated funds do not necessarily correspond to reducing the size of a firm: dividends paid
out are then used to recapitalize the same firms by injecting additional shareholder equity. As the
result, in anticipation of the reform the average (though not necessarily marginal) source of fund
shifts from retained earnings toward external equity financing but the overall equity of the firms is
not substantially affected.

1

This close to complete compensation for dividend payments is surprising given that the dividend
tax implies reduced return to shareholder equity in the future. Such a response is consistent with
either (1) lack of attention to tax considerations (though this is hard to believe given that firms
do respond to anticipated policy), (2) importance of liquidity constraints or (3) firm being used
for private saving (“pension accounts”) or financing of private consumption so that no taxable
return is expected. We corroborate the third possibility by investigating the behavior of firms
after the reform. We show that consistently with the new tax incentives, post-reform all firms start
retaining much higher share of earnings and building up much higher equity position. In particular,
the propensity to retain earnings increases significantly and the correlation of dividends and profits
declines. The cumulative growth in retained earnings is more pronounced for firms with personal
ownership and for those that maximized dividends in either 2004 or 2005 — the two groups that
we use as proxies for being affected by reform-induced incentives. A potential complication in
interpreting these differences as being due to the reform is that the post-reform period overlaps
with a profit boom. However, indicators of real economic activity — profits, revenue and costs —
all increase more for firms that are less affected by the change in incentives, indicating that the
introduction of dividend tax may have had a negative effect on real economic activity. At the same
time, despite weaker economic outcomes, long-term financial and fixed assets increase more for
personally than corporately owned firms, as well as for dividend maximizing than non-maximizing
firms – indicating that the retained earnings are saved but invested in ways not leading to economic
profits.
Particularly striking is the difference across personally and corporately owned firms for the
subgroup of durables that includes company cars, boats, planes and other durable goods that may
be of mixed corporate/personal use. We conclude that the new incentive structure induced firms to
retain earnings but that this effect at least partially corresponds to a shift toward activities that do
not translate into increasing profitability, and instead are likely to reflect personal saving and/or
consumption within a firm.

2

Literature review

The canonical approach to analyzing the impact of corporate taxation in public finance focuses on
a firm that is pursuing its activity in order to maximize its value, while dealing with arms-length
shareholders. Accordingly, corporate and capital income tax policy may influence firm investment
behavior by influencing the marginal cost of capital. A large literature has focused on distinguishing
between two different possibilities (see for example, Auerbach 2002 and Auerbach and Hasset 2002).
When marginal projects are financed out of new share issues (“old view”), dividend taxation distorts
the marginal cost of capital; on the other hand, when marginal projects are financed out of retained
earnings (“new view”), dividend taxation has no effect on the cost of (trapped) capital. Both views

2

may apply at the same time to different firms: indeed, “old view” describes relatively cash-poor
and illiquid firms, perhaps those that are relatively young; while “new view” applies to firms with
significant retained earnings — “old” firms (see for example Becker et al., 2013).
This is a useful dichotomy for thinking about large publicly traded firms, although even in this
context it has been recognized that the arms-length assumption does not apply to all parties, in
particular management may have objectives that are in conflict with maximization of the value
of the firm. More generally, the assumption of arms-length relationship between shareholders
and management is not attractive for thinking about closely-held firms with a small number of
shareholders. In the extreme, an entrepreneur is unlikely to be interested in simply maximizing
the value of the firm, but rather in maximizing the overall level of personal utility, with business
activity being just one input.
It has been documented in the literature that some aspects of the structure of firms do respond
to personal tax considerations. Gordon and Slemrod (2000) have documented that the US Tax
Reform Act of 1986 led to massive conversion of corporate firms to a different organization form of
S-corporation that, in particular, implies taxation of firm profits as personal tax. Romanov (2006)
showed that a tax reform in Israel, which changed the relationship between individual and income
tax rates, encouraged small businesses to incorporate. Jacob and Alstadsæter (2013) find that
owner-mangers in closely-held firms in Sweden rely on wages as the sticky payout channel, while
dividend payments are more responsive to changes in taxes.
The economic literature on dividend taxes and their effect on payout policy and corporate
behavior proves ambiguous. In particular, little is known about long term real effects on firms by
dividend taxes. Major reasons for this is lack of tax variation and compelling data. The majority
of evidence is based on samples of large, publicly traded firms. A recent wave of evidence (e.g.
Chetty and Saez (2005); Brown et al. (2007)) focuses on responses to the 2003 dividend tax cut
in the U.S. and finds evidence consistent with the importance of agency issues. Chetty and Saez
(2010) argue for a clientele effect on investments following a dividend tax reform. A dividend
tax induces firms to distribute more dividends, reducing lock-in of capital and “wasteful” use of
resources in cash rich firms in the presence of agency problems. Cash constrained firms that rely
on new equity to finance projects can raise new capital, resulting in more investments. Even if
total investment level is more or less the same, a dividend tax change can increase productivity
through a reallocation of investments across firms. Becker et al. (2013) document this effect for
listed firms using cross country firm data. Yagan (2013) finds no effects of the 2003 US dividend
tax cut on overall investments of firms affected by the tax cut (C-corporations) compared with
firms unaffected by the tax cut (S-corporations). The sample consists of large, privately traded
corporations with similar trends prior to the reform. Another issue in this literature is the role of
share repurchases. A substitution of repurchases for dividends, which leaves net equity unaffected,
has a similar flavor to the strategy of re-injecting dividends as external equity that we document

3

in this paper that corresponds to issuing new shares in lieu of retaining profits.
Firms are as a group very heterogeneous. The behavior of large, publicly traded firms with
dispersed ownership and separation of ownership and management is potentially different from
that of small and medium sized firms that often are owner-managed. These firms constitute a
considerable share of the economy. Michaely and Roberts (2012) document that the payout policies
of publicly traded firms differs from privately traded firms. In the present paper, we concentrate
on closely-held firms and provide new information on their behavior.

1

Little research has been done on how taxes affect ownership constellations in firms, beyond
what is done on effects on owner clienteles in listed corporations (Korkeamäki et al., 2010). One
reason for this is lack of data. To our knowledge, nothing has been done on how tax incentives
affect ownership constellation and individual owners’ ownership shares in smaller and medium sized
firms.

3

Background on the Norwegian tax system

3.1

Changes in the tax regime

The Norwegian dual income tax system levies a progressive tax rate on labor income and a constant
tax rate on capital income. A basic tax rate of 28 percent applies to corporate, capital and labor
income. Individuals’ labor income is subject to an additional flat social security contribution of
7.8 percent, and two additional and highly progressive surtaxes. The top marginal tax rate on
labor income was 55.3 percent before 2005 and 47.8 percent from 2006 and onward. In addition,
geographically differentiated social security contributions of maximum 14.1 percent apply to all
wage payments on employer level.
Prior to 2006, capital gains from the realization of shares were taxable at 28%, though the
part of capital gains stemming from withheld profits in the firm was tax free. Dividends were tax
exempt before 2006.2
1

Publicly traded firms may also have other motives beyond taxes for their dividend policy. Under the signaling
theory, (publicly traded) firms are reluctant to cut dividend payments, as this is perceived as a negating signal of
profitability to the market (Lintner, 1956; Allen and Michaely, 2003).
2
There are two noteworthy modifications to this tax exemption. First, under the pre-2006 tax regime, owners
who worked in their closely-held firms had tax incentives to withdraw income from their firm in the form of tax free
dividends instead of labor income. To avoid such income shifting, a so-called “split model” applied to owners with
2/3 or more of shares in the firm they (or their immediate family) worked. For these owners, a specific and imputed
return to real capital could be distributed as tax free dividends to the owners. Any remaining share of corporate
profits was taxed as wage income, independent of how it was distributed to the owner. Due to the imputation rule,
owner-managers in firms with low capital and/or few employees had incentives to reduce total ownership in the firm
(just) below 2/3, inducing firms to have more dispersed ownership. After the removal of this split model on January
1st 2006, this incentive disappeared. See Lindhe et al. (2004) and Thoresen and Alstadsæter (2010) for details.
Second, in 2001 there was a temporary dividend tax of 11% (with a small, fixed, tax free amount of NOK 10,000 per
shareholder). It was announced on September 5th 2000, valid for all dividends that were decided to be distributed
from that day and onward. This was removed from January 1st 2002 due to a change in government. The intention

4

A shareholder income tax was first proposed by an advisory committee on February 6th 2003.
A revised version was presented by the government on March 26th 2004, and sanctioned by the
Parliament on June 11th 2004, to be introduced on January 1st 2006. The shareholder income tax
levies a tax of 28% on all personal shareholders’ income from shares, both dividends and capital
gains. An imputed risk-free return to the share, the so-called Rate-of-Return-Allowance (RRA),
is tax exempt. The RRA is imputed as the average interest rate on government bonds times the
purchasing price of the share. Any unused RRA is carried forward and added to the imputed RRA
in the following year. The share-specific RRA cannot be transferred between different types of
shares, and only the owner at the end of the year benefits from the imputed RRA for that year.
Sørensen (2005) and Alstadsæter and Fjærli (2009) provide more information on the shareholder
income tax.
Under the shareholder income tax, no tax is levied on firms’ income from shares, neither on
dividends nor on capital gains.3 In fact, the tax on realized capital gains from shares for corporate
owners was unexpectedly removed already on March 26th 2004, i.e. long before the introduction
of the shareholder income tax. The tax rates and changes in such are displayed in Table 1 below.
The top marginal tax rate on income from self-employment equals the top marginal tax rate
on labor income. Prior to 2006, when dividends were tax exempt, high income self-employed had
incentives to incorporate in order to save taxes, as emphasized by Thoresen and Alstadsæter (2010).
The introduction of a dividend tax in 2006 in combination with a reduction in the top marginal
tax rate on labor income, partly removed these tax incentives for incorporation for self-employed
individuals. Most of our analysis is performed on the sample of firms that existed throughout the
period mitigating concerns about any incorporation/self-employment adjustments playing a role.

3.2

Incentives for changes in behavior

Pre-2004, corporate capital gains and dividends were treated in the same way as personal ones; as
of March 2004 corporate capital gains were privileged relative to individual ones and in 2006 both
capital gains and dividends on the corporate level were treated favorably relative to individual ones.
As the result, the changes introduced incentives to hold ownership stake in a firm through another
entity rather than directly. A transition rule in effect between December 10th 2004 and December 31st 2005 enabled personal shareholders to transfer their shares to a holding firm (“E-firm”)
without triggering the capital gains taxes that would otherwise apply, given certain restrictions.
As documented by Alstadsæter et al. (2013), approximately 16,000 holding firms were established
under this rule, mainly during the last few months of 2005. Approximately 9% of existing non-listed
was to evaluate and find a more permanent way to tax dividends and restrict income shifting in the future. See Table
1.
3
From 2009 a small tax on dividends and capital gains was introduced for corporate shareholders as well; 3% of
dividends and gains were subject to taxation, rendering an effective tax rate on income from shares of 0.8%. From
2012 and onward, this tax was removed for capital gains realized by firms.

5

firms at the end of 2004 had at least some of the owners electing to transfer their stake to a holding
company during 2005.
In present value terms, and given constant accrual-based tax system and rates of return after
2006, there is no tax saving in deferring dividend taxes through the setup of a holding company.
But there are still tax benefits of doing this. First, the deferral enables tax free growth of assets
within the holding company. Second, it allows for pooling of losses and gains from various enterprises within a single holding company level. The shareholder income tax does not allow RRA to
be transferred across different types of shares, and at realization, unused RRAs are lost at shareholder level. At company level, there is no dividend tax and thus no unused RRA to be lost at
realization. This will then increase the total RRA of the owner of the holding company, as the
personal shareholder’s RRA is based on his share of the external equity in the holding company,
which is unaffected by this transaction. Third, holding shares through a holding company allows
the personal shareholder to determine ultimate payout in firms with multiple owners. Fourth, the
investor may make a policy bet on the dividend tax to be removed in the future, and fifth, a personally fully owned holding company facilitates the investor’s ability to shift parts of his private
consumption to the firm.
In preparation for the announced dividend tax for personal shareholders in 2006, there were huge
incentives to shift dividends across time and maximize dividend payments before the introduction
of the tax. However, emptying the companies of cash and internal equity then increases leverage
and leaves the firm more vulnerable for difficulties in raising new loans, and in worst case, this
increases the risk of bankruptcy. One way to avoid that is to reinvest (tax free) distributed dividend
as external equity so that liquidity of the company is unaffected. Inserted equity can then be
distributed tax free to shareholders in the future, as long as there is no capital gain involved. This
could also be done in one operation without even distributing dividends, if the general assembly
decides to convert internal equity to external equity. Estimates from Statistics Norway based on
national accounts suggest that 73% of dividends received by households and non-profit organizations
in 2005 were reinvested in the corporate sector, either as debt or equity (Alstadsæter and Fjærli,
2009), and we will show micro evidence of these effects as well.
In the presence of the new dividend tax, firms have a stronger incentive to retain rather than
distribute earnings in order to defer tax liability although, naturally, it depends on the potential
economic use of funds. The incentive to use company rather than personal funds for categories
that can be funded in either way (i.e. for which private and corporate spending are substitutes)
strengthens unambiguously though. The incentives for personal consumption within the firm was
strong also before the 2006-reform, in particular through the value added tax of 25% which the
firm can deduce before the profit tax is levied, as well as trough the tax deductible depreciation
of durable assets in the firm in addition to any deductible financing costs. But the additional
dividend tax strengthens these incentives by raising the costs of distributing corporate profits for

6

private consumption as dividends by 28%.
To summarize, tax changes announced during the years 2004 to 2006 created the following
changes in incentives:
1. After the reform, it is better to have corporate rather than personal owners. This implies a
shift towards more indirect ownership by individuals.
2. In anticipation of the reform, firms should pay out as much dividends as possible before 2006
and reduce dividend distributions to personal shareholders from 2006 and onward.
3. Firms have incentives to reinvest extraordinarily high dividends in 2005 as inserted equity.
4. After the reform, the incentive to retain earnings is stronger and, in particular, the incentive
to substitute corporate spending for private spending becomes very strong.
In this paper we document responses to these incentives.

4

Data

4.1

Data sources

We use detailed administrative data from two data sources maintained by Statistics Norway. Every
firm and resident in Norway is provided one unique personal identifier which is present in all data
sources, enabling us to follow every firm and individual over time and across data sets.
1. The shareholder register. It contains records of every shareholder of every Norwegian firm
from 2004 to 2011. Ownership information is as of December 31 each year. There is also
information of each shareholder that has received dividends during the year, even if the
shareholder does not hold shares at year end. Because we observe this information for a
number of subsequent years, we can also trace changes in the ownership structure such as
transfers of an existing firm.
2. The accounting register. It contains accounts and balance sheet information from the financial
statements of every non-financial firm for every year 1999-2011.4
4

As in the U.S., however, the book and tax statements are not the same, since tax accounts/balance sheet
submissions may be required to provide more detailed information than the financial statements, or since the rules
for how to set up the tax accounts/balance sheet may be somewhat different from the rules related to the financial
statements.

7

4.2

Sample definition

The sample(s) we use in our analysis include firms that meet a set of conditions. In principle, the
shareholder register contains all firms,5 while the accounting register contains every non-financial
firm. Our first condition is that we restrict attention to the sub-set of firms available in both data
sources. Further, we limit attention to firms that exist in both 2004 and 2005 and, for most of the
analysis, focus on a balanced set of firms that existed throughout the period. We eliminate firms
that were publicly traded or had at least 1% foreign owners in 2005.6

4.3

Definition of variables

Information on distributed dividends from each firm to each of its shareholders during a calendar
year is available from the shareholder register. Distributed dividends are the actually dividends
paid during the year. From the accounting register we also have access to the sum of proposed
(ordinary) dividends of the firm as decided by the general assembly when closing the books for the
previous year.7 The proposed dividends may differ from actual dividends because shareholders may
choose to pay additional dividends after the assembly.8 While the correlation between distributed
dividends and proposed dividends is very high, it is possible that distributed dividends turn out
lower (if the firm for some reason ends up not paying) or higher (if special dividends are decided
by a special general assembly) than the proposed dividends. Information on distributed dividends
is available for the years 2004-2011. In addition, information on every firm’s industry, foundation
date and whether it is publicly traded, are also collected from the accounting register.
Using the shareholder register we can identify how dividend receipts are distributed to the
following groups of shareholders: personal owners; corporate owners; and foreigners and others.

9

We will use information about whether owners are persons or other firms in what follows. In
order to identify owners of the firm at the entry into the given year, we use information from the
shareholder register at the end of the previous year. Thus, the first year of ownership information
is 2005. For firms founded within the year, data on owners at beginning of the year (and at
foundation) are not available, so for these firms we set the owners at the beginning of the year
equal to the owners at the end of the foundation year. We define as corporately owned those firms
that are solely owned by corporations, while we classify firms as personally owned if they have any
5

However, around 5-10 percent of firms do not report to the shareholder register each year, according to the
Norwegian Tax Administration.
6
By excluding firms that did not exist in both of the years 2004 and 2005 we also remove a special category of
firms (“E-firms”) that were set up as holding companies in 2005 (see Alstadsæter et al. 2013 for details).
7
While proposed dividends are defined as corresponding to the previous accounting year, in this paper we align
the timing of proposed and distributed dividends so that they correspond to the payout in the same calendar year.
8
This is similar to the distinction between ordinary and special dividends in the US (though it is not the same as
extraordinary dividends, since the additional dividends over the original proposed dividend need not be large).
9
The latter group also includes a small number of owners with missing or incorrect personal/corporate identification
numbers.

8

personal owner (even if they have some corporate ones). Because ownership of a firm may and
does change over the years, we will usually define ownership based on information as of 2005.
To the sample of firms in the shareholder register, with information about paid dividends in
the year and about owners at entry into the year, we merge in accounting information for the
same calendar. We use several variables from the accounting register. Earned equity corresponds
to accumulated retained profits that have not yet been paid out to the shareholders, and in this
measure we include proposed dividends that are not yet distributed. We will also define total equity
as the sum of earned equity and external equity.
We will be particularly interested in firms that maximize dividends. To define dividend maximizers, we operationalize the two main legal restrictions on dividends. First, only accumulated
earned equity from the balance sheet of the previous year can be distributed in the given year.
Our operationalization of earned equity is a proxy, since there are additional factors (which we do
not have data to incorporate) that should be deducted from our measure of earned equity to find
the exact legal limit on dividends. Our measure may thus over-estimate legal dividends somewhat.
Second, remaining equity after dividend payments needs to be at least 10% of total assets, again as
stated in the balance sheet of the previous year. In defining dividend maximizers we use proposed
rather than distributed dividends for two reasons. First, we do not observe actually distributed
dividends before 2004 and using proposed dividends allows for illustrating the patterns before 2004.
Second, we do not have sufficient information to fully implement rules applying to special dividends
and thus can be much more precise using proposed dividends.
We divide the sample of personally owned firms into three groups. Some firms have no earned
equity (because they have paid it out in the past or have accumulated losses) or their equity level is
below 10% of assets. Such firms have no ability to legally pay any dividends. The remaining firms
can pay dividends. Some of them hit one of the two constraints that we just mentioned — we will
refer to them as “dividend maximizers” — and others (“dividend non-maximizers”) do not. We
define as maximizers firms that after proposing the positive dividend have the equity/asset ratio of
between 0.09 and 0.11 or that propose a dividend exceeding 95% of its earned equity.
Our variables are measured in thousand Norwegian Kroners (NOK); the exchange rate between
2000 and 2011 fluctuated in the range of approximately 5 to 9 NOK per US dollar. When we focus
on balance sheet variables measured in NOK, we usually work with levels — this is because many
of our variables can be negative or zero. To deal with wide distribution, we winsorize all variables
at 1% and 99%, for each year separately.
Table 2 provides summary statistics for the 44,905 different firms in our balanced sample that
existed all years in the period 1999-2011, The most important thing to observe is that these are
small firms, with the median number of both employees and owners being only two. Operating
income and profits are not impressive, with medians of NOK 2.5 Million and NOK 0.18 million. It is
also noteworthy that, despite the imposed sample restrictions, these firms are highly heterogeneous,

9

typically with means substantially higher than medians. However, for the number of owners, the
median and the mean are both low, and even the 95th percentile is only 7. This underlines that our
sample mainly consists of small firms with few owners for which interaction of individual and firm
incentives cannot be ignored. A clear majority of the firms belong to the two (NACE) industry
categories “Wholesale and retail, repairs”; and “Real estate, renting and business activities”.

5

Responses in anticipation of the reform

5.1

Dividend and ownership patterns

Figure 1 shows the pattern of actual distributed dividends starting in 2004. The overall level of
dividends in 2004 and 2005 vastly exceeded that in the following years. Over 40% of firms in 2004
and 50% of firms in 2005 paid dividends, the number that drops below 20% in 2006 and stays below
30% in the following years.
In Figure 2, we show evidence of a response to the ownership incentives, where we have classfied
firms into three groups: solely privately owned, solely corporately owned and mixed-ownership. In
the balanced sample of firms that existed throughout the period we study, structure of ownership is
very stable except for a one-time sharp shift in 2006. Between 2005 and 2006, the number of firms
with purely corporate ownership has nearly doubled, while the number of firms with purely private
ownership has decreased by approximately the same amount, with an increase in mixed ownership
making up the difference. This corresponds to transfer of ownership to holding companies that are
studied by Alstadsæter et al. (2013). Such transfers may be implemented by each owner separately
so that ultimate ownership is mixed, but Figure 2 suggests that in most cases all personal ownership
has been transformed into corporate one.
As mentioned before, we will use two groups in the rest of our analysis. Corporately owned firms
are those solely owned by corporations, while we classify firms as personally owned if they have
any personal owners (even if they have some corporate owners). In order to keep the composition
of the two groups constant, we will typically rely on ownership structure in 2005 to classify firms.
The pattern of dividend payments is driven by firms that were owned by individuals rather than
corporations, as shown in Figure 3. Impressively, over 60% of privately owned firms chose to pay
dividends in 2005. Interestingly, the same pattern is visible for firms that have transformed their
ownership to corporate one in the aftermath of the reform, as shown in Figure 4.10 While setting
up a holding company allows for deferring dividend tax, the return will still be subject to taxation
at a later date when profits retained in a holding company are going to be distributed either as
dividends or capital gains. Thus, paying dividends in anticipation of the reform is a tax saving
strategy even for firms that convert to corporate ownership.
10

Figure 2 indicates that the bulk of such such changes took place between 2005 and 2006.

10

In Figure 5 we show that propensity to pay any dividends varies with the number of owners of
a firm, but the time series pattern is the same regardless of the number of owners.

5.2

Dividend maximization and external equity substitution

As mentioned before, in order to assess the importance of incentives introduced by the reform and
the strength of response, we construct a proxy for a firm being constrained in paying dividends.
We divide the sample of privately owned firms into three groups. Some firms have no earned equity
or their equity level is below 10% of assets. Such firms have no ability to legally pay any dividends.
In our balanced sample, there are a bit more than 20% of such firms every year and the share is
fairly smooth; see Figure 6. The remaining firms can pay dividends, and as described in Section
4.3 we have divided them into “dividend maximizers” and “dividend non-maximizers”. Figure 6
illustrates the relative share of each type in our balanced panel over time. In years before or after
the reform, the number of firms that maximize their dividends is small. In 2005, however, nearly
half of the firms that have the ability to pay dividends (almost 40% of the whole sample) decide
to maximize their payouts. Given that just over 60% of these firms pay any dividends, the median
firm that pays dividends in 2005 does so to the maximum extent possible.
Propensity to maximize dividends also appears somewhat elevated in 2003 and 2004. The
decision to propose dividends for 2003 for sure precedes the announcement of the reform, while the
decision for 2004 may have preceded it for some firm but not for most of them.11 The pre-reform
trend in dividends may also be affected by the presence of a (different) dividend tax in late 2000 and
2001 (see footnote 2) and the possibility of introducing a new tax (as ultimately happened) being
on the political agenda. After 2005, the incidence of maximization of dividends drops precipitously.
Given firms’ attempts to maximize dividends, one might expect that firms’ liquidity and overall
assets will decline. We investigate it by looking at changes in the level of external (shareholder
equity) and total equity. The dividend tax depletes earned equity. As Figure 7 shows though, 2004
and 2005 also feature unusually high increases in external equity. Put differently, owners of firms
in 2004 and 2005 tripled or so their direct investments in their firms. As the result, there is no
discernible effect on the change in the total equity of these firms. Figure 8 shows the extensive
margin. Increasing external equity is a relatively rare event — in a typical year, only about 5% of
firms do so. In 2005, however, this number nearly doubles. Furthermore, as Figure 9 illustrates,
the incidence of matching external equity changes and dividend payments one-for-one, while rare
in general, spikes in 2005.
11
Proposed dividends for accounting year t-1 are decided at a general assembly that typically takes place in
May/June in year t, and are payable in year t. The reform was announced March 26, 2004.

11

6

Behavior in the aftermath of the reform

In the previous section, we documented that firms responded in anticipation of the reform by
distributing dividends prior to the reform. At the same time, they also took measures to limit
the impact on their liquidity by re-injecting external equity. There is a possibility then that
nothing about the activity of the firm changes as the result of the reform, at least on impact.
This is puzzling though. In the new regime, the return to outside funds is affected, a scenario
stressed by the “old” view of the dividend taxation. Firms that paid dividends and re-injected
external equity appear to have an ability to manipulate their outside funding, so that the “old
view” may in fact be applicable and one would then expect scaling down the size of the firm in
response to adverse incentives. There are a few alternative possibilities though. First, assuming
that injection of external equity is equivalent to issuing new equity is not necessarily appropriate
if firms face adjustment costs or liquidity constraints — in that case, the whole point of combined
dividend/external equity scenario is to keep things constant and the marginal source of funds for
additional projects (rather than maintaining current ones) may well be retained earnings if any (so
that the “new” view applies). Second, owners may be focusing on the salient benefit of avoiding
the dividend tax on already accumulated earnings, and ignoring the importance of the dividend
tax in reducing the return to additional investments. Third, such a strategy is completely rational
if firms do not expect that re-investment will lead to taxable dividends in the future. This would
be so if the additional investments are in fact a substitute for the same type of behavior outside of
the firm — a tax shelter-like activity.
In what follows, we will analyze behavior of firms in the aftermath of the reform. We will first
show that after the reform firms are significantly more likely to retain earnings. Then, we will
compare outcomes for different types of firms that were differently affected by the reform, in order
to learn about the association between incentives and firm behavior.
In Table 3 we show the sensitivity of changes in retained earnings and dividends to after-tax
profits, for firms with personal owners. This is done by regressing the outcome variable on year
dummies and their interactions with profits, on a balanced panel with standard errors clustered
on firm level. We do not claim that the results represent a causal relationship, but they allow for
investigating how the correlations between profits and dividends or equity changed over time. The
baseline is 2003: in that year, an additional 1NOK of profits is associated with 0.41NOK increase in
retained earnings and 0.39NOK increase in ordinary dividends. This relationship is stable between
2002 and 2005. In particular, the lack of a significant change in this association in 2005 suggests
that factors other than current profits (and not strongly associated with them), such as availability
of accumulated (rather than current) earnings were primary determinants of dividend distribution
decisions. This relationship changes dramatically in the immediate aftermath of the reform when

12

the association of profits and retained earnings raises to nearly one,12 while association of profits
and dividends falls to close to zero. In the years that follow, retained earnings remain much more
sensitive to profits than prior to the reform and association of dividends and profits remains very
weak.
These results indicate that following the reform we should expect to see increases in retained
earnings. This is indeed the case, as Figure 10 illustrates. This, and the following figures, normalize
all series to 1 for 2004 in order to facilitate the comparison across groups. Average earned equity
(retained earnings) starts to increase immediately and rapidly after the reform. These effects
are very large and in sharp contrast to the behavior of the firms prior to the reform. By 2009,
the undistributed earnings accumulated by the firms double. The figure shows both the effect on
personally owned and corporate owned firms (using the status as of 2005). While distributed profits
of both types of firms are going to be eventually subject to capital income taxation when distributed
to ultimate personal shareholders, firms with corporate ownership structure have additional degrees
of freedom, because payouts to corporate parents does not trigger immediate tax liability. Hence,
one may expect that the effect of tax incentives will be muted for corporate firms. It does indeed
appear so in the case of retained earnings. While retention increases for both types of firms, the
effect after a few years is much stronger for privately owned firms.
Our alternative strategy for identifying firms that are differentially affected by the reform relies
on their behavior in 2004/5. We classify personally-owned firms as dividend maximizers if they
maximized (distributed) dividends in either 2004 or 2005 and as non-maximizers otherwise. This
is of course an endogenous choice. However, this selected group of firms that maximize dividends
may be expected to be more responsive to tax consideration. In Figure 10, we show that dividend
maximizers are indeed accumulating more retained earnings after a few years and we find no
evidence of a difference in the retention pattern of the two groups prior to the reform. The pattern
of debt does not exhibit sharp changes after the reform and trends are parallel for the two groups
(in either strategy), with the exception of 2004, suggesting that some of the increased dividend
payouts may have been financed by (short-term) loans.
In Figures 11 and 12, we illustrate evolution of variables that proxy for real economic activity.
Overall profits undergo large changes during the 2000s, with an expansion beginning in 2003 or so,
peak in 2007 and a drop during the crisis that followed. Using both of our strategies for splitting
the data, firms that are expected to be more responsive to the tax incentives affected by the reform
have lower profits beginning with 2005 and very similar patterns prior to that. These lower profits
are associated with both lower operating income and lower operating costs (and not much difference
in wages), which suggest a lower level of economic activity. This is revealing in the light of just
documented effect on retained earnings: since the same firms are actually retaining more of their
earnings, one might have expected that they expand their economic activity and yet the opposite
12

The sum of the baseline coefficient on profits and the year-specific effect.

13

occurs. Hence, these results suggest that retaining earnings stimulated by tax incentives does not
correspond to profitable economic activity but may in fact reflect other considerations.
In Figures 13 and 14 we focus on the asset side of the balance sheet. Consistently with the
effect on earned equity, the overall assets for privately owned firms and their dividend-maximizing
subset, increase relatively more. Overall assets can be grouped into four components: long-term
financial assets, durable (“real”) assets, intangible assets and current assets (inventories, cash and
short-term investments). The difference between tax-sensitive and insensitive groups is present for
financial assets and durable assets, but much less obvious for current assets (and, if anything, going
in the opposite direction). The latter is consistent with the notion that current assets are more
tightly linked to current real economic activity (e.g., one might expect that inventories and cash
holdings are correlated with firms’ core business activity), further supporting the previous finding
that firms affected by the tax reform have actually experienced a relative decline in their economic
activity.
Individuals are subject to the shareholder income tax, with a marginal tax of 28% on dividends
and capital gains. Firms pay no taxes on income from shares and the effect on financial assets
indicates that firms are increasingly used as a vehicle for financial saving and investment. As is
seen in Figure 13, firms that were personally held in 2005 drastically increased their financial assets
in the aftermath of the reform, compared with firms that were owned by corporate shareholders.
Also, firms that maximized dividends in 2005, also increase their stock of financial assets relatively
more after 2006; see Figure 14.
The effect on durable assets is also very pronounced. We show particular subcategories of fixed
assets in Figure 15. Ownership of machinery and ships and planes has dramatically increased,
with the effect more pronounced among firms that are more sensitive to tax incentives.13 Our data
do not allow for direct investigation of the nature of this response but two possibilities are using
retained earnings to substitute from leasing to ownership and investing in assets that can be used
for personal consumption rather than business activity. Tax authorities are aware of such attempts
to conceal purchases of private durable good (horses, planes, luxury boats, houses etc.) as business
expenses and attempt to limit this type of tax evasion. For example, in June 2013 they issued a
press release stating14 that over the prior two years they had detected NOK90 million in tax evasion
among firm owners who use luxury boats at the cost of their firm. They also explicitly stated that
the 2006 introduction of dividend tax was a possible reason for this.
Both ships/planes category (which may include private boats and yachts as well as private
jets), and the machinery/equipment category (which has also been identified by tax authorities as
being used to conceal private durable goods), show patterns indicating their increased use by tax13

The magnitude of response of these variables reflect the fact that much of response takes place on the extensive
margin with many firms beginning to report non-zero values in later years.
14
Norwegian Tax Assessment Region Øst Press Release Number 11/2013, dated 6/27/2013; See also http://www.
ba.no/jobbmagasinet/article6732282.ece accessed on 10/24/2013.

14

sensitive firms. Furthermore, in Figure 16, we show a category of “other durables” that includes
assets that are likely to be used for personal consumption — notably company cars (also smaller
categories such as office equipments). This category of assets also underwent a striking evolution
in the aftermath of the reform, responding sharply right after its introduction and, again, showing
stronger effect for the tax sensitive groups despite their lower level of economic activity. Overall,
these results suggests that retained earnings are invested in both financial and real assets, but
heterogeneity across different types of firms indicates that such investments are not associated with
real economic activity.

7

Conclusions

In this paper, we documented the effect of a 2006 Norwegian dividend tax reform on the behavior
of closely-held firms. As expected, an anticipated dividend tax increase stimulated dividend payments prior to the reform and the response was aggressive: nearly half of the firms that could pay
dividends, did so to the maximum extent possible. This anticipation response has all the hallmarks
of a purely tax-motivated response because it is accompanied by re-injection of equity into firms so
that their net balance sheets is largely not affected.
In the aftermath of the reform, firms begin to retain earnings at a much faster pace than before.
In particular, the strength of association of profits and changes in retained earnings increases, while
the association of profits and dividends falls almost to zero. We focus on two groups that are likely
to be particularly affected by tax incentives: personally owned firms and the self-selected subset
of them that chose to maximize their dividend payouts prior to the reform. We find that both of
these groups exhibit lower level of economic activity relative to their complements (respectively,
corporately owned firms and privately owned ones that did not maximize dividends in 2004/5): their
revenue and costs are lower, and so are their profits. At the same time though, there is no evidence
that these firms get relatively smaller. To the contrary: the more tax-affected firms accumulate
more of retained earnings and end up with higher total assets. Hence, more distorting dividend tax
incentives appear to be simultaneously associated with larger firm and less real economic activity.
The asset increase is visible in both the financial and real asset category, in particular in the
categories including machines, equipment, boats, planes and company cars. The puzzle here is
why firms that appear to invest more in real and financial assets are not seeing a corresponding
effect on profits, revenue and operating costs. The possible explanation for these effects is that an
increase in retention does not serve the main economic purpose of the firm but is instead invested
within a firm in a way that benefits shareholders without associated profitability. The leading
examples of such activity are using a firm as a substitute for private saving and using firm’s real
assets for personal use. Hence, our results appear consistent with the dividend tax stimulating the
closely-held corporate tax sector to become more passive in terms of real economic activity and

15

more active as a tax shelter.

16

References
Allen, Franklin and Roni Michaely, “Payout policy,” in M. Harris G.M. Constantinides and
R.M. Stulz, eds., Corporate Finance, Vol. 1, Part A, Elsevier, 2003, chapter 7, pp. 337 – 429.
Alstadsæter, Annette, Kopczuk Wojciech, and Kjetil Telle, “Social networks and tax avoidance: Evidence from a well-defined Norwegian tax shelter,” 2013. University of Oslo, Columbia
University and Statistics Norway, mimeo.
Alstadsæter, Annette and Erik Fjærli, “Neutral taxation of shareholder income? Corporate
responses to an announced dividend tax,” International Tax and Public Finance, 2009, 16 (4),
571–604.
Auerbach, Alan and Kevin Hasset, “On the marginal source of investment funds,” Journal of
Public Economics, 2002, 87, 205–232.
Auerbach, Alan J., “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy,” in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin S. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3, Amsterdam; New York: Elsevier/North Holland, 2002.
Becker, Bo, Marcus Jacob, and Martin Jacob, “Payout Taxes and the Allocation of Investment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2013, 107, 1–24.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner, “Executive Financial Incentives
and Payout Policy: Firm Responses to the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut,” Journal of Finance, 2007,
62 (4), 1935–1965.
Chetty, Raj and Emmanuel Saez, “Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from
the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2005, 120 (3), 791–833.
and

, “Dividend and Corporate Taxation in an Agency Model of the Firm,” American

Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (3), 1–31.
Gordon, Roger H. and Joel Slemrod, “Are “Real” Responses to Taxes Simply Income Shifting
Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?,” in Joel Slemrod, ed., Does Atlas Shrug? The
Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, New York: Harvard University Press and Russell
Sage Foundation, 2000.
Jacob, Martin and Annette Alstadsæter, “Payout policies of privately held firms: Flexibility
and the role of income taxes,” FAccT Center Working Paper No., 2013, 12.
Korkeamäki, Timo, Eva Liljeblom, and Daniel Pasternack, “Tax Reform and Payout Policy:
Do Shareholder Clienteles of Payout Policy Adjust?,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 2010, 16,
572–587.
17

Lindhe, Tobias, Jan Södersten, and Ann Öberg, “Economic Effects of Taxing Different
Organizational Forms under the Nordic Dual Income Tax,” International Tax and Public Finance,
2004, 11 (4), 469–485.
Lintner, J., “Tax Reform and Payout Policy: Do Shareholder Clienteles of Payout Policy Adjust?,”
American Economic Review, 1956, 46, 97–113.
Michaely, Roni and Michael R. Roberts, “Corporate Dividend Policies: Lessons from Private
Firms,” Review of Financial Studies, 2012, 25, 711–746.
Romanov, Dmitri, “Corporation as a Tax Shelter: Evidence from Recent Israeli Tax Changes,”
Journal of Public Economics, November 2006, 90 (10-11), 1939–54.
Sørensen, Peter, “Neutral Taxation of Shareholder Income,” International Tax and Public Finance, 2005, 12 (6), 777–801.
Thoresen, Thor O. and Annette Alstadsæter, “Shifts in organizational form under a dual
income tax system,” FinanzArchiv: Public Finance Analysis, 2010, 66 (4), 384–418.
Yagan, Danny, “Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003 Dividend
Tax Cut,” 2013. Mimeo.

18

19

49.3
55.3
55.3
55.3
55.3
55.3
51.3
47.8
47.8
47.8
47.8
47.8
47.8
47.8

1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28

Corporate

Until 2006, the capital gains attributed to retained earnings were tax exempt under the so-called RISK-model, and the reminding capital gains were

tax, the normal return to shares are tax exempt, while the remainder is taxed at 28%.

taxed at 28%. On March 26, 2004, the Shareholder income tax was announced to be introduced from January 1, 2006. Under the Shareholder income

d

Notes:
a
In addition, social security contributions of 14.1% apply to wage payments on corporate level.
b
11% tax on dividends to personal shareholders (with NOK 10,000 as tax free deduction in taxable dividends per shareholder) was unexpectedly
introduced September 5, 2001, and removed December 31, 2002. On March 26, 2004, the Shareholder income tax was announced to be introduced from
January 1, 2006. Under the Shareholder income tax, the normal return to shares are tax exempt, and the remainder is taxed at 28%. Until 2006,
dividends to shareholders active in the daily operation of the firm were taxed according to the so-called SPLIT-model; an imputed return to capital was
taxed as dividend income, while the remainder was taxed as wage income at shareholder level.
c
Unexpected removal of capital gains tax for corporations as shareholders on March 26, 2004. Announced introduction of 28% tax on 3% of all capital
gains and dividends received by corporations, from October 7, 2008, effectively a 0.8% tax. As of 2012, this tax was again removed on capital gains
received by corporations.

Wagea

Year

Table 1: Top marginal tax rates by type of income and recipient
Dividends, by type of recipient Capital gains, by type of recipient
income
Individualsb
Corporationsc
Individualsd
Corporationsc
0
0
28
28
0
0
28
28
11
0
28
28
0
0
28
28
0
0
28
28
0
0
28
0
0
0
28
0
28
0
28
0
28
0
28
0
28
0
28
0
28
0.8
28
0.8
28
0.8
28
0.8
28
0.8
28
0.8
28
0.8
28
0

Table 2: Summary statistics
Fraction with value
Percentile
Median
equal to or below zero 5th
95th
Employees
2
0.36
0
28
Operating income
2 536
0.09
0
49 091
Profits
183
0.23
-304 4 865
Number of owners
2
1
7
Industry groups (EU’s NACE standard)
Agriculture, hunting, forestry; fishing; mining and quarrying
Manufacturing; electricity, gas and water supply
Construction
Wholesale and retail trade, repairs
Hotels and restaurants; transport, storage and communication
Financial intermediation
Real estate, renting and business activities
Other

Mean

N

8.8
20 632
2 452
3.5

44
44
44
44

716
905
905
898

0.03
0.10
0.10
0.24
0.08
0.00
0.40
0.06

44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44

880
880
880
880
880
880
880
880

Note: All variables are measured in 2004. Monetary variables are in thousands of NOK. The sample comprises the
44,905 firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

Table 3: Sensitivity of a change in retained earnings and dividends to profits

Profits
Profits#year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
N
R2

∆ earned equity
0.41
8.92

Dividends
0.39 33.77

0.21
3.68
0.43
7.36
0.00
0.03
.
.
0.03
0.43
-0.08
-1.21
0.57
11.09
0.60
11.07
0.25
4.26
0.17
2.88
0.16
2.85
0.20
3.31
440 496
0.30

-0.15 -11.86
-0.24 -21.11
-0.09
-7.03
.
.
-0.09
-6.73
0.02
1.51
-0.36 -31.18
-0.30 -25.58
-0.26 -20.85
-0.32 -27.29
-0.31 -26.47
-0.29 -24.51
440 496
0.26

Note: Point estimate (followed by t-statistic) from OLS regressions run on the balanced panel of firms that existed
in all years (1999-2011) and were personally owned in 2005. Year dummies (2003 omitted) included in both models
but estimates not reported. After-tax profits and proposed dividends. Standard errors clustered on firm level.

20

.1

200

.2

400

NOK (millions)
600
800

.3
.4
.5
Fraction paying dividends

1000

.6

Figure 1: Trends in dividend payments

2004

2006
Total dividends

2008

2010

2012

Extensive margin (right axis)

Note: Dividend payments for firms existing in all years 1999-2011; total amount of dividends (left axis) and fraction
of firms paying dividends (right axis).

21

5000

10000 15000 20000 25000 30000

Figure 2: Restructuring

2004

2006

2008

2010

Personal owner(s) only
Combination

Corporate owner(s) only

Note: Ownership structure in each year for firms existing in all years 1999-2011.

22

2012

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

Figure 3: Firms paying dividends by initial ownership status

2004

2006

2008

2010

(Some) personal owner(s)

2012

Corporate owner(s)

Note: Fraction of firms that paid dividends in each year, by ownership status in 2005. The sample comprises firms
that existed in all years (1999-2011).

23

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Figure 4: Firms paying dividends by change in ownership status

2004

2006

2008

2010

Always personal owner(s)
Personal to Corporate

2012

Always corporate owner(s)
Corporate to Personal

Note: Fraction of firms that paid dividends in each year, by change in ownership structure 2005-2011. The sample
comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

24

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Figure 5: Propensity to pay dividends by number of owners in 2005

2004

2006

2008

2010

1 owner
9+ owners

2012

5 owners

Note: Fraction of personally owned firms in 2005 that paid dividends in a given year, by number of owners in 2005.
The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

25

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Figure 6: Ability to pay dividends and dividend maximization

2000

2005
Dividend maximizers
Dividend non−maximizers

2010
No dividends allowed

Note: Fraction of firms that maximize dividends in each year. Dividend maximization defined by equity to asset
ratio close to 0.1 or dividends greater than 95% of earned equity (see text for details). The sample comprises firms
that existed in all years (1999-2011) and were personally owned in 2005.

0

−500

100

0

500

NOK (millions)
200
300

1000

400

500

1500

Figure 7: Changes in external and total equity over time

2000

2005
External equity (right axis) 26

2010
Total equity

Note: The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

.04

.06

.08

.1

.12

Figure 8: Fraction of firms increasing external equity

2000

2005

2010

Note: Fraction of firms increasing external equity by more than NOK 50,000 relative to previous year. The sample
comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

0

.005

.01

Figure 9: Firms with change in external equity similar to dividend payment

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

27
Note: Fraction of firms with a change in external equity of similar magnitude as the dividend payment (i.e. change in
external equity between 0.95 and 1.05 of dividend). The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

2.5

2

2000
Personal owners

2005

Earned equity

Corporate owners

2010

2000

Dividend maximizers

2005

Earned equity

2010
Dividend non−maximizers

2000

2000

Dividend maximizers

2005

Total debt

Personal owners

2005

Note: Means of variables normalized to 1 in 2004. The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

1

Total debt

Figure 10: Accumulated retained earnings and debt by ownership status

1

1.5

.5

2

2.5

.5

1.5

1.4
1.2
1
.8
.6
1.5
1
.5

28
2010
Dividend non−maximizers

Corporate owners

2010

1.5

1

.5

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

2000

2000

Personal owners

2005

Revenue

Personal owners

2005

Profits

Corporate owners

Corporate owners

2010

2010

2000

2000

Corporate owners

Personal owners

2005
Corporate owners

Operating costs

Personal owners

2005

Wages

Figure 11: Real economic outcomes by ownership status in 2005

Note: Means of variables normalized to 1 in 2004. The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

.8

1.6
1.4
1.2
1
.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
.8

29
2010

2010

1.5

1

.5

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

2000

2000

Dividend maximizers

2005

Revenue

Dividend maximizers

2005

Profits

Dividend non−maximizers

2010

Dividend non−maximizers

2010

2000

2000

Dividend maximizers

2005

2010

Dividend non−maximizers

2010

Dividend non−maximizers

Operating costs

Dividend maximizers

2005

Wages of firms

Figure 12: Real economic outcomes by dividend maximization status in 2004/5

Note: Means of variables normalized to 1 in 2004. The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

.8

1.6
1.4
1.2
1
.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
.8

30

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

.8

2000

2000

Personal owners

2005

Current assets

Personal owners

2005

Total assets

Corporate owners

Corporate owners

2010

2010

2000

2000

Personal owners

2005

Durable assets

Personal owners

2005

Corporate owners

Corporate owners

Financial assets

Figure 13: Assets by ownership status in 2005

Note: Means of variables normalized to 1 in 2004. The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

.6

2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
1.4
1.2
1
.8

31
2010

2010

2

1.5

1

.5

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

.8

2000

2000

Dividend maximizers

2005

2010

Dividend non−maximizers

2010

Dividend non−maximizers

Current assets

Dividend maximizers

2005

Total assets

2000

2000

Dividend maximizers

2005

2010

Dividend non−maximizers

2010

Dividend non−maximizers

Durable assets

Dividend maximizers

2005

Financial assets

Figure 14: Assets by dividend maximization status in 2004/5

Note: Means of variables normalized to 1 in 2004. The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

.6

2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
1.4
1.2
1
.8

32

4

3

2

1

4

3

2

2000

2000

Dividend maximizers

2005

Machinery

Personal owners

2005

Machinery

2010
Dividend non−maximizers

Corporate owners

2010

2000

2000

Corporate owners

Dividend maximizers

2005

2010

2010

Dividend non−maximizers

Ships and planes

Personal owners

2005

Ships and planes

Figure 15: Equipment and machinery by ownership and dividend maximization status in 2004/5

Note: Means of variables normalized to 1 in 2004. The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

1

8
6
4
2
0
8
6
4
2
0

33

Figure 16: Other durables (including company cars) by ownership and dividend maximization
status in 2004/5

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Other durables

2000

2005

2010

Personal owners

Corporate owners

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Other durables

2000

2005

2010

Dividend maximizers

Dividend non−maximizers

Note: Means of variables normalized to 1 in 2004. The sample comprises firms that existed in all years (1999-2011).

34

