                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         EXPERIMENTATION IN FEDERAL SYSTEMS

                                           Steven Callander
                                             Bård Harstad

                                        Working Paper 19601
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19601


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2013




We have benefitted from the audiences at the 2012 Nemmers Conference in Honor of Elhanan Helpmann,
the 2012 NYU-LSE conference on political economy, the 2012 Symposium on Collective Decisions
at the University of Hamburg, University of Namur, Paris School of Economics, Yale University,
APSA, MWPSA, Stanford GSB, the Australasian Econometric Society Meetings, the Priorat Workshop
in Theoretical Political Economy, and in particular our discussants David Austen-Smith, Hande Mutlu-Eren,
and Daniel Sturm and research assistant Anders Hovdenes. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Steven Callander and Bård Harstad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Experimentation in Federal Systems
Steven Callander and Bård Harstad
NBER Working Paper No. 19601
October 2013
JEL No. D78,H77

                                             ABSTRACT

We present a model where heterogeneous districts choose both whether to experiment and the policies
to experiment with. Since districts learn from each other, the first-best requires that policy experiments
converge so that innovations are useful also for neighbors. However, the equilibrium implies the reverse
– policy divergence – since each district uses its policy choice to discourage free-riding. We then study
a clumsy central government that harmonizes final policy choices. This progressive concentration
of power induces a policy tournament that can increase the incentive to experiment and encourage
policy convergence. We derive the best political regime as well as the optimal levels of heterogeneity,
transparency, prizes, and intellectual property rights.


Steven Callander
Stanford University
sjc@gsb.stanford.edu

Bård Harstad
Department of Economics
University of Oslo
P.O. Box 1095
Blindern 0317
Oslo, Norway
and NBER
bardh@econ.uio.no
1         Introduction
Just as people learn from each other, so do governments. Whilst people learn from each
other about restaurants and career choices, governments learn from each other about
good policies. Governments observe their neighbors, as well as states and countries
further a…eld, and imitate their policy successes while avoiding their policy failures.
        The spread of policies in this way –known as policy di¤usion –has most famously
been documented as a strength of federal systems. Yet information need not be con-
strained by political borders, and policies can di¤use across countries as well, from
friends to even sworn enemies.1 In recent times, researchers have begun to document
not just the existence of these ‡ows, but the rate, extent, and channels via which policy
information passes. Within the U.S. federal system, Volden (2006) shows that the chan-
nel that policy successes spread is across states that are similar. This pattern also is
prominent across national borders. Buera, Monge-Naranjo, and Primiceri (2011) show
how learning from similar countries accounts for a majority of the movement toward
market policies and economic growth throughout the late twentieth century.
        Despite this progress, much remains unknown about policy experimentation. That
policy successes exist at all con…rms that free-riding –the classic concern of the litera-
ture –doesn’t eliminate experimentation altogether. Yet this doesn’t speak to whether
the e¢ cient amount of experimentation is undertaken. More subtlely, the positive …nd-
ing that similar states can learn from each other hides a deeper pathology of policy
experimentation. If policies spread only across similar states, then they do not spread
to dissimilar states and, consequently, the informational bene…ts of policy experimenta-
tion are bounded more tightly than previously thought. In fact, that di¤erent policies
may bene…t states unequally raises the novel question of whether the policy experiments
undertaken are the right type of experiments. That is to say, are the policy experiments
that are undertaken those that cast o¤ the most useful information to the broadest array
of states? Until now, the theoretical literature on policy experimentation has focused
exclusively on the quantity of policy experimentation, ignoring the question of which
policies are actually experimented with. In a world of similar and dissimilar states
– as is typically assumed in models of political economy – this question is of central
importance.
        The objective of this paper is to shed light on exactly this question. We present a
simple model of policy experimentation with political units that we refer to as districts,
    1
    The history of warfare, for one, is replete with examples of policies, strategies, and technologies
imitated by enemies.


                                                  2
although they can equivalently be interpreted as states, nations, etc. A key novelty of
the model of experimentation is that the districts choose both whether to experiment
with policy – the quantity – and the policy with which to experiment with, what we
refer to as the type. The inclusion of policy choice is important as the districts do not
share the same policy preferences –they may be similar or dissimilar –and, therefore,
the usefulness of a particular policy experiment varies across the districts. Our primary
interest is in how the classic question of free-riding and the quantity of experimentation
interacts with the choice of policy with which to experiment. Formally, we model a
policy outcome as having two components: a spatial preference component to capture
di¤erences across districts, and a quality, public good component, that captures the
transferability of successful policy innovation.
   We present three sets of results. We begin with decentralized systems in which two
districts are free to make their own policy choices, whether due to a weak central gov-
ernment or the non-existence of any formal federation. For this case, we …nd …rst that
preference heterogeneity delivers some positive news: The incentive to free ride is miti-
gated by heterogeneity, declining the more di¤erent are the districts. This is intuitive.
The less similar a neighboring district is to another, the less useful is information re-
vealed by each other’s experiments and the more inclined is each to engage in its own
experiments.
   Within this positive result, however, lurks a deeper ine¢ ciency. The districts, freed to
choose the policy with which to experiment, are also freed to take the free-riding problem
into their own hands. Whereas e¢ ciency calls for the districts to experiment with policies
more favorable to their neighbors, we …nd that in equilibrium the districts deliberately
choose policies that are less attractive to each other. We show that they do this even to
the degree that they sacri…ce their own immediate welfare by experimenting with policies
other their own ideal policies. Speci…cally, the equilibrium policy choices diverge and are
Pareto ine¢ cient. The divergence increases as heterogeneity declines as the incentive
to free-ride would otherwise increase. This leads to the surprising conclusion that it
is not similar districts that bene…t each other the most with informational spillovers,
but rather that the most e¢ cient decentralized federal systems are those with some
heterogeneity across the districts.
   The ine¢ ciency of policy experimentation with decentralized authority raises the
question of whether a better outcome can be achieved. Our second set of results ad-
dresses the question of design. We introduce a central authority into the federal system
and follow the literature in supposing that the central authority harmonizes the dis-


                                             3
tricts onto one speci…c choice. We depart from the literature, however, in conceiving
of the centralization of authority as a dynamic process. We show that ex post policy
harmonization is unambiguously ine¢ cient as a district may be forced to implement the
less preferred policy of a neighbor. Ex ante, on the other hand, policy harmonization
can provide a positive bene…t by providing the incentives for more e¢ cient policy ex-
periments during the earlier, decentralized phase. This bene…t emerges as the looming
shadow of future harmonization induces the districts to experiment to ensure that it is
their policy – their successful experiment – that is harmonized upon rather than the
policy of the other district. The districts compete, therefore, in what might be thought
of as a policy tournament, so that their policy can win the prize of adoption by the cen-
tral authority. This implies that the incentive to experiment may increase and policies
might converge.
   The view of federalism we present is inherently dynamic and, to the best of our
knowledge, novel in the academic literature. We sometimes refer to it as progressive
federalism. Nevertheless, the dynamic concentration of power is evident empirically.
The largest –and most successful –federal systems, namely the United States and the
European Union, have both followed this dynamic path. Indeed, in a landmark and
exhaustive examination of all federal systems in place since U.S. independence, Riker
(1964) concludes that those that exhibit increased centralization of authority outperform
those that moved in the opposite direction. Moreover, our model also predicts that this
centralization will proceed in lock-step with experimentation as the policies in e¤ect
di¤use from the districts up to the central authority. This comovement is documented
by Rabe (2004, 2006) for the case of the United States. Our contribution is to show
that this dynamic is more than merely a symptom of changing institutional preferences,
but in fact is a key element of the of the federal system as an incentive mechanism.
   With a richer conception of federalism in place, our …nal set of results explores how
incentives to experiment interact with several prominent debates in political economy
– both within and outside the federalism literature – as well as issues of robustness.
In turn, we examine how the inclusion of explicit coordination bene…ts (a frequent
assumption in the literature) a¤ects experimentation, we study the role of transparency
and correlation as experimental successes are easier or more di¢ cult to imitate and
when the lessons are (partially) transferable to other policies and domains, to the use
of prizes and transfers to facilitate e¢ cient experimentation, and …nally the impact of
larger federal unions, with many districts. The objective of these exercises is to further
illuminate how incentives to experiment with policy are driven by political institutions,


                                            4
and also to show how these various features of the political landscape have broader
impacts than noted until now.
       The idea that a federalist system facilitates policy experimentation has a long history.
It has been prominent in academic and policy circles at least since the time of Justice
Louis Brandeis, who uttered the famous phrase:

             “It is one of the happy incidents of the federal system that a single coura-
         geous state may, if its citizens choose, serve as a laboratory; and try novel
         social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the country.”
         Justice Brandeis, 1932.

       The Justice presents an optimistic perspective on federalism. Yet he fails to grasp
(or at least to mention) the problem of free-riding, let alone how in a diverse country
federalism induces the right experiments to be undertaken. Brandeis may indeed be
correct that a policy experiment in a single state is without risk to the rest of the
country, but he ignores the possibility that the experiment may also be without bene…t.
       More subtle –but of no less importance –the Justice fails to explain why a federal
system is required at all. If information is unconstrained by physical borders, why must
the states formally lash themselves together in a federal union to bene…t from the won-
ders of the policy laboratory? A contribution of our model is to provide an explanation
to this question. We show why an ex ante commitment to federalism (speci…cally, to a
progressive federal system) may be bene…cial. Contra Brandeis, however, this commit-
ment is more akin to entering a tournament –albeit a policy tournament –than it is to
joining a laboratory.
       The formal study of federalism has produce a large and broad literature that ex-
tends well beyond the issue of experimentation. In a prominent, recent contribution, de
Figueiredo and Weingast (2005) identify twin dilemmas of federalism as free-riding and
the inexorable concentration of power at the center. Both of these forces are central
to our model. However, rather than representing threats to the stability and existence
of federal systems, with each exacerbating the other, we show how the progressive con-
centration of power in a federal system actually works to solve the free-riding problem.
Thus, progressive federalism is a feature and not a bug of the federalism project.2
   2
    The relevance of free-riding extends well beyond the issue of experimentation and has given rise to
a broader literature that explores how federalist institutions work to align incentives between states and
the national interests (for example, Persson and Tabellini 1996; Cremer and Palfrey 1999, 2000). These
papers o¤er very di¤erent institutional solutions to ours and do not touch upon policy experimentation,
and we do not consider them in detail here.


                                                    5
       The formal analysis of policy experimentation in federal systems was pioneered by
Rose-Ackerman (1980) who describes the free-riding problem and demonstrates how it
dampens the incentives of o¢ ce-seeking politicians to experiment with policy. Cai and
Treisman (2009) explicitly compare this outcome to that possible under a fully central-
ized government as the candidates seeking national o¢ ce attempt to construct majority
winning coalitions. Their focus is on how the construction of winning majorities can
undermine e¢ ciency, a point we do not address here. Closer to our paper is the model of
Strumpf (2002). He compares fully decentralized and fully centralized outcomes, mod-
eling the centralized system as one in which the policymaker is compelled to harmonize
policies across all districts. Strumpf allows for heterogeneity in district preferences, but
in restricting each state to the classic two-armed bandit set-up (with one safe and one
risky arm) he abstracts from the question of policy choice that is central to our results.
Similarly, Volden, Ting, and Carpenter (2008) allow for preference heterogeneity in the
sense we presume here, although they too restrict policy to a binary choice and preclude
the ine¢ ciencies in policy choice that are our interest here. Instead, they use the model
to make the important point that policy di¤usion is often di¢ cult to distinguish from
private policy learning.3
       Our model also connects with the large verbal literature on federalism. Most no-
table is recent work by Bednar (2011) in which she asks how a federalist system can
‘nudge’states toward productive experimentation. She considers a variety of practical
inducements, from shifting public attention to o¤ering party-based rewards, that work
by aligning states’interests with those of the nation. Bednar explicitly focuses on these
‘nudges’ as they work outside the formal constitutional structure. Our results show
how the constitutional structure can itself align incentives in this way. Interestingly,
in a separate survey of the federalism literature, Bednar (2011b, p. 282) argues that
“perhaps the most revolutionary research shift moving forward is to develop a theory
of the dynamics of federalism’s boundaries”, a possibility consistent with the dynamic
conception of authority that we describe here.
       The most prominent research stream on federalism is, without doubt, that originating
from Tiebout’s (1956) famous model of sorting and policy competition. Our conception
of policy competition is very di¤erent from that of Tiebout; speci…cally, we do not allow
for inter-district movement of people. Nevertheless, we …nd that an intriguing connection
appears between our work and that of Tiebout. Central to our model is the presence
   3
    An interesting computational approach is proposed by Kollman, Miller, and Page (2000). They
show that decentralized, parallel, search outperforms centralized search on problems of moderate com-
plexity.


                                                 6
of heterogeneity across districts, the emergence of which is the central prediction of
Tiebout’s model. We return to this connection –and to the question of whether Tiebout-
style sorting can also improve policy experimentation –in the discussion section.
    The question of e¢ cient experimentation has long been a question of more general
interest in economics, captured famously by models of multi-armed bandits. This liter-
ature has been extended to environments with two experimenters by Bolton and Harris
(1999) who characterize how free riding undermines the e¢ ciency of equilibrium. Keller
et al. (2005) permit more than two agents. Our model is a considerable simpli…cation
of these general formulations, yet our results suggest that preference heterogeneity may
carry more general force in mitigating the free riding problem when multiple agents
coexist. Although simple, our model extends the experimentation literature by allowing
for heterogeneity of preferences and policy choice, moving beyond the previous focus on
binary and predetermined actions. We also take up the question of institutional design
and experimentation that has not previously been considered.
    The next section describes the basic model and describes the …rst-best outcome as a
benchmark. Thereafter, Section 3 derives the equilibrium under decentralization and the
optimal level of heterogeneity. Section 4 analyzes the outcome under centralization, and
Section 5 compares the two regimes. Section 6 generalizes the basic model by allowing
for multiple districts, multiple periods, coordination bene…ts, transfers and policies that
may be more or less transparent. Section 7 is further discussing the results and Section 8
concludes,. The Appendix contains all proofs as well as more detailed lemmas describing
the equilibria.


2     Model and Benchmarks
2.1    The Model
Our basic model consists of two agents and three stages. Each agent could be thought
of as a political unit, a state in a federal system or one of two independent countries.
We refer to them as districts.
    In order to distinguish between the quantity and the type of experimentation, we
propose the following timing. First, each district i 2 fA; Bg simultaneously decides the
type, or location, of its initial policy or experiment. This location is simply a point on
the real line, xi 2 R.
    Second, each district decides on the binary quantity of experimentation. That is, a


                                            7
district can play it safe or experiment with the policy. With probability p 2 (0; 1), an
experiment succeeds and raises the value of the policy by 1. The cost of the experiment
is k > 0. Parameter k can represent the bene…t of the safe option relative to the
expected bene…t of the risky option, but it can also simply measure the investment cost
of developing and enhancing the value of a policy. For simplicity, we assume that the
probability of success is independent of both the policy location and the other districts’
experimental outcome.
        Third, after the districts have observed the outcomes of both experiments, each
district i decides on its …nal policy location, yi , to implement. We assume that a district
must implement one of the two policies developed at the …rst stage, so yi 2 fxA ; xB g.
This is natural if adopting a completely new policy requires su¢ ciently high additional
costs (these costs can then be abstracted from here).4
        The districts may have di¤erent ideal points regarding the type of policy. For ex-
ample, districts may disagree regarding how redistributive or pro-market a new health
reform ought to be. Mathematically, each ideal point ti is a point on the real line and
h        0 measures the heterogeneity or the distance between the ideal points, h = tB                tA .
Without loss of generality, we let tA < tB and place the origin half-way between the
ideal points. This implies tA =         h=2      0 and tB = h=2           0. It is useful to de…ne ai as
the extent to which district i accommodates the neighbor by experimenting on a policy
that is closer to the center than i’s ideal point:

                                aA     xA       tA and aB        tB   xB .

        Putting the pieces together, the payo¤ to district i 2 fA; Bg is:

                                     ui = Iyi     c (yi   ti )    Ji k,

where the index-function Iyi 2 f0; 1g equals 1 if the policy, chosen by i at stage three,
has proven successful. The index function Ji 2 f0; 1g equals 1 if i decided to experiment
at the second stage. To simplify, we let the preference over location be represented by a
disutility-function that is symmetric around the ideal point: c (yi                ti ) = c (ti   yi ). We
                                                                             0
assume c ( ) to be convex, U-shaped, and to satisfy c (0) = c (0) = 0.
    4
    We can endogenize this assumption if selecting a new policy requires a set-up cost larger than
min fc (ai ) ; c (h a i )g, referring to notation (as well as the equilibrium) discussed below.




                                                    8
2.2       The First-Best
To understand the model, consider …rst the case of autarky with only one district. At
the third stage, district i must necessarily stick to the location picked at the …rst stage,
so yi = xi . Anticipating this, i always prefers to choose the policy at its own ideal point
to minimize the distance cost; thus, yi = xi = ti . At the second stage, the district …nds
it optimal to experiment (Ji = 1) if the cost k is smaller than the expected bene…t from
the experiment:
                                                p > k,

which is henceforth assumed to hold. The equilibrium is thus (xi ; Ji ; yi ) = (ti ; 1; ti ) and
this implements the …rst-best outcome when there is only one district.
       With two districts the e¢ cient outcome is not so straightforward. Each experiment
is a public good that potentially provides a positive externality to the other district.
This externality is stochastic and bene…cial when one district’s experiment succeeds
and the other fails (or is not attempted). In this case, the latter district with the failed
experiment may abandon its own policy and adopt the successful policy of the other
district. This policy imitation will involve a distance cost for the switching district and,
consequently, these switching costs must be accounted for in determining the …rst best.
For moderate levels of district heterogeneity, the set of socially optimal experiments
actively reduces these costs by requiring positive policy accommodation or convergence.
       The following proposition presumes that 2p (1          p) > k, so it is optimal that both
                                                      5
experiment even when locations are identical.

Proposition 1 The …rst-best outcome is characterized as follows. There exists hb 2
(0; 1) such that:
(i) For h 2 0; hb , both districts experiment, with the same degree of accommodation,
a 2 [0; h=2), satisfying:

                                 c0 (a)
                                             = p (1       p) , i 2 fA,Bg :                        (1)
                           c0 (h a) + c0 (a)


Consequently, @a=@h 2 (0; 1) and a ! 0 when h ! 0. The districts implement the other
district’s policy only if their own policy fails and the other succeeds.
(ii) For h      hb , both districts locate and experiment at their ideal points. They imple-
   5
   If 2p (1    p) < k, the …rst-best requires that only one district experiments when h is su¢ ciently
small.


                                                  9
    Figure 1: In the …rst-best, policy positions converge relative to the ideal points

ment their own policy regardless of experimental outcomes.

   In case (i) each experimenting district accommodates the other, thereby imposing
a cost on itself. Whenever it implements its own policy in the …nal stage, it must pay
a distance cost that could have been avoided. This behavior is nevertheless socially
optimal as, by the concavity of utility over policy type, the accommodation saves the
other district more in distance cost should it wish to imitate the successful district, such
that the net e¤ect is positive.
   The proposition also exposes the limits of federalism. For su¢ ciently heterogeneous
districts the distance costs overwhelm the externalities from successful experimentation
and the bene…ts of federalism become strained. In this case, the e¢ cient outcome is the
same as for an autarky: the districts experiment on their own and learn nothing (useful)
from the experiments of others. This result aligns with the conventional wisdom that
federalist systems are best composed of homogeneous districts. It is not di¢ cult to
deduce from Proposition 1 that, indeed, social welfare is maximized when heterogeneity
disappears and the districts are identical (h = 0).
   The …rst-best policy choice choices as a function of heterogeneity are depicted in
Figure 1: The horizontal axis is here measuring ideal points as well as policy positions.
Since the vertical axis measures heterogeneity, the two ideal points (on the horizontal
axis) as a function of h (on the vertical axis) are given by the two straight lines tA
and tB . For every h    hb , policy-positions are given by the green/bold lines which are
somewhat closer to the center than the lines representing the ideal points.
   The logic underlying Proposition 1 is straightforward. Yet as simple as the result
is, the convergence we identify is important. It implies that to evaluate federalism

                                            10
in practice, analysis cannot be limited to only the amount of policy experimentation
observed, but, more subtlely, must also weigh the actual policies that are experimented
with. Proposition 1 suggests that much of the e¢ ciency gain from federalism may be
buried within the convergence of actual policy choices. It is this novel implication of
federalism that we expand and explore in the following sections.
    Before moving on, it is worth understanding the trade-o¤s that drive the …rst-best
as it is the same trade-o¤s that drive equilibrium behavior. Of all the combinations
of experimental outcomes, the most important is when the outcomes are mismatched.
When both districts succeed –of fail –there is no reason for one to imitate the other.
Only in the event where one succeeds and the other fails (or doesn’t experiment) –when
outcomes are mismatched –does the externality deliver value. It is for this reason that
the quantity p (1        p) appears in the …rst-order-condition of case (i) in the proposition.
It is also for this reason that convergence of experimental policies is not complete. The
externality is only probabilistic, whereas the distance cost is paid in all events, thus the
e¢ ciency of convergence is bounded.
    The …rst-best also permits comparative statics. As the degree of heterogeneity in-
creases, the distance costs grow and, to minimize these e¤ects, the optimal experiments
are even more convergent or accommodating (until h = hb is reached). Nevertheless,
as heterogeneity increases the degree of accommodation increases at a slower rate. As
a result, for increasing heterogeneity, the districts are experimenting at policies further
from their own ideal policies but also further from each other.
    Example Q: To bring the intuition for Proposition 1 into sharper focus, the following
corollary specializes utility to the quadratic functional form:

                                            c (a) = qa2 =2.

In this case, (1) can be rewritten as:

                                           a = p (1    p) h.

    This special case permits precise comparative statics for relative policy choices. For
                                                                                       1          dai
case (ii), the rate of accommodation can be bounded more tightly at                    4
                                                                                         ,   as   dh
                                                                                                        =
                   1
p (1     p) 2 0;   4
                       . Further, as the distance between the policies is given by: xB            xA =
                       d(xB xA )                       1
h      2a, we have:       dh
                                   =1   2p (1   p) 2   2
                                                         ;1   , so the degree of policy polarization
is growing at least half as fast as preference heterogeneity in the …rst-best outcome.



                                                  11
3     Decentralization
We now turn to equilibrium policy choices when authority is completely decentralized to
the districts. The districts will not internalize the informational externality from their
own experiment. Nevertheless, this does not imply that the externality is irrelevant to
their choices. We proceed by backward induction.
    At stage three, the choice facing districts is quite trivial. With sunk investment
costs and policies …xed, each districts i 2 fA,Bg picks the …nal policy that maximizes
its utility:
                                yi = arg      max          Ixj        c (xj   ti ) :                    (2)
                                           xj 2fxA ;xB g

Each district will stick to its own policy if it succeeds whenever jai j < jh                    aj j, which
always will hold in equilibrium. The only choice to be made, e¤ectively, is when a
district’s own experiment fails and the other district succeeds. In this situation, i prefers
to switch policy if and only if:

                                      c (h       aj )      c (ai )       1:

Note that this set of choices is, conditional on earlier choices, e¢ cient. As district
j is indi¤erent to whether district i imitates it or not (an assumption which is later
relaxed), the choice of district i is the same that would be made by a social planner.
This equivalence does not extend to earlier stages, as we will now explain.


3.1     The Quantity of Experimentation
At stage two, the decision to experiment depends on whether the other district is ex-
perimenting as well as the policy positions. The "incentive compatibility condition" to
ensure a district experiments (even when the other does) is given by the following.

Proposition 2 Taking locations as given, both districts experiment with their policies
if and only if:

                                             k     p (1          p)
                  c (h   aj )    c (ai )                              8i; j 2 fA; Bg ; i 6= j:          (3)
                                                    p2

    Not surprisingly, a district is willing to experiment as long as the distance to the
other district’s experiment is not too attractive. To understand the expression, it is



                                                        12
helpful to rewrite it as:

                            [c (h   aj )   c (ai )] p2 + p (1      p)   k.                  (4)

The right-hand-side is the cost of experimentation and the left-hand-side the marginal
bene…t. The marginal bene…t of experimenting accrues only when the experiment is a
success (as a failure leads to a third stage identical to not having experimented) and
the size of the bene…t depends on whether the other district’s experiment is a success or
a failure. If the other district’s experiment is a success, a success by district i changes
the policy it implements (from j’s to its own) but doesn’t change the quality received.
This event saves the distance cost and occurs with probability p2 , corresponding to the
…rst term on the left-hand-side. On the other hand, if the other district’s experiment is
a failure, then district i does not change the policy it implements at stage 3 (its own)
but it does receive a quality boost of one. This event occurs with probability p (1          p)
and corresponds to the second term on the left-hand-side.
   If the policies fully converged (xA = xB ), the incentive compatibility condition re-
duces to p (1   p)    k     0. To render the free-riding problem meaningful, we hereafter
assume that this condition fails and that k            p (1     p) > 0. This implies that there
exists an unique hd > 0 that satis…es:

                                               k     p (1     p)
                                     c (hd )                                                (5)
                                                      p2

To interpret this value, hd is the heterogeneity such that if the districts located at their
ideal policies, they would both be indi¤erent between experimenting and not (conditional
on the other district experimenting). Note that the larger is the cost of experimenting,
k, the larger is the necessary heterogeneity to make sure both districts experiment when
located at ideal points. We use the subscript d here and subsequently to denote the
decentralized choice.


3.2    The Type of Experimentation
We are now ready to analyze the choice of policy positions. It is immediately clear that,
with self-interested districts, the incentive to converge that characterizes the …rst-best is
entirely absent here. Policy convergence delivers an informational externality that not
only bene…ts the other district at the expense of the convergent district, but the very
convergence itself may undermine the willingness of the other district to experiment,


                                                13
further harming the convergent district.
   In fact, this desire to bene…t from the experiment of the other district may induce the
districts to deviate from their own ideal policies. However, in contrast to the …rst-best,
the districts deviate to the outside rather than the inside toward each other.

Proposition 3 There exists a hd > 0 such that for each h                         hd , there is a unique
equilibrium in which both districts experiment. The equilibrium is symmetric and char-
acterized by ai = aj = a, such that:
(i) For h 2 [hd ; hd ), policies diverge:

                               xA < tA < tB < xB , a < 0;                                          (6)

and the level of divergence satis…es

                                                k       p (1   p)
                       c (h   a)    c (a) =                         , 8i 2 fA; Bg .                (7)
                                                         p2

(ii) For h    hd , the districts always experiment at ideal points (a = 0).
(iii) For h < hd , only one district experiments. The experimental location is at the
experimenter’s ideal point.

   In Example Q, when c (a) = qa2 =2, we can rewrite (7) as:

                                            h       k     p (1 p)
                                    a=                            :
                                            2             qhp2

The proof and the de…nition of hd are in the Appendix.
   In general, the decentralized equilibrium is very di¤erent from the …rst-best. Only for
extreme heterogeneity do the requirements coincide. For all other cases, the …rst-best
demands policy convergence whereas in equilibrium they either remain at their ideal
policies or they diverge. The equilibrium policy positions as a function of heterogeneity
are depicted in Figure 2 (with the same axes as Figure 1). For large h, experiments’
locations, given by the green/bold lines, are at ideal points. For smaller heterogene-
ity, locations diverge, and divergence is larger if h is small. For a su¢ ciently small
h, it becomes too costly to satisfy the incentive constraint. For even lower levels of
heterogeneity (h < hd ), only one district experiments, and it does so at its ideal point.
   The amount of divergence is given by the requirements of Proposition 2. Each district
diverges enough to ensure that the other district experiments but no more. Divergence in
policies arises in the cases where the ideal points of the districts are not di¤erent enough

                                                    14
Figure 2: The green line shows equilibrium experimental locations (on the horizontal
axis) as a function of heterogeneity (on the vertical axis): When heterogeneity declines,
locations may diverge.

to ensure this incentive to experiment (and satisfy the requirement of Proposition 2).
In this case, each district understands that by making its own policy less attractive to
the other district, the other district’s incentive to free-ride will be diminished and it will
experiment itself. In this way, the informational externality from policy experimentation
drives equilibrium behavior, even when the districts are entirely self-interested.
   The divergence in policy choice is clearly ine¢ cient. The set of choices is Pareto
dominated in the sense that both districts would be better o¤ if they simply agreed
to experiment at their own ideal policies (or closer). They do not have the ability to
commit to such an agreement, however, and the agreement is not self-enforcing in a
decentralized system.
   The degree of policy divergence can be signi…cant. Straightforward manipulation of
the equilibrium condition in Equation (7) establishes for h 2 (hd ; hd ) that:

                                @a      c0 (h a)
                                   = 0               > 1,
                                @h  c (h a) + c0 (a)

which, in turn, implies that:

                             @ (xB xA )   @ (h 2a)
                                        =          <          1.
                                 @h           @h

As heterogeneity declines, not only are the districts more divergent but their policy


                                             15
positions get further apart in absolute terms. This point suggest that e¢ ciency may be
lower if the districts are similar, than when they are di¤erent. This is con…rmed in the
next subsection.
       The divergence in policies emerges only for moderate levels of heterogeneity. For
su¢ ciently high heterogeneity free-riding is no longer an issue and each district is able
to experiment at its ideal policy. Of course, this freedom comes at its own cost as
the experiment of the other district provides minimal or no bene…t should a district’s
own experiment fail. At the other end of the spectrum, if the districts are su¢ ciently
homogeneous then the cost of deterring free-riding is so great as to outweighed the
bene…t that accrues. Thus, one district experiments, letting the other free ride, but the
experimenter does not accommodate at all in its policy choice. The critical threshold at
which a district prefers to carry the load rather than su¤er a policy distortion is given
by hd .
       Finally, a note on equilibria when h < hd : In this case, there are multiple equilibria
but all require that exactly one district experiments and, in all pure strategy equilibria,
that the experimenting district experiments at its ideal point.6


3.3       Optimal Heterogeneity
In the …rst best the e¤ect of heterogeneity is straightforward: The more similar districts
are the better o¤ they are. This monotonicity is consistent with the conventional wisdom
on federalism. With self-interested and decentralized control, however, the answer may
be reversed.
       For very heterogeneous districts (h > hd ), the districts experiment at their own
ideal points as the free-riding incentive is su¢ ciently weak. Districts may still utilize a
successful experiment of the other district, but they do not need to distort their policy
to ensure the other district experiments. In this case, more heterogeneity leaves the
districts worse o¤, strictly so whilst they still receive an externality from each other’s
experiments, and weakly so after the point where they are e¤ectively autarkic and the
logic of federalism irrelevant.
       On the other hand, for more moderate levels of heterogeneity (h 2 (hd ; hd )), de-
creasing heterogeneity leads to ever greater distortions in policy choice. Proposition 4
   6
    A large set of locations for the non-experimenting district can be supported in equilibrium via
o¤-equilibrium-path beliefs. The beliefs necessary are that, following any moderate deviation, it is the
deviating district alone that is expected to carry the burden of experimentation. There are certain
constraints on locations for the nonexperimenting district in these equilibria, but we have chosen to
not report on these here.


                                                  16
shows that this distortion leaves the districts, in aggregate, worse o¤ such that welfare
is maximized in this range when h = hd . In fact, if the cost of experimentation is low
enough, this level of heterogeneity produces the global maximum of welfare, dominating
cases in which the districts are arbitrarily similar in preference or even identical. Thus,
with self-interested districts and the freedom to choose both policy location and whether
to experiment, the conventional wisdom that more similarity among districts produces
better federalism is overturned.

Proposition 4 Equilibrium payo¤s are strictly higher at h = hd than at any other
h   hd . In fact, hd is a global optimum if

                                                1   p
                                      k    2p         :
                                                2   p

    This result can be readily seen in the region of moderate heterogeneity in which
both districts experiment. As heterogeneity increases in this region, each district’s ex-
                                                                              @(xB xA )
periment is less distorted from its ideal point. From the earlier fact that      @h
                                                                                          <   1,
increased heterogeneity also implies that the distance between the policy experiments
is also decreasing. In e¤ect, the greater heterogeneity allows free-riding to be avoided
more easily, and so much more easily that both districts are better o¤.


4     Centralization
Modeling centralization in the context of a federal system presents a challenge: If the
central government were benevolent and powerful, it could command the districts when
to experiment and with which policies, thereby implementing the …rst-best outcome.
We follow the literature in modeling instead a weaker, and somewhat clumsy, version of
the central government.
    In particular, we assume that policies always emerge locally: stages one and two
are exactly as before. Only after locations and experimental outcomes are realized and
observed, at stage three, will a central government play any role. This may be reasonable
when policies that are not yet developed cannot be contracted on or dictated from the
top. Furthermore, if the time lags between the stages in the game are substantial, then
a central government that has little power at stage one may have grown to be more
powerful at stage three. The history of the European Union, for example, shows that
local policies have been developed and once the EU has been su¢ ciently powerful, some


                                              17
of the local successes have been introduced also elsewhere. This empirical dynamic is
at the heart of de Figueiredo and Weingast’s (2005) description of federalism.
      At stage three, centralization means that the …nal policy decision, yi , is not necessar-
ily taken by i. Instead, we consider the case where a median voter, with ideal point tm ,
decides on a common federal policy, harmonized across the districts. Note that such har-
monization is always suboptimal ex post: it is ine¢ cient to require harmonization when
either both policies fail or both succeed. In fact, the decentralized system implemented
the socially optimal choices at stage 3 (conditional on the choices that had been made at
the earlier stages). However, there is a long tradition in the …scal federalism literature
to assume a clumsy central government imposing harmonization (going back to Oates,
1972. See the survey by Oates, 1999). Although the uniformity-assumption has been
criticized as ad-hoc (as by Besley and Coate, 2003, or Lockwood, 2002), it has quite
a lot of empirical support (Strumpf and Oberholzer-Gee) and it has also been given a
theoretical foundation (Harstad, 2007). Note that, conditional on such harmonization,
it is socially e¢ cient that locations converge completely (a = h=2).
      Following the literature on probabilistic voting (for an overview, see Persson and
Tabellini (2000)), we assume the median voter’s ideal point is a random variable that
is distributed symmetrically around zero with density                        > 0. The realization of tm is
unknown until stage 3, when it is drawn from the uniform distribution:

                                                         1 1
                                         tm      U        ;          :                                 (8)
                                                        2 2

At stage three, the median voter sets policies such as to maximize its payo¤:

                            yA = yB = arg        max          Ixj    c (tm     xj ) :
                                              xj 2fxA ;xB g


If both (or none) of the experiments fxA ; xB g have proven successful, the chosen policy
will be the one closest to the median voter. Given the distribution (8), the probability
that A’s policy is chosen (when xA < xB ) is given by:

                                                               1         xA + xB
                        Pr (jtm     xA j < jtm       xB j) =     +                      :              (9)
                                                               2            2

If one experiment succeeds and the other fails (or is not initiated), then the median
voter is assumed to pick the successful policy.7
  7
      The median voter does indeed prefer to select the successful policy in equilibrium (since locations



                                                      18
4.1     The Quantity of Experimentation
The median voter’s strategy in stage 3 sets up a sort-of tournament for the districts in
the earlier stages. At the second stage, with policies …xed in place, the districts want
to experiment to avoid being compelled to implement the other district’s experiment.
Nevertheless, this incentive has its limits as the costs of being so compelled can neverthe-
less still be dominated by the costs of experimenting. This is the basis of the following
proposition.

Proposition 5 Take locations as given and suppose jaj                               ai j       1= . Both districts
experiment if:

                                                k p (1 p)
          c (h    aj )        c (ai )                                        , i; j 2 fA,Bg ; i 6= j:          (10)
                                          p=2 + (aj ai ) p (1=2         p)

    This says that the districts are willing to experiment if the location of the neighbor’s
experiments is not too attractive, similarly to Proposition 2 for decentralization. If
locations are symmetric, the condition in Proposition 5 simpli…es to:

                                                             k   p (1      p)
                                        c (h   a)   c (a)                       .                              (11)
                                                                 p=2

To understand the condition, it is helpful to rearrange (11):

                                       1                         1
              [c (h      a)      c (a)] p2 + p (1       p) 1 +     [c (h        a)         c (a)]    k.        (12)
                                       2                         2

The right-hand side is the cost of experimenting. The left-hand side is the bene…t. As
before, this bene…t has two components and accrues only if the district’s experiment is
successful, which occurs with probability p. If the other district’s experiment succeeds
then, with combined probability p2 , the district has its own policy implemented half
the time, thereby avoiding the distance cost. If, on the other hand, the other district’s
experiment fails, which occurs with a combined probability of p (1                                  p), a successful
experiment ensures the successful district’s experiment is always implemented, giving it
not only a quality boost but also avoiding the distance cost from having to implement
the other district’s failed experiment half the time.
will be symmetric), and also o¤ the equilibrium path if just the two locations are ’su¢ ciently similar’,
meaning that:
                        1 jc (tm xA ) c (xB tm )j 8tm 2 [ 1=2 ; 1=2 :] :



                                                        19
   The bene…cial impact on progressive centralization is evident when the other dis-
trict’s experiment is expected to fail (p < 1=2). This strictly increases the incentive of
the other district to experiment as it otherwise faces the prospect of implementing the
other district’s failed experiment half the time. By experimenting it reduces the chance
of this fate (it is still possible as the experimenting district cannot guarantee its own
success) and, additionally, still receives the bene…t of implementing a successful rather
than a failed policy.
   This bene…t, however, must be counterbalanced against the case where the other
district’s experiment is expected to succeed (p > 1=2). In this case, the incentive
to experiment is dampened as a district cannot even be guaranteed of implementing its
own experiment should it succeed. In this case, an experiment must be discarded by one
district, despite proving successful, as the central government imposes harmonization.
   The condition in Proposition 5 depends on the heterogeneity and polarization of
the districts. Recalling the maintained assumption (from Section 3) that k > p (1       p),
there must exist a hc > 0 that satis…es:

                                           k        p (1   p)
                                 c (hc )                        .                     (13)
                                                    p=2

At heterogeneity level hc , both districts are indi¤erent between experimenting and not
if the policies chosen are the districts’ideal positions. This de…nition is the analogue of
the de…nition of hd for decentralized federalism.


4.2    The Type of Experimentation
While equation (9) shows that a district’s policy is more likely to be chosen at the
federal level if the policy position is moderate, the lesson of Proposition 5 is that such
accommodation can discourage the other district from experimenting. The threshold
at which this occurs is critical to equilibrium behavior. Yet, rather than de…ning the
barrier that must be breached to ensure victory in the policy tournament, the threshold
de…nes the boundary of policy competition.

Proposition 6 There exist four thresholds 0 < hc < hc < e
                                                        h and hc such that when h 2
 hc ; hc , there exists a unique symmetric equilibrium in which both districts experiment,
given by the following:




                                               20
(i) For h 2 hc ; e
                 h , a satis…es:

                                                       k   p (1     p)
                            c (h    a)       c (a) =                     .          (14)
                                                           p=2

Consequently, for h 2 (hc ; hc ) policies are divergent (a < 0), whereas for h 2 hc ; e
                                                                                      h
policies converge (a > 0).
(ii) For h 2 eh; hc , policies converge and a > 0 satis…es:

                                                          c0 (a)
                          c (h     a)    c (a) =                   .                (15)
                                                       p2 + (1 p)2


   In Example Q, when c (a) = qa2 =2, (14) becomes

                                         h     k      p (1 p)
                                   a=                         ;
                                         2           qhp=2

while (15) becomes:
                                             h=2
                             a=                                     :
                                    1 + 1= h p2 + (1          p)2
   The policy tournament combines competition with restraint. The districts compete
to win the favor of the median voter, but only up to the point at which further com-
petition would drive their opponent from the tournament. The competitive e¤ects of
the tournament depend on the incentive to experiment characterized by Proposition
5. For districts of moderate or larger heterogeneity (h > hc ), this incentive is strong
enough to not just overcome the incentive to diverge, but also to induce the districts to
converge toward this opponent. In our terminology, this leads to equilibria with posi-
tive accommodation, although the incentive for doing so is not exactly hospitable. It is
well possible that the level of convergence is larger than what would be required by the
…rst-best outcome (Proposition 1).
   These incentives to compete as well as to discourage free-riding explain why conver-
gence is not a universal behavior in centralized federalism. As heterogeneity decreases
(h < hc ), the distance required between experimental policies becomes wider than the
distance between the districts’ideal policies. In this case divergence is again necessary
to ensure that both districts don’t free ride and have the incentive to experiment. The
equilibrium policy positions are depicted in Figure 3.



                                                21
Figure 3: The green/bold lines show locations of experiments (on the horizontal axis) as
functions of h, on the vertical axis. For large h, locations converge.

   In case (ii) of the proposition the districts do not converge so much as to be indi¤erent
between experimenting or not. At this point, further convergence is undesirable even
though, if small enough, it would not deter an opponent from experimenting. Driving
this result is uncertainty over the location of the median voter. With no uncertainty,
a small deviation would not deter the opposing district from experimenting but would
guarantee victory in the policy tournament should the experimental outcomes be the
same. This would create a discontinuity in district payo¤s and ensure convergence,
at least to the point where experimentation may be deterred. With uncertainty over
the median voter’s location, the pro…tability of small deviations is much smaller and
determined by the degree of uncertainty; speci…cally, the size of . For large enough
heterogeneity, and high enough , the point at which deviations are no longer pro…table
is reached before the point at which an opponent is deterred from experimentation.


4.3    Optimal Heterogeneity
What is the optimal level of heterogeneity under centralization? Proposition 6 suggests
that one gets positive convergence only if h is su¢ ciently large (h > hc ), and we know
such convergence is necessary in the …rst-best outcome. If instead h is small, then
policies diverge, and more so the smaller is h 2 (hc ; hc ). This reasoning suggest that a
large h > hc may increase payo¤s.
   As a counter-argument, centralization requires policy harmonization and the cost

                                            22
of such uniformity must be larger if the districts are very di¤erent. This traditional
argument suggests that a small h may be better as the costs of harmonization are then
smaller.
    It turns out that these arguments are balanced when h = hc . At the optimal level
of heterogeneity, districts are locating their policies exactly at their ideal points (as was
the case, albeit for a di¤erent value of h, under decentralization).

Proposition 7 For all h 2 hc ; hc , welfare is maximized when h = hc .

    By comparison, note that hc = hd when p = 1=2. If p is smaller (larger) than 1/2,
then the optimal heterogeneity is smaller (larger) under centralization than it would be
under decentralization. The next section reveals the intuition for this comparison and
derives when centralization increases payo¤s relative to decentralization.


5     Comparing Centralization and Decentralization
The two institutions di¤er only at stage three, when centralization imposes harmoniza-
tion. As this harmonization is often ine¢ cient, whereas decentralization at this stage is
equivalent to a benevolent social planner, the comparison between the systems at this
stage is straightforward and always favors decentralization. E¢ ciency, of course, must
account for behavior at all stages of the game, and when we allow for the incentive
e¤ects of centralization’s ex post ine¢ ciency, the comparison may be reversed.
    To understand this possibility, recall that equilibrium policy choices were often de-
termined by the indi¤erence condition between experimenting and not at stage 2. The
comparison of institutions, therefore, begins with an analysis of which institution re-
quires more divergence to sustain dual experimentation. A comparison of Propositions
2 and 5, or equations (7) and (11), reveals that decentralization requires more divergence
                     1
if and only if p <   2
                         (the intuition is explained in the text following Proposition 5). In
this case, centralization moves policy choices closer to the …rst best and, as long as het-
erogeneity is not too high such that the costs of harmonization are too great, this e¤ect
dominates and progressive centralization is the more e¢ cient federalist institution.

Proposition 8 Suppose h           max fhc ; hd g : Decentralization dominates centralization if
p    1=2 but centralization might be better if p < 1=2. When c (a) = qa2 and p < 1=2,




                                               23
progressive centralization dominates decentralization if and only if:
                                  s
                                      k   p (1   p)     1=4p2 1
                             h<                                   ,
                                            q         1=2 p (1 p)

that is, for h small, q small, k large and p small.

                    1
   The value p =    2
                        provides the critical threshold as at this value the experimenting
                                                                                      1
districts are equally likely to both succeed as they are to both fail. When p <       2
                                                                                          the
districts are more likely to both fail and, therefore, centralization creates a stronger
incentive to experiment and, consequently, more policy accommodation. To see this,
recall from Equation (12) that when the other district’s experiment fails, a successful
experiment o¤ers two rewards under centralization: An improved policy quality as well
as avoidance of being compelled by the median voter to implement the other district’s
failed policy. Under decentralization, only the …rst reward is present (see Equation
4). In contrast, when the other district’s experiment is a success, centralization o¤ers
only half the reward that decentralization does from a successful experiment. This is
because centralization compels each district, despite their own success, to implement the
other district’s successful policy half of the time. Under decentralization, in contrast, a
successful district is always able to enjoy the fruits of this success.
   The following numerical example makes this trade-o¤ even clearer. Set p = 1=3,
k = 1=4 and q = 1. We then have:

                                  hd = 0:24 and hd = 0:5;
                                  hc = 0:18 and hc = 0:41.

For the domain h        hd = 0; 24, progressive centralization dominates decentralization if
and only if:
                                            h < 0:35.
                                       p
With q 6= 1, the condition is instead h q < 0:35. In the plot, the threshold for h
(under which centralization is better) is drawn below as a function of q, measured on
the horizontal axis:




                                                 24
                       1.0
                   h
                       0.8


                       0.6


                       0.4


                       0.2


                       0.0
                             0   1        2         3        4        5
                                                                     q

              Centralization is better than decentralization below the curve


6     Extensions
The model above is intentionally simple so as to illuminate the intuition and demonstrate
most clearly the necessary features. A fortuitous by-product of this simplicity is that
the model can be easily extended in a number of interesting directions. In this section,
we present some of these extensions. Each extension builds on the basic model above
(rather than on each other) and can be read isolated from the others. The …rst three
extensions are combined in the Appendix.


6.1       Multiple Periods and Coordination Bene…ts
So far, a district has been indi¤erent to whether the other district copies the policy. In
reality, there may be "coordination bene…ts," so that a district receives a bene…t, say
G, if the two districts end up with the very same policy. A positive G can explain why
the median voter under centralization always imposes harmonization at stage three.
    Such a coordination bene…t would arise naturally in a setting with multiple periods.
Suppose we extend the model above by allowing for a fourth stage: After each district
has picked its policy at stage three, each may experiment further and the potential
rewards can be enjoyed by everyone having implemented that exact policy. This would
naturally lead to a coordination bene…t to both districts when they adopt the same
policy.
    To see this, suppose, at stage four, that each district can pay a cost k2 to experiment
and succeed with probability p2 > k2 . If alone, a district’s bene…t from this fourth stage


                                              25
would be simply p2     k2 . If two districts have implemented the same policy at stage 3,
then we can have (at least) three di¤erent cases.
   (1) Suppose the success probabilities are uncorrelated and that if both succeeds, then
both values (1+1) can be enjoyed by each district. In this case, both districts …nd it
optimal to experiment (when p2 > k2 ) and the fourth stage adds the value 2p2              k2 to
each district. Compared to the payo¤ when policies are di¤erent, harmonization gives
the additional "coordination bene…t" G = p2 .
   (2) If the value of two innovations at stage four is the same as the value of one, then
the fourth stage adds the payo¤ p2 (2     p2 )    k2 if both experiment, since p2 (2   p2 ) is
the probability that at least one district succeeds. In this situation, it is indeed optimal
for both to experiment if (1   p2 ) p2 > k2 and, compared to the payo¤ when policies are
di¤erent, harmonization gives the additional coordination bene…t G = p2 (1         p2 ).
   (3) If case (2) is modi…ed such that (1        p2 ) p2 < k2 , then only one district will
experiment at the fourth stage when policies are harmonized. If each is equally likely to
be the one that experiments, then the fourth stage gives the expected payo¤ p2             k2 =2.
Compared to having di¤erent policies, harmonization gives the coordination bene…t
G = k2 =2.
   For what follows, it is irrelevant which of these cases (or something else) that de-
termines the coordination bene…t G, and we can simply ignore the fourth stage of the
game and instead just remember that harmonization gives each district the additional
bene…t G.
   Under decentralization, the incentive to free-ride depends on G. On the one hand, G
makes it less costly for one district to fail and adopt the neighbor’s policy, particularly
if the neighbor is likely to succeed (p > 1=2). On the other hand, a large G makes it
more important to succeed and attract a failing neighbor (with probability 1 p). Thus,
if p > 1=2, a larger G makes free-riding more tempting and, as a response, a < 0 must
decline. If p < 1=2, a larger G makes experimentation more attractive and a can be
larger, without discouraging the neighbor from experimenting.
   In fact, positive accommodation (a > 0) is possible even under decentralization
when G > 0: When h is so large that even a successful policy is unattractive to a failing
neighbor, then a district must accommodate somewhat (by increasing a) to ensure that
the coordination bene…t may be enjoyed following a success.

Proposition 9 Suppose G > 0.
(i) Under decentralization, a < 0 increases in G if p < 1=2 but decreases in G if p > 1=2
when h 2 (h ; h ). Furthermore, there exist thresholds hd > b
             d   d                                             hd > h such that policies
                                                                        d


                                             26
Figure 4: Convergence is possible even under decentralization when there are bene…ts of
coordinating the policy


                          hd ; hd . Both thresholds b
converge (a > 0) when h 2 b                         hd and hd , as well as the size of
this interval hd     b
                     hd , increase in G. The optimal level of heterogeneity hd decreases
in G if p < 1=2 but increases in G if p > 1=2.
(ii) Under centralization, the level of G does not a¤ect the equilibrium choices.
(iii) By comparison, we always have that centralization is better (uc > ud ) when G is
su¢ ciently high.

   Figure 4 illustrates that positions converge when h is large. Part (ii) of the proposi-
tion is intuitive: under centralization, policies will be harmonized in any case and G can
be treated as a lump sum gain which thus does not a¤ect any choices. A larger G only
means that the ex post cost of harmonization is reduced and, for a su¢ ciently large G,
harmonization is bene…cial. It may not surprise, therefore, that centralization is likely
to outperform decentralization when G is su¢ ciently large.
   The precise conditions can be found in the appendix.


6.2      Transparency and Correlation
So far, we have assumed that a district can perfectly well copy the neighbor’s success.
In reality, it might be the case that a district can only imperfectly observe and learn the
neighbor’s policy.
   Let    2 [0; 1] measure the fraction (as well as the magnitude) a district can capture

                                            27
of a neighbor’s successful experiment. Thus, if A adopts B’s successful policy, A’s payo¤
(abstracting from any sunk investment cost) is                             c (h           aB ). Note that parameter
can alternatively be interpreted as the probability at which the policy will succeed for
A given that it has already proven successful to B.
   Intuitively, more correlation or transparency (a larger ) increases the temptation to
free-ride. This makes more divergence necessary in order to satisfy incentive constraints
when     is large. Since divergence is costly, a smaller                            can be better for both districts.

Proposition 10 Suppose            2 [0; 1] :
(i) Under decentralization, a smaller                  raises a and reduces hd . The optimal degree of
transparency increases in h and is given by:

                                                                       p        k
                                   d   = min 1; c (h) +                               .
                                                                           p2

(ii) Under centralization, a smaller                raises a and reduces hc . In Example Q, the optimal
degree of transparency increases in h and is given by:

                                           k        p (1     p)       1
                         c   =1        2                          +     (2          p) qh2 < 1
                                                     p2               p
                                       p                                                                    n            o
              hc and h < e
when h 2 hc ; b          hc                    [k     p (1        p)] =q (2          p) p=2. When h      min b
                                                                                                             hc ; e
                                                                                                                  hc ; hc ,
  = 1 is optimal.
(iii) In Example Q, a decrease in                    1 when p           1=2 always increases ud            uc .

   Part (iii) suggests that transparency tends to be more bene…cial than under decen-
tralization. This is intuitive since, under centralization, one district is always copying
the other district’s policy. If     is reduced, the cost of imposing harmonization increases
and decentralization becomes preferable.
   With reduced transparency, the question arises whether district A can pay district
B to disclose the remaining information such that A becomes capable to enjoy the full
value of the experimental success (and not only the fraction                                    ). Such transfers are
analyzed in the following extension.


6.3    Transfers and Patents
The above analysis has assumed away side payments between the districts. This sub-
section shows how even quite clumsy (or exogenous) side transfers can improve on the
equilibrium derived above, and perhaps even implement the …rst-best outcome.

                                                           28
   In short, we simply assume that a district must pay T to the neighbor when copying
the neighbor’s policy. There may be several motivations for such a transfer. For example,
the innovating district may have information that is bene…cial for a neighbor trying to
copy the successful policy. The innovator may then be able to extract favors (implicit or
explicit transfers) before this information is disclosed. To be precise, suppose a fraction
  of the innovation can be enjoyed for free (as in the previous subsection), while the
remaining fraction 1           can be enjoyed only if the innovator releases all information.
One may then refer to 1          as the strength of the innovator’s intellectual property right
or patent. If the innovator has bargaining power index           2 [0; 1], then the generalized
Nash bargaining solution predicts that the transfer from the neighbor to the successful
innovator will be
                                         T =    (1      ):                                (16)

   Another explanation for T is that there may be some exogenous or constitutional
prize going to the district that gave birth to the nation-wide policy. Although such
a motivation may best …t with the centralized system, we henceforth assume that the
transfer T is the same under decentralization as well as under centralization, and we
will abstract from the origin of T .
   If T increases, it becomes more bene…cial to be the innovator and the incentive to
experiment increases. This means that there is less of a need to diverge to discourage
free-riding and, in equilibrium, a increases. The value of heterogeneity (which also
increases a) is then diminished and the optimal level of h decreases. These results hold
in both federal systems.
   Furthermore, it becomes possible that districts converge (a > 0) even under decen-
tralization when T (and h) is large: for a large h, convergence may be necessary to sell
a successful policy to a failing neighbor and, for a large T , such a sale is very valuable
and worth some convergence.

Proposition 11 (i) Under decentralization, a larger T raises a and reduces hd . For T
su¢ ciently large, a > 0 and the …rst-best outcome is implemented. In Example Q, the
optimal transfer is given by:

                           k     p (1   p)
                    Td =                     qh2 p (1   2p (1   p)) 2 (0; 1) .
                                   p

(ii) Under centralization, a larger T raises a and reduces hc . In Example Q, the optimal



                                                29
transfer is given by:
                                         k    p (1     p)
                                 Tc =                       > Td .
                                                p


(iii) By comparison, if T can be freely chosen, decentralization is always preferable: Td
implements the …rst-best outcome under decentralization; but centralization can never be
…rst-best.

   Centralization can never be …rst-best since it imposes uniform policies. Decentral-
ization, however, can implement the …rst-best outcome if a su¢ ciently large T induces
the districts to converge rather than diverge. A large T is particularly important when
the districts are relatively similar (h low) since the free-riding problem is then large.
   Note that if T is the outcome of negotiations and given by (16), then we can im-
plement the …rst-best T = Td by selecting an appropriate level for intellectual property
rights:
                                     1
                             =1          1    qh2 (1        2p (1    p)) :


6.4       Multiple Districts
It is simple to permit multiple districts in the model. This can be done in several
ways. Perhaps the traditional way would be to place the districts’ ideal points on a
one-dimensional line. This would destroy symmetry, however, as some districts would
be located more centrally than others. Here, we allow for multiple dimensions and we
seek symmetry by assuming that the ideal points of n districts are spread out on the
rays of a star, as illustrated in Figure 5.
   The disutility from distance is assumed to be c (d), where d is now the distance from
a district’s ideal point to the selected policy given that one must travel along the rays
of the star.
   When there are many districts, then one district’s success can potentially be copied
by a larger number of districts. This implies that it is socially optimal that districts
converge more (by increasing a) if n is large. That is, in the …rst-best outcome, a
increases in n.
   The opposite is the case in equilibrium, however: a will decrease in n in both political
regimes. Intuitively, the incentive to free-ride is larger when n is large, since it is then
more likely that one of the other n 1 districts succeeds. The incentive constraint, which
is necessary for a district to still to be willing to experiment, is thus harder to satisfy,


                                               30
                Figure 5: Ideal points in black; policy locations in green

and the level of accommodation a which guarantees that all the districts experiment
must decline.

Proposition 12 With a larger number of districts (n), the …rst-best convergence level
(a > 0) increases. However, the reverse holds in the symmetric equilibria:
(i) Under decentralization, a decreases in n:
(ii) Under centralization, a decreases in n:
(iii) By comparison, decentralization is always better if n      1=p. Even if n < 1=p,
decentralization is better if h is su¢ ciently large in Example Q.

   The Appendix contains the details. By comparing decentralization and centraliza-
tion, there is again a positive and a negative e¤ect of centralization. If it is expected
that all the other districts will fail, then the bene…t of succeeding is larger than under
decentralization, and the incentive to experiment is larger (this is the "positive e¤ect").
If it is instead expected that at least one of the other districts will succeed, then the
bene…t of succeeding is smaller under centralization than decentralization, and the in-
centives to experiment is thus also smaller - with the consequence that a < 0 must be
smaller than it would have been under decentralization (this is the "negative e¤ect").
The positive e¤ect can dominate only if p < 1=n , n < 1=p, that is, if it is very unlikely
that the other experiments will succeed. But for a su¢ ciently large n, the negative e¤ect
will eventually dominate: Almost for sure, at least one other district will succeed and
this implies that centralization will reduce the value of succeeding and experimenting.
When there are many districts, decentralization is better.

                                            31
7         Discussion
From a normative perspective, the objective of politics is to identify and implement
good policies.8 Everything else is a means to an end. The focus of political competition,
therefore, should be on which policy wins that competition and is implemented rather
than which candidate wins o¢ ce. Besley (2001), in a brief policy paper, emphasizes
this distinction and introduces the notion of policy competition, in contrast to political
competition, to shift the focus from candidates to policy. The framework we introduce
here pursues this tighter focus and constructs an explicit tournament in which policies
compete, placing policy competition at the center of the design of political institutions.
        Within this setting, our main contribution is twofold. First, we show that in the
absence of federal institutions –in a decentralized system –the incentives to experiment
are perverse. Speci…cally, each district seeks to provide a policy alternative that is
unattractive to their neighbors, hoping that their fellow districts are inspired to try
harder and experiment with a new policy. The end result is that the forces of policy
competition drive policy choice in the wrong direction.
        Our second contribution is to show how policy competition can be harnessed pos-
itively by appropriately-designed political institutions. The key to the design of such
institutions is to realign the competitive forces so that competition runs in the right
direction. This is done by establishing a sort-of policy tournament. Unlike standard
tournaments, however, the winning district earns no accolade or prize other than the
freedom to implement its policy of choice. Instead, the tournament carries a negative
prize: the loser incurs the punishment of being forced to implement the other district’s
policy, whether it wishes to or not.
        One may wonder, then, why anyone would willingly submit to a tournament with
a negative prize. A corollary of our main results is an explanation of just this puzzle.
It is only by binding themselves to a negative prize tournament that the states can
harness the positive implications of policy competition. From this perspective, the ex
post ine¢ ciency of forced policy coordination should not be lamented, rather it should
be celebrated as the price of generating more e¢ cient ex ante incentives.
        These results o¤er a reinterpretation of the purpose of federal systems. This rein-
terpretation can be pushed deeper. One connection is to the practice of coordinating
policies across states –frequently referred to as policy harmonization in the EU. Popular
accounts frequently take harmonization as an end in itself, desirable to avoid the costs
    8
        Where a “good” policy is the maximand of some social welfare function.



                                                    32
of coordination or merely to increase continent-wide harmony. From the perspective
of a policy tournament, however, policy coordination becomes an incentive mechanism
rather than an end in itself.
       Our model takes a stark and extreme line on policy coordination and the dual issue
of exit from the federal system. Coordination is always imposed in the …nal stage and
states have no option to exit. Once a design perspective is adopted, though, focus
quickly moves beyond what is possible with institutional design to what is optimal. At
the heart of the design question is how to most e¢ ciently provide the incentives for
states to experiment and converge. It may be that these incentives are induced most
cheaply and e¤ectively by forcing coordination only when both policies fail or when they
both succeed. Such a design may appear unrealistic, yet the same ends may be achieved
by more recognizable mechanisms; for instance, by allowing states the option to exit
the federal system in some circumstances (generally or on speci…c issues).9 Of course,
other complications may arise from these features –such as veri…cation of the outcomes
of experiments. The dimensions of choice available to the designer are rich, extending
well beyond coordination and exit. It is possible that legislative institutions (such as
bicameralism) shape experimentation, as well as supermajority rules and the strategic
setting of the scope of the federal union itself (a la Mundell (1961) for currency areas
and Alesina and Spolaore (1997) for federalism).
       Although the overall pattern in the history of the U.S. and E.U. is toward greater
centralization of authority, it is notable that some issues have moved in the opposite
direction, with authority devolved from the center back to the states. A prominent
example of this decentralization of authority in the U.S. is welfare reform policy in the
1990’s.10 Although this example seemingly runs counter to our model, we would like to
suggest that it, in fact, rea¢ rms our theory. It is not di¢ cult to see that once a political
issue is centralized, it becomes relatively stagnant with minimal experimentation. This
stability is …ne in a stable world, yet it is restrictive in a changing world when shocks
require that further experimentation be undertaken. Our conjecture is that when un-
certainty is present – be it due to a shock or insu¢ ciently attractive experimentation
earlier in the process –the central authority will devolve an issue back to the states to
restart the policy tournament and reignite policy experimentation. For welfare reform
in the 1990’s, it appears this is an accurate description of the state of the environment.
As Bednar (2011, p. 511) argues, on welfare policy “By the early 1990’s, there was a
   9
     See Bednar (2007) for an interesting discussion of the incentive e¤ects of exit options in federal
systems.
  10
     We thank Craig Volden for this example.


                                                  33
sense that the federal government had run out of ideas, and that the country needed
much more diverse experimentation in order to discover policy improvement.” If our
conjecture is true, the logic suggests not only that power will accumulate in the center
in federal systems, but that a natural limit to the size or authority of the central gov-
ernment will obtain, where the natural limit is determined by the degree of stability in
the environment over which policy rules.
    An intriguing feature of our results is that the collective welfare of the states is
maximized when the states are similar but not identical. If states are too similar, they
are plagued by free riding and ine¢ ciently low levels of experimentation. This result
creates a surprising connection to the famous model of Tiebout. The implication is that
in setting up a federal system, a degree of heterogeneity across the districts is preferable,
and this is exactly what is generated by Tiebout style sorting. An interesting open
question, therefore, is whether Tiebout sorting generates the e¢ cient degree of inter-
district heterogeneity that our model predicts.
    The connection to Tiebout also suggests how a decentralized federal system may
meaningfully di¤er from a collection of districts with no formal attachments. The di¤er-
ence may be in labor mobility. That is, if people within a decentralized federal system are
able to relocate, Tiebout sorting may generate greater heterogeneity and more e¢ ciency
than would the same states without a formal federalist pact.
    Finally, although we apply our ideas exclusively to policy competition, the issue of
free riding and experimentation is of broad importance. Our framework and results
can be adapted to these other settings. Theorists within organizational economics are
interested in joint control problem within …rms where they players – such as the boss
and workers or managers and owners – have preference di¤erences. Experimentation
and learning is also key to joint ventures and research partnerships between …rms, such
as oil exploration ventures and pharmaceutical research into new drug compounds. Our
key insight into the use of tournaments to reconcile incentives in collective choice envi-
ronments is as applicable in these settings as it is in politics.


8     Conclusion
The prominence of policy experimentation in policy and popular discourse has not been
matched by development of a formal understanding of the underlying phenomenon. The
objective of this paper has been to close this gap, if only a small degree.
    We have allowed districts to choose both the type and quantity of policy experimen-


                                             34
tation. To discourage free-riding, each district may prefer a policy that is less useful
to the other districts, particularly when the districts are relatively similar. This implies
that policies may be more di¤erent than the districts’ideal points would suggest, and
that heterogeneity is bene…cial since it discourages free-riding.
   In this setting, we have found a new role for even a very clumsy central government.
If policies are harmonized at the end of the game, each district may face a stronger
incentive to experiment and policy positions may converge (as in the …rst-best) rather
than diverge (as in the decentralized equilibrium).
   Our workhorse model is both simple and tractable and thus possible to extend in
several directions. So far, we have explored the e¤ects of multiple districts, multiple pe-
riods, coordination bene…ts, transparency or imperfect correlation, and transfers, prizes
and intellectual property rights. Needless to say, many possible important extensions
are left unpursued and these should be explored in future in subsequent work.




                                            35
9     Appendix: Proofs and Generalizations
The following proofs (except for Lemma 1) are based on the most general two-district
model (i.e., with the extensions from sections 6.1-6.3 incorporated). To refer to an arbi-
trary district, we use i 2 fA; Bg and j                 fA; Bg ni. Hence, i succeeds with probability
p, and then i enjoys the quality-increase

                                            V         1 + G (1       p) ;

where G is the coordination bene…t i receives if the other district copies the policy
(which can happen if the other district fails, i.e., with probability 1                           p). If i instead
adopts j’s successful policy, then i enjoys the quality-bene…t

                                                  v        + g;

where     2 [0; 1] is the transparency-index while g is the coordination bene…t for the
looser. By employing the parameters v and V , we incorporate all our …rst three exten-
sions as well as many others. For centralization, we also use W                           1 + G.
    The following lemmas describe the results for this "generalized model". Each propo-
sition above follows directly from the corresponding lemma (with the same number as
the associated proposition).

    Lemma 1: Suppose p (1              p) > k=2 and de…ne hb > 0 by:

                                   1                                           1
           p (1     p) c h    fb       hb       + [1     p (1       p)] c fb        hb   = p (1    p) ;

where a = fb 1 ( ) is the inverse of:

                                                                1
                          fb (a)       a + c0     1
                                                                            1 c0 (a) :
                                                         p (1       p)

    (i) If h      hb , the …rst-best is implemented by ai = aj = a > 0 satisfying:

                                         c0 (a)
                                                     = p (1                  p) :
                                   c0 (h a) + c0 (a)

    (ii) If h     hb , the …rst-best is implemented by ai = aj = 0.
    (iii) If h = hb , both outcomes [(i) and (ii)] give the same payo¤s.



                                                         36
    Proof. Consider the basic model. Suppose that 2p (1                              p) > k, so it is optimal that
both experiment even when locations are identical.
    (i) Suppose both districts experiment and switching constraints are satis…ed: c (h                                       ai )
c (aj )   1. The …rst-best then maximizes ui;b + uj;b , where

        ui;b = p2 (1    c (ai ))     (1      p)2 c (ai ) + p (1             p) (2        c (ai )     c (h      aj ))   k
            = p (2     p)      c (ai )     p (1      p) [c (h        aj )     c (ai )]       k:

Clearly, …rst-order conditions imply ai = aj = a satisfying:

                            c0 (a) = p (1         p) [c0 (h     a) + c0 (a)] ) (1):

The second-order condition is             c00 (a)     p (1      p) [c00 (h          a)      c00 (a)] < 0, which always
hold.
    (ii) If j’s switching constraints are not satis…ed, then ai = 0 is the trivial local
optimum, giving ui = p          k. By comparison, payo¤s are higher under (1) when

               p     k < p (2       p)     c (a)      p (1      p) [c (h        a)         c (a)]         k,

                     p (1     p) c (h      a) + [1       p (1        p)] c (a) < p (1              p) :                    (17)

Note that we can rewrite (1) to:

                                                                     1
                       h = fb (a)          a + c0    1
                                                                                1 c0 (a) ;
                                                              p (1       p)

where fb (a), as well as h         a, are increasing in a. Inserted into (17), we get

             p (1    p) c h        fb 1 (h) + [1         p (1        p)] c fb 1 (h) < p (1                  p) ;           (18)

where the left-hand side is increasing in h. De…ne hb such that (18) binds when h = hb ,
and note that hb > 0 since when h = 0, the left-hand side of (18) is zero. It follows that
(18) holds if and only if h < hb .
    It is easy to check that it cannot be optimal with an asymmetric solution such that
one switching constraint is satis…ed but not the other. QED




                                                         37
9.1     Decentralization
Lemma 2:
    (i) Suppose that j’s switching constraint at stage three is satis…ed:

                                    c (h          ai )     c (aj )       v (SCj ).

If j experiments, i is also willing to experiment if and only if IC i holds:

                                                                 k    p (V         pv)
                           c (h     aj )      c (ai )                                    (ICi ).                     (19)
                                                                         p2

(ii) If SC j is violated and j experiments, i is also willing to experiment if and only if:

                                                                     k      p (1      pv)
                              c (h         aj )        c (ai )                              :
                                                                              p2

    Proof. At stage 3, i 2 fA; Bg prefers j’s success to i’s own failed experiment if and
only if the following switching or selection constraint (SC) for i (SCi ) is satis…ed:

                                    c (h          aj )     c (ai )       v (SCi )                                    (20)

If (20) fails, i will certainly experiment (since we have assumed p > k). Thus, presume,
…rst, that (20) is satis…ed.
    It is easy to check that there is no equilibrium where both experiments if i actually
prefer j’s location, i.e., if jh     aj j         jai j for some i 2 fA; Bg. From now we thus consider
the natural case where jh          aj j > jai j for both districts.
    If the other district j experiments and SCj is satis…ed, i experiments as well if this
gives i a higher payo¤ than by not experimenting:

                   p (V    c (ai )) + (1           p) [p (v          c (h     aj ))      (1        p) c (ai )]   k   (21)
                   p (v   c (h     aj ))          (1      p) c (ai ) , (19):

    This gives the incentive constraint (IC) for i (ICi ). If SCj is violated, V in (19)
should be replaced by 1, since i’s success will then never create any coordination bene…t
(as j will never switch).
    Assume from now that SCj is satis…ed as well (as it must be in the symmetric
equilibrium - and it can be shown that all equilibria where both experiment must be
symmetric; see below).

                                                            38
    Note that when ICi holds (binds), SCi can still be (is) satis…ed if

                                             pV          k
                                      v                        v , pV > k;
                                                  p2

which is already assumed to hold.
    Finally, when SCi is violated, then i always prefers to experiment and (19) holds
also in this case. QED

    Lemma 3:
    De…ne the thresholds hd < b
                              hd                  e
                                                  hd         hd and hd by:

                                 1            pV         k
                  hd = c               v                       ;
                                                    p2
                  b
                  hd = c         1
                                     (v) ,
                  e
                  hd   c         1
                                     (p [1        p] G) + c        1
                                                                       (v) ;
                                 1
                  hd         c        p) G) + c 1 (v + p (1 p) G) ;
                                     (p (1
                                     pV k                     k
                  hd         c 1 v          + (1    p)   V        p2 G
                                       p2                     p
                                                k
                               c 1 (1 p) V             p2 G ;
                                                p

                       1
where the function c       (x) is the inverse of c (jxj).
    There exist pure-strategy equilibria where both districts experiment if and only if
h    hd . All equilibria are symmetric and they are characterized as follows:
    (i) If h 2 [hd ; hd ), the equilibrium is unique: policies diverge and a < 0 increases in
h and satis…es:
                                                                   k      pV + p2 v
                                 c (h        a)        c (a) =                      .   (22)
                                                                           p2
                h      i
    (ii) If h 2 hd ; b
                     hd , the equilibrium is unique: districts experiment at their ideal
points, so a = 0.
   (iii) If h 2 bhd ; e
                      hd , the equilibrium is unique: policies converge and a > 0 increases
in h and ensures that (SC) binds:

                                             c (h        a)     c (a) = v.              (23)
               h       i
    (iv) If h 2 e
                hd ; hd , there are two equilibria in pure strategies: one is as described
by (iii), and in the other, a = 0.


                                                              39
   (v) If h > hd , the equilibrium is unique: districts experiment at their ideal points,
so a = 0.
   Some comments: Note that we have hd > b
                                         hd if and only if the coordination bene…t
is positive, G > 0, and the larger is G, the larger is the range at which a district would
like to accommodate (hd increases in G). For a given G > 0, it is also necessary to
accommodate more if         (and thus v =          + g) is small. At the end of the proof, there
are explicit formulations for the thresholds for the case where c (:) is quadratic.

   Proof. Objectives and constraints: Anticipating the behavior of district i, described
in the previous proof, we now derive district j’s optimal location, given by aj . Just as
i’s utility is given by (21), we can write

            uj = p (V     c (aj )) + (1    p) [p (v     c (h    ai ))        (1       p) c (ai )]   k

as long as both districts experiment (IC holds) and both selection constraints hold. For
a given ai , ICi is satis…ed when aj      a0j (ai ), where a0j (ai ) is de…ned such that (19) binds:

                                                                 pV          k
                            c h     a0j (ai )     c (ai ) = v                     ;                     (24)
                                                                        p2

while SCi requires that aj        a00j (ai ), where a00j (ai ) is de…ned such that (20) binds:

                                   c h     a00j (ai )   c (ai ) = v:                                    (25)

   The left-hand sides of (24) and (25) are (identical and) both decreasing in aj . Since
the right-hand side of (24) is larger than that of (25), we have a00j (ai ) < a0j (ai ). When
both ICi and SCi hold, aj 2 a00j (ai ) ; a0j (ai ) and uj is increasing whether aj " 0 or aj # 0.
Hence, aj = 0 is preferred by j if both ICi and SCi are satis…ed. If a00j (ai ) < 0 < a0j (ai ),
j can indeed set aj = 0 without violating ICi or SCi . If a00j (ai ) < a0j (ai ) < 0, j needs to
diverge, by selecting aj = a0j (ai ) < 0, to satisfy ICi . If 0 < a00j (ai ) < a0j (ai ), j needs to
accommodate, by selecting aj = a00j (ai ) > 0, if j wants i to copy j’s success if i fails (i.e.,
to satisfy SCi ). It follows that for the set of equilibria where both ICi and SCi hold, we
have:
                             aj = min a0j (ai ) ; max 0; a00j (ai )           :                         (26)

   Fixed points: To further characterize j’s best response, as a function of ai , note that
aj , as given by (26), is a continuous function. Then, di¤erentiate the left-hand side of
(24) and (25). In both cases (i.e., regardless of whether aj = a0j (ai ) or aj = a00j (ai )), we

                                                   40
get:
                                                                       daj     c0 (ai )
                        c0 (h   aj ) daj     c0 (ai ) dai = 0 ,            = 0          ;
                                                                       dai  c (h aj )
which is an element in the interval (0; 1) when ai < 0 ) c0 (ai ) < 0, but in ( 1; 0) when
ai > 0 ) c0 (ai ) > 0 since jc0 (h           aj )j > jc0 (ai )j when jh         aj j > jai j, which we have
already assumed. When neither ICi nor SCi binds, aj = 0 so daj =dai = 0. Thus, the
best-response functions are ‡at (‡atter than the 45-degree line) and they cross exactly
once. The equilibrium is thus unique. Since the best-response curves are identical, the
unique equilibrium is also symmetric, so simply write ai = aj = a and de…ne the …xed
points a0 = a0j (a) and a00 = a00j (a) < a0 , using (24)-(25). Note that both a0 and a00
increase in h. By di¤erentiating (24) or (25), we can see that a smaller h leads to more
divergence regardless of whether a = a0 or a = a00 :

                                                             da      c0 (h a)
            c0 (h      a) (dh   da)        c0 (a) da = 0 ,      = 0               > 0.                (27)
                                                             dh  c (h a) + c0 (a)

By again referring to (24)-(25), note that a0 = 0 when h = hd while a00 = 0 when h = b
                                                                                     hd ,
when these thresholds are implicitly de…ned by:

                                                             pV         k
                                       c (hd ) = v                          ;                         (28)
                                                                  p2
                                      c b
                                        hd       = v:

                      h       i
Consequently, when h 2 hd ; b
                            hd , a00             0    a0 and, from (26), the equilibrium is a = 0.
If h < hd , a00 < a0 < 0 (the IC-constraint is violated when a = 0) and a = a0 < 0 is
necessary to satisfy IC (19). If h > b
                                     hd , 0 < a00 < a0 (the SC-constraint is violated when
a = 0) and a = a00 > 0 is necessary to satisfy SC.
   Lower threshold: So far, we have simply assumed that j wants to satisfy ICi and
SCi . But as h < hd decreases and also aj < 0 decreases to satisfy ICi (remember that
SCi does not bind in this case), uj decreases and, for a su¢ ciently small h (and aj ) it
might be that j …nds it too costly to satisfy ICi . By instead increasing aj , j is, at worst,
risking that i will stop experimenting because (19) is violated. If so, j’s payo¤ would be
p (1 + G)    c (aj )     k, since the coordination bene…t G is now guaranteed if j succeeds.
Given this payo¤, aj = 0 would be the best choice for j. Thus, it can be optimal to pick




                                                     41
aj = a0 satisfying IC only if j’payo¤ in this case (21) is larger than p (1 + G)                                                                   k:

                 p (V    c (a)) + (1                 p) [p (v           c (h         a))        (1         p) c (a)]     k               p (1 + G)      k,
p [(1 + G (1            p))    c (a)] + (1                    p) [pv        p [c (h           a) c (a)]             c (a)]               p (1 + G) ,
                                                                                              pV k
                                                    (1            p) pv         p v                                 c (a)                p2 G ,
                                                                                                 p2
                                                                                                     k
                                                                                 (1           p) V                     p2 G              c (a) ,            (29)
                                                                                                     p

where a = a0 < 0, ensuring that IC binds, is an increasing function of h. We can make
this function explicit by rewriting (24) to get:

                                                                                           pV          k
                              h = f (a0 )                         a+c       1
                                                                                 v                         + c (a0 )     )
                                                                                                p2
                              a0 = f                 1
                                                         (h) .

                                                                                                   1
Note that hd = f (0). Further, (27) implies that f                                                     , and thus f , are increasing func-
                                           1
tions. Inserting a = f                         (h) into (29), we get:

         1                                                    k
c   f        (h)              (1           p) V                        p2 G ,
                                                              p
             1                         1                               k
     f           (h)           c               (1        p) V                    p2 G ,
                                                                       p
                                                         1                                k
                   h          hd           f        c             (1    p) V                           p2 G
                                                                                          p
                                       1                                k
                        =      c               (1        p) V                        p2 G
                                                                        p
                                       1             pV            k                  1                             k
                              +c               v                       +c        c            (1       p) V                       p2 G
                                                             p2                                                     p
                                   1                pV        k                                    k                                                    k
                        = c            v                           + (1         p) V                         p2 G        c    1
                                                                                                                                   (1      p) V                    p2 G :
                                                         p2                                        p                                                    p

    So, there is an equilibrium where both districts experiment and locations strictly
diverge (a = a0 < 0) if and only if h 2 [hd ; hd ). Note that we always have hd > 0
(since when
       h     h i# 0, a0 ! 1, violating (29)). Also, note that hd < hd if and only if
(1 p) V      k
             p
                   p2 G > 0 , G p2 (1 p)2 < (p k) (1=p 1).
    Upper threshold: If h > b
                            hd , j must accommodate by choosing aj = a00 > 0 in order
to satisfy SCi (remember that ICi does not bind in this situation). As h increases, and
aj = a00 > 0 increases to satisfy SCi , j may reach the point where j instead wants

                                                                                42
to reduce aj , even though SCi (and SCj ) will then be violated. If so, j’s payo¤ is
p    c (aj )   k, and aj = 0 would be the optimal choice (ICi will still be satis…ed for such
a reduced aj , but that is irrelevant to j because j does not strictly prefer to switch to
xi is only i succeeds).
    Assume …rst that i selects ai = a00 > 0. Then, it can be optimal for j to pick
a = a00 > 0 satisfying SCi if and only if j ’s payo¤ (21) is larger than the best alternative
payo¤, p       k:

               p (V             c (a)) + (1         p) [p (v        c (h      a))        (1       p) c (a)]      k           p   k,
    p [(1 + G (1        p))           c (a)] + (1          p) [pv        p [c (h        a)    c (a)]       c (a)]            p,
                                                                   p (1      p) G + (1            p) [pv        pv]          c (a) ,
                                                                                                   p (1        p) G          c (a) , (30)

where a = a00 > 0, ensuring that SC binds, is an increasing function of h. We can make
this function explicit by rewriting (25) to get:

                                        h = g (a00 )               a00 + c    1
                                                                                  (v + c (a00 )) )
                                       a00 = g         1
                                                           (h) .

                                           1
Note that when a > 0, c                        is an increasing function, and g, and thus g 1 , are both
                                                                                                                       1
increasing functions (this fact also follows from (27)). Inserting a = g                                                   (h) into (30),
we get:

                        1
               c g          (h)            p (1        p) G ,
                            1                   1
                    g           (h)        c        (p (1      p) G) ,
                                                             1
                                 h         hd         g c        (p (1       p) G)
                                                1                                 1                1
                                       = c          (p (1      p) G) + c               v+c c           (p (1     p) G)
                                                1                                 1
                                       = c          (p (1      p) G) + c              (v + p (1        p) G) :

So, there is an equilibrium wherehboth districts
                                        i        experiment and locations converge ac-
                                  b
cording to SC if and only if h 2 hd ; hd . Note that such an equilibrium with strictly
                                                                                                                       1
positive accommodation requires G > 0, since if G = 0, then hd                                                  g (c       (0)) = g (0) =
c 1 (v) = b
          hd .
    Multiple equilibria: When deriving hd , we assumed that i selected ai = a00 > 0 to
satisfy SCj . But suppose instead that i prefers to abandon SCj and instead go for i’s

                                                                     43
best alternative, ai = 0. To determine j’s best response in this case, note that if j
would like to satisfy SCi , j certainly prefers the smallest aj > 0 satisfying (25), giving
aj = a00j (0), de…ned (as above) by c h                        a00j (0) = v. It is easy to check that SCj is not
satis…ed at this point, so j receives the payo¤

                                                    pV      c a00j (0)        k:

By comparison, if j gives up on satisfying SCi , j gets p                            k, which larger if

                                   p (V       1)           c a00j (0) ,
                         1
                    c        (p [1        p] G)            a00j (0) = h c 1 (v) ,
                                               h           e
                                                           hd c 1 [p (1 p) G] + c          1
                                                                                               (v) :

So, if h   e
           hd , there is an equilibrium where ai = aj = 0 and both experiment (IC are
satis…ed but not SC). Note that   e
                              h hd i hd , but this inequality is strict if and only if G > 0.
Thus, when G > 0 and h 2 e     hd ; hd , j prefers to set aj = a00 if i does the same, but to
set aj = 0 if ai = 0. Consequently,
                               h      wei have two equilibria in pure strategies where both
district experiment when h 2 e   hd ; hd .
                                                 p
    Example Q: If c (a) = qa2 , then c 1 (') = '=q, so
            s
                k       pV + p2 v
   hd =                           ;
                         qp2
            p
   b
   hd =         v=q;
            s                             r
   e            p (1         p) G             v
   hd                                +          ;
                        q                     q
            s                             s
                p (1         p) G             p (1       p) G       v
   hd =                              +                             + ;
                        q                            q              q
            v                                                                       v
            u                                                                       u
            u (1        p) V              k
                                                    p2 G                            u (1   p) V              k
                                                                                                                 p2 G
            t                             p                    k        pV + p2 v   t                        p
   hd =                                                    +                                                            :
                                     q                                   qp2                           q

   Furthermore, c (h               a)     c (a) = qh (h             2a), giving:

                               0        pV + p2 v
                                              k        0   k                         pV + p2 v         h
              h (h          2a ) =                ,  a   =                                               ;
                                         qp2                                         2qhp2             2
                                     v         h   v
              h (h          2a00 ) =   , a00 =       .
                                     q         2 2qh

                                                                   44
   QED

   Lemma 4: (i) Of all h              hd , payo¤s are maximized at h = hd . (ii) In fact, hd is a
global maximum if:
                                         p (1 + v=V )                            1    1
                             V    1                                     k                      :                      (31)
                                               2                                 p    2
   Proof. (i) When h 2 [hd ; hd ] and IC binds, each district receives the equilibrium
payo¤

        ud = p V           c ad       + (1     p) p v             c h            ad            (1    p) c ad     k
           = pV + (1            p) p v c h                 ad + c ad                  c ad           k
                                       pV k
           = pV + (1            p) p                        c ad            k
                                          p2
           = V         k=p      c (a0 ) ;                                                                             (32)

which we can see is maximized (and equal to V                           k=p) at hd ) a0 = 0.
   For h > hd , IC does not bind but both districts are worse o¤ since c (h) increases:
when h 2 h ; b
            d hd , we have a = 0 so

                             ud = pV + (1                  p) p (v          c (h))        k;                          (33)

decreasing in hh and approaching
                       i         V k=p when h # hd .
   When h 2 b   hd ; hd and SC binds (so that one weakly best response is to not copy a
successful neighbor), we have

                                         ud = pV             c (a00 )        k;                                       (34)

which is also decreasing in h. When h > hd , we have ud = p                                        k, which is independent
of h and smaller than V          k=p.
   Example Q:
                       8                                                2
                                                                                                         9
                       >
                       >     V         k=p     q       k pV +p2 v
                                                                             if h 2 [hd ; hd ] ;         >
                                                                                                         >
                       >
                       >                                 2qhp2                                           >
                                                                                                         >
                       >
                       >                                                                                 >
                                                                                                         >
                       <   pV         k + (1       p) p (v       qh2 ) if h 2 hd ; bhd ;                 =
                ud =                                              2         h       i
                       >                                                                 >
                       >
                       >
                       >         pV     k      q       h      v
                                                                    if h 2 b hd ; hd ;   >
                                                                                         >
                                                                                         >
                       >
                       >
                                                       2     2qh                         >
                                                                                         >
                       :                           p       k if h > h :                  ;
                                                                             d


   (ii) If h < hd , only one district experiments and it does so at its own ideal point.

                                                           45
The utilitarian sum of payo¤s is therefore maximized at h = 0, giving an average payo¤
equal to p (V + v) =2          k=2. By comparing to the payo¤ when h = hd , V                        k=p, we can
conclude that hd gives the highest payo¤ when (31) holds. QED


9.2        Centralization
Assume that if only j succeeds, then the median voter selects j’s policy with probability
one.

    Lemma 5=
    (i) Suppose aj        ai        1= . If j experiments, i does as well if and only if

              c (h aj ) c (ai )                                                                             (35)
              k p [1 p (1 + ) =2]    (ai aj ) p2 (1                       ) =2
                                                                                        (G     g) (ICi ):
                       p=2 + (ai aj ) p (p 1=2)

    (ii) Consequently, if aA = aB = a and j experiments, i does as well if and only if

                                               k      p [1      p (1 + ) =2]
                   c (h        a)     c (a)                                        (G        g) :           (36)
                                                               p=2

    Proof. (i) Consider a district’s decision whether to experiment. When both districts
succeed or fail, we let zA 2 [0; 1] represent the probability that A’s policy is chosen by
the median voter when both experiments have the same outcomes. If the ideal point of
the decision-maker (median voter) is uniformly distributed with mean 0 and density ,
i.e., tm    U [ 1=2 ; 1=2 ], then the probability that A’s policy is chosen is

                                    1         xA + xB              1     aA        aB
                          zA =        +                        =     +                   ;
                                    2            2                 2           2

when this is in [0; 1] (requiring jaA              aB j      1= ). Then zB = 1           zA 2 [0; 1].
    If i’s policy is chosen, i enjoys the value W = 1 + G if i’s experiment succeeded
but the bene…t G if i failed. Note that W > V = 1 + G (1                                p), since i receives the
coordination bene…t with certainty under centralization.
    If the other district experiments, i does, as well, if this gives i a higher payo¤ than
by not experimenting:




                                                          46
           zi p2 + p (1         p) (W       c (ai )) + (1         zi ) p2 + p (1     p) (v         c (h      aj )) (37)
                     2                                   2
          + (1     p) zi [G         c (ai )] + (1      p) (1       zi ) [g    c (h     aj )]       k
          p (v     c (h        aj )) + (1   p) [(1      zi ) [g     c (h     aj )] + zi [G         c (ai )]] ;

which can be rewritten as:

                                                       p               1
                           [c (h     aj )   c (ai )]     + zi                p (2p     1)                         (38)
                                                       2               2
                                 1
                           k        p (2 + G g) p2 (1 + )
                                 2
                                      1
                                 zi       p2 (1 + 2 (G g))                      p (G        g) :
                                      2

Note that (38) becomes (35) when we assume zi 2 [0; 1] , jai                                aj j       1= (then, the
inequality-sign when transitioning from (38) to (35) is preserved since the second bracket
in (38), which we divide both sides on, is always positive).
   (ii) follows straightforwardly. QED

   Remark: If aj      ai        1= is violated, j accommodates so much more than i that j’s
policy is always selected when the experiments have identical outcomes. (It may still be
that both districts experiment in this case.)

   Lemma 6: Under centralization, there exists four thresholds hc , hc , b
                                                                         hc > hc and hc >
hc such that, for every h             hc there is a symmetric equilibrium where both districts
experiment and locations are characterized as follows:

                                    a = acIC < 0 if h 2 [hc ; hc )
                                    a = 0 if h = hc
                                                                 i
                                    a = acIC > 0 if h 2 hc ; bhc
                                                        h        i
                                          c              b
                                    a = af oc > 0 if h 2 hc ; hc
                                    a = 0 if h           hc ,




                                                       47
where acIC , acf oc , and hc are de…ned implicitly by:

                                                   k       p [1      p + (G       g) =2 + p (1             ) =2]
         c (h      acIC )       c (acIC ) =
                                                                                p=2
                                                   c0 acf oc =               2
                                                                            p (1      + G g)              (1       p)2 (G       g)
    c h          acf oc     c    acf oc      =
                                                                            p2 + (1 p)2
                                                   k       p [1      p + (G g) =2 + p (1                   ) =2]
                                 c (hc ) =                                                                         :
                                                                           p=2

   The thresholds b
                  hc , hc and hc are de…ned in the proof. Note that both acIC and acf oc
increase in h, and so does therefore a = min acIC ; acf oc :

   Proof. We now investigate j’s choice of aj given ai and that i’s subsequent action is
as described by Lemma 5 and its proof. Just as the left-hand-side of (37) describes i’s
payo¤, j’s payo¤ can be written similarly:

    ucj =          zj p2 + p (1           p) (W            c (aj )) + (1        zj ) p2 + p (1        p) (v            c (h    ai ))(39)
             + (1           p)2 zj [G c (aj )] + (1                   p)2 (1        zj ) [g    c (h      ai )]     k; where
             1               aj ai
    zj     =   +                      :                                                                                              (40)
             2                   2

A …rst-order-condition approach: By taking the derivative of (39) we …nd that @ucj =@aj
0 if and only if

           dzj 2
               p (W               c (aj )        v + c (h         ai )) + (1        p)2 [G     c (aj )      g + c (h          ai )] (41)
           daj
                c0 (aj ) zj p2 + p (1            p) + (1          p)2 zj       0;

while the second-order condition @ 2 ucj = (@aj )2 < 0 always holds. By inspection, and
because dzj =daj =                =2 > 0, ucj is strictly increasing in aj for all aj                                   0. When the
analogous f.o.c. holds for ai , we have two equations in two unknown, permitting the
unique (and symmetric) solution ai = aj = acf oc > 0 satisfying:

                                 c0 acf oc                c h      acf oc     c acf oc        p2 + (1       p)2
                            =      p2 (1          ) + (G            g) p2 + (1           p)2 ,

                                                                c0 acf oc =          p2 (1      )
                     c h        acf oc       c   acf oc    =                              2           (G         g) :                (42)
                                                                        p2 + (1        p)


                                                                     48
Note that the l.h.s. of (42) decreases as acf oc < h=2 increases, so acf oc increases in
and (G      g) but decreases in . When                         = 1, acf oc is minimized (over p) when p = 1=2
(then, the denominator in (42) is smallest), so, the larger is the probability that the two
experiments have the same outcome, the more important it is to pander to the median
voter and so the larger is acf oc .
   Adding IC-constraints: The …rst-order-condition approach is ignoring the IC-constraint
for i, (35) or, equivalently, (38). As aj increases towards acf oc , (38) might be violated.
When both the IC-constraints bind in the symmetric model, the outcome is symmetric
ai = aj = acIC and satis…es:

                                                       k    p [1      p + (G     g) =2 + p (1          ) =2]
              c (h     acIC )         c (acIC ) =                                                              :        (43)
                                                                               p=2
   Remark: When (38) binds, a marginally larger aj does violate (38) if and only if:

                                                            p      1
                                        c0 (h      aj )       + zi      p (2p 1)
                                                            2      2
                                                                    h            i
                                                [c (h aj ) c (ai )] p (2p 1)
                                                                      2
                                    p2 (1          + 2 (G g)) p (G g) < 0;
                              2

which, in the symmetric equilibrium, holds if and only if

            c0 (h    acIC )
                                  > [c (h         acIC )      c (acIC ) + G     g] (1     2p)      p (1            );
                                         k      p [1        p (1 + ) =2]
                                  =                                      (1         2p)    p (1        );
                                                           p=2

which is always satis…ed when the r.h.s. is negative (for example when p > 1=2), but if
it is positive, we must require:

                                                                 c0 (h acIC )
                     <        (h)                                                                          ;
                                        [k      p [1       p (1 + ) =2]] (2=p        4)    p (1        )

where we may note that c0 (h                    acIC )      c0 (h=2) for all acIC       h=2. We henceforth assume
   <     (h). If         >        (h), there would be no pure strategy equilibrium where both
invested.
   Returning to (43), note that acIC                         0 if h      hc and acIC       0 if h          hc , where hc is
de…ned by:
                                         k      p [1       p + (G       g) =2 + p (1       ) =2]
                         c (hc ) =                                                                 :
                                                                      p=2

                                                                49
   Combined with the lessons from the …rst-order approach, we can conclude that as
long as j indeed prefers that also i experiments, we have in a symmetric equilibrium
that:
                                                                  ac = min acIC ; acf oc :

So, for h < hc , ac = acIC < 0 < acf oc . Both acIC and acf oc are increasing functions of h
and so is thus ac = min acIC ; acf oc , which we may write as ac = ' (h). Note that acIC
increases in h faster than does acf oc when a > 0 (this follows from the term c0 acf oc in
(42)): we have acf oc > acIC if and only if the l.h.s. of (42) is smaller than the l.h.s. of
(43), and this requires that c0 acf oc , and therefore acf oc and h, are su¢ ciently small.
   To be precise, we have ac > ac if and only if h > b       IC   hc , where bhc ensures that
                                                                           f oc
acIC = acf oc . Note that we can rewrite (43) to

                                                                  k        p [1   p + (G          g) =2 + p (1             ) =2]
   h = fc (acIC )                            acIC + c        1
                                                                                                                                   + c (acIC ) )
                                                                                                p=2
 acIC = fc 1 (h) .

So, acIC < acf oc when h < b
                           hc , implicitly de…ned such that acIC = acf oc by the following:

 c0 f c     1       b
                    hc          =            p2 (1           )                       k      p (1     p)
                                             2                        (G      g) =                            (G      g)      p (1         ) ) (44)
                 p2 + (1                 p)                                                 p=2

                            b                                                k    p (1         p)
     c0 f c         1
                            hc           =           p2 (1        )=                                p (1          )       p2 + (1      p)2 )
                                                                                  p=2

                     b                           k       p (1     p)
  c0 f c        1
                     hc              = =                                   p2 + (1       p)2        p (1          ) p2 + (1          p)2    p )
                                                         p=2

                b                             k          p (1     p)
   fc   1
                hc = c0              1
                                                                       p2 + (1           p)2        p (1          ) [(1      p) (1     2p)] )
                                                         p=2


 b                                       k       p (1 p) 2
 hc = fc c0                      1
                                                         p + (1 p)2     p (1      ) [(1 p) (1 2p)]                                             )
                                                 p=2
                                 k           p (1 p) 2
        = c0            1
                                                      p + (1 p)2    p (1     ) [(1 p) (1 2p)]
                                             p=2
                                2                                                                                                              3
                                                                            k p[1 p+(G g)=2+p(1            )=2]
                                                                                                                  +
                +c          1   4                    h                                p=2                                                  i   5:
                                                         k p(1 p)                     2
                                     c c0        1
                                                           p=2
                                                                           2
                                                                       p + (1          p)           p (1          ) [(1     p) (1      2p)]


This equation is explicitly de…ning b
                                    hc 2 (hc ; 1).

                                                                                  50
      Lower threshold: As h < hc decreases, a = acIC < 0 decreases in order to satisfy
IC. This is costly for district j, which may be tempted to increase aj , even if then ICi
should be violated and i would stop experiment. In this case,

                                                                          1 acIC
                                                    zi = min 0;             +            :
                                                                          2    2

if the two outcomes are the same. The payo¤ to j would be:

                                p+G                 (1     p) zi (c (h       acIC ) + G        g)      k;

In contrast, the payo¤ from selecting aj = ai = acIC is:

                       p2                                         G+g            c (acIC ) + c (h          acIC )
                          + p (1             p) (1 + ) +                                                            k:             (45)
                       2                                           2                         2

By comparison, j prefers to stick to acIC if and only if:

                                G        c (acIC ) + c (h acIC )
                                             g
p (1    p=2) (1 + )                                              > p (1 p) zi [c (h                                       acIC ) + G      g] )
                                  2                  2
                                             p      p2 G g                     c (h                                       acIC )    c (acIC )
                                    p 1                          > c (h acIC )
                                             2       2     2                                                                  2
                                (1 p) zi [c (h acIC ) + G g] )


             p          p2      G        g                                  k     p [1        p + (G     g) =2 + p (1          ) =2]
  p 1                                             > c (h         acIC )
             2          2           2                                                                   p
                                                           (1     p) zi [c (h      acIC ) + G        g] )

  k                      p (3           p)
        (1       p)2                         (1          ) > c (h       acIC )    (1     p) zi [c (h         acIC ) + G    g] ; (46)
  p                             2
where the r.h.s. becomes arbitrarily high (and the condition will fail) when h # 0 since
then acIC #        1. Thus, there exists a hc > 0 (implicitly de…ned such that (46) binds)
such that both districts prefer to stick to acIC < 0 only if h                                      hc .
      In the basic model, the condition simpli…es to

                                    k        p (1        p)2
                                                               > c (h      acIC ) [1     (1     p) zi ] :
                                                p

      Upper threshold: As h > hc increases, a > 0 increases since both districts try to
please the median voter. Suppose j considers to give up on pleasing the median voter


                                                                     51
for the case where both experiments have the same outcomes. If, in this case, the
uncertainty regarding the median voter’s ideal point is so large (i.e.,                              is so small) that
zj > 0 even when aj = 0, then we know that this cannot be an optimal choice for j:
from (41) we have that @ucj =@aj > 0 when aj = 0. However, if zj = 0 when aj # 0, then
it is no longer the case that @ucj =@aj > 0 at aj = 0, since j’s policy would then never be
chosen when ai = ac = min acIC ; acf oc and both experimental outcomes are the same.
Instead, j’s policy will only (and always) be chosen if i fails but j succeeds, and, for this
situation, aj = 0 is indeed the best choice, giving j the payo¤:

                    zej p (1     p) W + pv        [1     zej p (1          p)] c (h   ac )      k:

By choosing ac , j could instead receive the payo¤:

                  p2                                   G+g             c (ac ) + c (h        ac )
                     + p (1       p) (1 + ) +                                                        k:
                  2                                     2                        2

By comparison, j prefers ac if

                                  p           G + g c (ac ) + c (h ac )
                       p 1           (1 + ) +                           >                                        (47)
                                  2             2             2
                       p (1      p) W + pv [1 p (1 p)] c (h ac ) ;

which fails if h > hc 2 (hc ; 1), where hc is implicitly de…ned such that (47) holds with
equality. So, when h 2 hc ; hc and i selects ac > 0, then j prefers aj = ac to aj = 0.
   Example Q: Rewriting (42) and (43), we get

                                     2qacf oc =        p2 (1           )
            qh2    2qhacf oc =                                 2              (G      g) )
                                          p2 + (1            p)
                                                               p2 (1     )
                                     qh2 + G           g+     p2 +(1    p)2
                        acf oc   =                        2q=
                                                                                                                 (48)
                                          2hq +        p2 +(1 p)2

                                     (qh2 + G           g) p2 + (1             p)2 + p2 (1           )
                                 =                                           ;2
                                              2hq p2 + (1 p) + 2q=
                                     k    p [1 p + (G g) =2 + p (1  ) =2]
            qh2     q2hacIC =                                              )
                                                        p=2
                                     h    k p [1 p + (G g) =2 + p (1      ) =2]
                         acIC =                                                 :                                (49)
                                     2                      qhp

   QED


                                                        52
   Lemmaă:= Of every h              hc , payo¤s are highest when h =h c .
                h       i
                      b
   Proof. If h 2 hc ; hc ,

         p2                     G + g c (acIC ) + c (h acIC )
uc =        + p (1 p) (1 + ) +                                     k                                             (50)
         2                        2               2
               p           G + g 2k p [2 2p + G g + p (1             )]
     = p 1        (1 + ) +                                                                               c (acIC ) (51)
                                                                                                                     k
               2             2                    2p
                                                1+p
     = 1 + p (1 p) p (1 p) (1       ) =2 + G k         c (acIC ) ;
                                                 p

which is increasing as h ! hc and ac ! 0. If instead h > b
                                                         hc , a < acIC , smaller than
what is presumed in (50), andhthus uic is smaller as well.
  Example Q: So, when h 2 hc ; b hc , we get

                                                                            1+p
               uc = 1 + p (1          p)       p (1      p) (1       ) =2 + G       k
                                                                             p
                                                                                               2
                              h      k        p [1      p + (G g) =2 + p (1  ) =2]
                          q                                                                        :
                              2                               qhp

   QED
                                                  h       i
   Lemma 8: (i) Consider Example Q and suppose h 2 hc ; b
                                                        hc \ [hd ; hd ]. We have
uc > ud if and only if:
                                                                                                                              2
                                                                     k       p [1   p + p (1           ) =2]    G g       h
      k    p (1   p) + p (1       p) (1          ) =2    pG + q
                                                                                     qhp                         2qh      2
                                                                     2
           k   p (1   p + G (1            2p))       G g         h
  < q                                                                    :
                      2qhp2                           2qh        2

   (ii) Consider the basic model and suppose h                    max fhc ; hd g. We have uc > ud if and
only if:                            s
                                          k      p (1    p)     1=4p2 1
                              h<                                          :
                                                   q          1=2 p (1 p)
    Proof. (i) Consider
                 h      …rst
                        i    the case where IC binds for centralization as well as decen-
tralization: h 2 hc ; b
                      hc \ [hd ; hd ] :Under centralization, we had from above that when




                                                         53
    h      i
         b
h 2 hc ; hc :

                                                                                           1+p
                uc = 1 + p (1                         p)       p (1        p) (1         ) =2 + G                    k                             (52)
                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                                  2
                                           h      k         p [1       p + (G g) =2 + p (1  ) =2]
                                  q                                                                                                   :
                                           2                                 qhp

   Under decentralization when h 2 [hd ; hd ],

                                                                                                                 2
                                       d                   k               k       pV + p2 v             h
                                      u =V                         q                                                 :                             (53)
                                                           p                       2qhp2                 2

   By comparison, uc > ud if and only if:

                                                                               G+g          k            p [1            p + (G           g) =2]
            p (2         p)       p (1          p) (1           ) =2 +
                                                                                2                                          p
                                                                                                                     2
                     k        p [1         p + (G            g) =2 + p (1                ) =2]           h
                q                                                                                                         k
                                                           qhp                                           2
                                                                               2
                     k                k        pV + p2 v               h
        > V                   q                                                    ,
                     p                         2qhp2                   2


                         p (2         p)         p (1          p) (1               ) =2 + G + 1              p
                                                                                                                              2
                                   k           p [1        p + (G        g) =2 + p (1                    ) =2]            h
                              q                                                                                                       k
                                                                       qhp                                                2
                                                                                                     2
                                                                k      pV + p2 v            h
                    > 1 + G (1                   p)        q                                             ,
                                                                       2qhp2                2


                      p (1            p)        p (1        p) (1              ) =2 + pG         k                                                 (54)
                                                                                                                              2
                                  k        p [1            p + (G        g) =2 + p (1                    ) =2]           h
                      >q
                                                                       qhp                                               2
                                                                                                                                  2
                                  k        p (1        p)        p2 (1                 g)   p (1                 p) G         h
                          q                                                                                                           :
                                                                     2qhp2                                                    2

   The condition is more likely to hold if                                     is large (less transparency favors decentral-
ization).
   Regarding G and/or g, we should take the derivative... But it seems like if T in-
creases, then condition is less likely to hold (more transfers favours decentralization)


                                                                           54
and if p roughly 1/2, then a larger G = g makes condition more likely to hold (more
coordination bene…ts favor centralization). All this can be intuitively explained.
    Set G = g and                  = 1, then the condition becomes:
                                                               2                                                                2
                               k      p [1    p]      h                        k       p (1     P ) + Gp (2p          1)    h
k      p (1     p) + q                                             < pG + q                                                         ;
                                      qhp             2                                         2qhp2                       2

where the derivative of the r.h.s. w.r.t. G is positive if

                       k       p (1 p) + Gp (2p 1) h p (2p 1)
        p + 2q                                                                                 > 0,
                                    2qhp2           2   2qhp2
                           k    p (1 p) + Gp (2p 1) h (1 2p)
                                                                                               < p,
                                     2qhp2            2   hp
                                 k p (1 p) + Gp (2p 1)
                                                        (1 2p)                                 < 2p2 + (1           2p) ,
                                          qh2 p2
                                 k p (1 p) + Gp (2p 1)
                                                        (1 2p)                                 < p2 + (1           p)2 ;
                                          qh2 p2

which holds if p > 1=2, for example (the parenthesis must be positive when h < hd ,
ad < 0). If p < 1=2
    (ii) In the simplest model, the condition above becomes

                                                                       2                                       2
                                       k      p [1        p]       h               k      p (1 p)          h
        k       p (1       p) + q                                           < q                                    )
                                              qhp                  2                     2qhp2             2
                                                                              s
                                                                                   k    p (1       p)     1=4p2 1
                                                                       h <                                          :
                                                                                          q             1=2 p (1 p)

    For this case, consider also h                        hd . Suppose h           hc . If a = acIC , we have from (51):

                                                                   k   p [1   p]
                                   uc = p (2         p)                                c (acIC )    k
                                                                        p

If h     hd ,
                                             ud = p + p (1             p) 1    qh2        k:




                                                                       55
In this case, ud > uc , when (using (49)):

                                k     p [1       p]
        p (2        p)                                    c (acIC )        k < p + p (1         p) 1     qh2   k)
                                       p
                                                                           2
        k      p [1        p]                h        k   p [1      p]
                                    +q                                         > p (1        p) qh2 )
                p                            2            qhp
                                                                           2
         2     1                                      k   p [1      p]
       qh                p (1       p) + q                                     > 0;
               4                                          qhp

which always hold. Furthermore, if h > b
                                       hc , we know ac < acIC , which reduces uc still
further and, again, we must have ud > uc . Thus, it is possible that uc > ud only when
h < hd . QED


9.3     Extensions
Proof of Proposition 9. Departing from the generalized model, set V = 1 + (1                                        p) G,
v = W = 1 + G; g = G and                          = 1.
   (i) By di¤erentiating the simpli…ed version of (22), we get:

                                                                       p) dG + p2 dG
                                                                               p (1
                              c0 (h      a) da        c0 (a) da =                    )
                                                                        p2
                                                           da       1=p 2
                                                              = 0                ;
                                                           dG   c (h a) + c0 (a)

where the numerator is always positive. The rest of the proof follows from Lemma 3 -
except for the claim on hd , which follows from its de…nition (28) and Lemma 4.
   (ii) follows from Lemma 5 and Lemma 6.
   (iii) Since we know @uc =@G = 1, we only need to consider @ud =@G. From the proof
of Lemma 4 and (33)-(34), we can check that @ud =@G < 1 if h > hd . If h 2 [hd ; hd ], we
have
                                                 @ud                            @a0
                                                     =1          p + c0 (a0 )           1 if
                                                 @G                             @G

                                k     p [1 + (1        p) G] + p2 (1 + G)               h       2p2 p
       (1      p)        2q                                                                                    1,
                                                      2qhp2                             2        2qhp2
                                             k     p (1 p) Gp (1 2p)                     h       1 2p
                                                                                                               1;
                                                          2qhp2                          2         h

which is never satis…ed if p > 1=2 (since then the l.h.s. is negative). If p < 1=2, as


                                                                      56
well, the inequality fails if G is su¢ ciently large (which again makes the l.h.s. negative).
QED

   Proof of Proposition 10. For the transparency-extension, we can simplify the gener-
alized model by setting v = , V = W = 1 and g = G = 0.
   (i) We can di¤erentiate the simpli…ed version of (22) to get

                                     da           1
                                        = 0       0
                                                                                < 0.
                                     d   c (a) + c (h               a)

   From Lemma 4 and (28), we have that the optimal h is given by

                                                               p        k
                                          c (hd ) =                         ;
                                                                   p2

which we can di¤erentiate to get dhd =d = 1=c0 (hd ) > 0:
   If h 2 [hd ; hd ], ud follows from (32). Taking the derivative w.r.t.                                 , we …nd that ud
is maximized when a0
   is minimized (at zero), which from (28) requires                                  = c (h) + (p          k) =p2 . If this
expression is larger than one (which it is if h > hd ), then                               = 1 is optimal. Equation
(33) is also uncovering that          = 1 is optimal when h > hd .
   (ii) The claim on a follows from the de…nitions of acIC and acf oc in Lemma 6 (or
by di¤erentiating these de…nitions). The claim on hc follows from Lemma 7 and the
de…nition of hd in Lemma 6.                                        i            h
   Regarding the optimal                                         b
                                     in Example Q, when h 2 hc ; hc the utility under central-
ization becomes:

                                                                                                 1+p
                       uc = 1 + p (1          p)     p (1      p) (1                ) =2     k
                                                                                                  p
                                                                                                 2
                                      h       k     p [1      p + p (1               ) =2]
                                 q                                                                   ;
                                      2                        qhp

which is maximized over          when the following f.o.c. holds (the second-order condition
holds trivially):

            p (1       p)        k     p [1        p + p (1         ) =2]            h        p
                            2q                                                                           =0)
                   2                                qhp                              2       2qh




                                                       57
                                                                p
           k       p [1       p + p (1             ) =2] = p 1       qh2 )
                                                                2
                                                              p          k p (1 p)
                                      p (1          ) =2 = 1      qh2              )
                                                              2               p
                                                             k p (1 p)        1    p
                                                         = 1       2
                                                                           +     1   qh2 :
                                                                  p =2       p=2   2

But this       < 1 only if
                                                                                               s
                     k        p (1       p)                  p                                     k p (1 p)
                                              > 1              qh2 ) h < e
                                                                         hc                                    :
                                p                            2                                     q (2 p) p=2

Thus, optimally we have

               k
             p (1 p)        p k                                  2                         k   p (1          p)             h
   = 1                  + 2     +                                      1 qh2           2                          < 1 if h 2 hc ; e
                                                                                                                                  hc .
             p2 =2           p2                                  p                              p2
             h       i
              e    b
   = 1 if h 2 hc ; hc .

                 h        i
Consider next h 2 bhc ; hc and note that (48) simpli…es to:

                                                    qh2 p2 + (1                p)2 + p2 (1               )
                                   acf oc     =                                    2                         )
                                                        2hq      p2
                                                         + (1 p) + 2q=
                               dacf oc                      p2
                                              =                       < 0:
                                d               2hq p2 + (1 p)2 + 2q=

So the payo¤, from (50), is

                                1+                                       c acf oc + c h                 acf oc
                      uc =                    1     (1       p)2                                                   k:
                                 2                                                  2

The derivative of uc w.r.t.                    is then:

                               1       (1         p)2                            dacf oc
                                                        +q h           2acf oc
                                        2                                         d
                               1       (1         p)2                                              p2
                          =                                  h       2acf oc
                                        2                                 2h p2 + (1 p)2 + 2=
                                                                         p2             2acf oc
                          = p2 + 2p (1                  p)                          1           ;
                                                                 p2 + (1 p)2 + 1=         h

which is always positive since acf oc > 0. If h                                  hc , ac = 0 and uc is maximized when


                                                                      58
  = 1.

   (iii) From (52) we have

                 duc   p (1 p)           k        p [1   p + p (1         ) =2]          h     p
                     =                                                                           ;
                 d         2                              qhp                            2     h

and from (53) we have
                                dud           k     p + p2        h       1
                                    =                                       :
                                d                  2qhp2          2       h
Thus, when      = 1,

                   duc        dud   k p + p2             1 1                    (1       p)2
                                  =                       +         p2                         ;
                   d          d      qh2 p2              4 4                         2

which is always positive when p          1=2 since the …rst bracket is larger than one when
h < hd . QED

   Proof of Proposition 11. For this extension we can simplify by setting G =                                g=T
and      = 1, so V = 1 + (1      p) T , v = 1       T , and W = 1 + T .
   (i) The …rst sentence follows from the de…nition of ad and hd when simplifying the
model. From Lemma 1, we know that the …rst-best requires a = ab 2 [0; h=4]. In
equilibrium, Lemma 3 reveals that, since the thresholds for h depend on T , we can
always …nd T such that h 2 b
                           hd ; hd and a > 0, given by (23). In fact any a 2 (0; h=2)
is achievable for some T , implying that the …rst-best can be implemented. (Since i
captures the entire surplus if j switches when (23) binds, i will not jump to a = 0 before
this is socially optimal).
   Under (Q) and if h 2 b
                        hd ; hd ;(23) becomes:


                                         k        p (1 p)     pT
                         h2    2ah =                                  )
                                                      qp2
                                         k        p (1 p)
                                 T =                          qp h2             2ah :
                                                    p

Substituting in the …rst-best a from Corollary 1 completes the proof.
   (ii) The …rst sentence follows from the de…nitions of acIC , acf oc and hc . Furthermore,
we have:
                                                                                                     2
                                              1+p             h       k     p [1 p + T ]
             uc = 1 + p (1      p) + T    k              2q                                              :
                                               p              2                qhp

                                                    59
So the f.o.c. when maximizing uc w.r.t. T is

                                         h      k       p [1 p + T ]                      1
                          1       2q                                                           =0
                                         2                 qhp                           qh

giving
                                                        k        p (1       p)
                                               T =
                                                                   p
   (iii) follows from that above. QED

   Proof of Proposition 12. Let p0 be the probability that one of the other n 1 district,
di¤erent from i, succeeds:
                                              p0 = 1            (1       p)n   1
                                                                                   :

We will consider equilibria where all districts experiment. If every other district accom-
modates by a i , then district i’s payo¤ is:

                ud;n = p          c (ai ) + (1          p) p0 [1         c (h          a i ) + c (ai )]       k:

Maximizing this payo¤ w.r.t. a = ai = a                     i   gives the …rst-best level of a:

                    c0 (a) + (1        p) 1      (1         p)n      1
                                                                         [c0 (h        a) + c0 (a)] = 0 ,

                      c0 (a)
                                  = (1                   p) p0 = (1                p) 1       (1    p)n   1
                                                                                                                  :
                c0 (h a) + c0 (a)
So, a larger n (increasing the r.h.s.) implies more accommodation (increasing the l.h.s.)
in the …rst-best.
   (i) If the other districts experiments, i does as well if

                                                 un               p0 [1        c (h       a i ) + c (ai )]            c (ai ) ,
     p (1   p0 [1      c (h    a i ) + c (ai )])                  k,
                                                                  k p (1               p0 )         p         k
                        c (h      a i)        c (ai )                                         =1                  (IC):           (55)
                                                                     pp0                                pp0

   Naturally, the IC-constraint becomes harder to satisfy when n is large since it is
quite likely that a nonexperimenter can copy another district’s success (p0 increases in
n and so does the r.h.s. of (55)).




                                                                60
      Note that IC holds even when a = 0 if h                          hd;n , given by:

                                                  k        p (1      p0 )          p         k
                                 c hd;n =                                   =1                   ;
                                                            pp0                        pp0

increasing in n. But when h < hd;n , it is necessary with divergence (a < 0) for all
districts to be motivated to experiment. Just as before, in an equilibrium where all
districts will experiment, the IC will bind for every district. This requires ai = ad , given
by:
                                                  k     p (1        p0 )                         p k
                c (h     ad )     c (ad ) =                                =1                                           :
                                                         pp0                      p 1            (1 p)n             1


      Since the right-hand side increases in n, so must the left-hand side and therefore
 ad . It is easy to check (just as before) that among all these equilibria, payo¤s are
highest at h = hd;n :
      Example Q gives

                                                             k      p (1 p0 )
                                qh (h       2ad ) =                           ,
                                                                     pp0
                                                        h           k p (1 p0 )
                                              ad =                              ,
                                                        2                2qhpp0
                                                        h           k p (1 p0 )
                                        h     ad      =           +
                                                        2                2qhpp0

and ud;n becomes

                   ud;n = p         qa2d + (1           p) p0 1            q (h   ad )2 + qa2d                 k:

      (ii) In a symmetric equilibrium where everyone experiments, each district’s payo¤ is

                                                            c (a) + c (h          a) (n              1)
                   uc;n = 1             (1        p)n                                                      k
                                                                        n
                                                             c (a) + c (h a) (n                      1)
                               = p + (1           p) p0                                                        k:
                                                                         n

      If instead i decides to not experiment, then i’s payo¤ is:

                                                                    c (a) + c (h        a) (n             1)
                       p0 (1     c (h       a))       (1     p0 )                                              :
                                                                                   n




                                                               61
By comparison, i experiments only if

                                                 c (a) + c (h           a) (n        1)
       p (1        p0 ) + p0 c (h        a)                                                           k,
                                                                    n
                                                                                                          k        p (1      p0 )
                                                                c (h       a)        c (a)            n                             ;
                                                                                                                     p0

where the r.h.s. is again increasing in n (even more than under decentralization because
of the n-e¤ect). Thus, a must decrease in n also under centralization. When the IC-
constraints bind, the inequality binds.
   Example Q gives:

                                                            k     p (1 p0 )
                                   qh (h       2ac ) =                       ,
                                                                  p0 =n
                                                           h      k p (1 p0 )
                                                 ac =                            ,
                                                           2          2qhp0 =n
                                                           h      k p (1 p0 )
                                           h     ac      =      +              ;
                                                           2          2qhp0 =n

and payo¤ uc;n becomes:

                                                           qa2c + q (h           ac )2 (n         1)
                          uc;n = p + (1          p) p0                                                        k:
                                                                                n

   (iii) By comparison, centralization is better if

                                                  uc;n > ud;n ,
                                           2
                   qa2c   + q (h       ac ) (n        1)
                                                           >        qa2d        (1     p) p0 q (h             ad )2       a2d ,
                                      n
       n       1
                   q (h      ac ) 2     qa2c      qa2c >            qa2d        (1     p) p0 q (h             ad )2       a2d ,
           n
           n       1 k       p (1 p0 )                                                            k       p (1        p0 )
                                                  qa2c     >        qa2d        (1     p) p   0
                                                                                                                              ,
               n             p0 =n                                                                         pp0




                                                               62
                                                                                                            n        1    1       p
                                                        qa2d    qa2c > [k              p (1         p0 )]                             ,
                                                                                                                p0            p
                             2                                    2
     h k p (1 p0 )                  h k p (1 p0 )                                                           n        1    1       p
   q                             q                                      > [k           p (1         p0 )]                             ,
      2         2qhpp0              2       2qhp0 =n                                                            p0            p
             0                 0
k p (1 p ) k p (1 p )                     1         1                        n        1         1       p
           2                  2     h                                   >                                   ,
 q (2hpp0 )        q (2hp0 =n)          2hpp0 2hp0 =n                            p0                 p
               k p (1 p0 ) 1                  1 1                            n        1         1       p
                     2  02        2
                                     n2               n                 >                                   ,
                  4qh p         p            2p0 p                               p0                 p


                 k  p (1 p0 )          1               1 1         n 1 1 p
                                             n2     >        n +             ,
                   4qh2 p02            p2               0
                                                      2p p           p0    p
               k p (1 p0 )             1              1        2p0
                                             n2     >   +n 2       (1 p) ,
                   2qh2 p0             p2             p         p
        k p (1 p0 )                     1 + np
                      (1 np)                        > 2 (1        p)n       (1        np) :                              (56)
          qh2 p0 p                         2

   It is easy to see that the inequality can never hold if np > 1. If np < 1, such that
the l.h.s. of (56) is positive, then the inequality still fails if h is su¢ ciently large, i.e., if:
                             s
                                  k      p (1 p0 )             1 n2 p2
                        h<                                                             :                                 (57)
                                         qp0 p     4 (1        p)n 2 (1          np)

This claim follows since the r.h.s. of (56), and thus the denominator in (57), is always
positive.
   Remark: To see that the r.h.s. of (56) is always positive, note that its derivative
w.r.t. n is


                                      2 (ln ((1   p))) (1      p)n + p;

which is increasing in n. When n = 2, the r.h.s. of (56) becomes

                     2 (1   p)2        (1   2p) = p + (1           p) (2         2p        1)
                                                  = p + (1         p) (1         2p) > 0

when p < 1=n. Thus, the r.h.s. of (56) must be positive when n                              2. QED




                                                    63
References
 [1] Alesina, Alberto, and Enrico Spolaore. 1997. “On the Number and Size of Nations.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 1027-1056.

 [2] Bednar, Jenna. 1996.“Federalism: Unstable by Design.” Masters thesis, Stanford
    University.

 [3] Bednar, Jenna. 2007. “Valuing Exit Options.”Publius 37 (2): 190-208.

 [4] Bednar, Jenna. 2011. “Nudging Federalism towards Productive Experimentation.”
    Regional and Federal Studies 21 (October/December): 503-521.

 [5] Bednar, Jenna. 2011b. “The Political Science of Federalism.” Annual Review of
    Law and Social Science 7: 269-288.

 [6] Besley, Timothy. 2001. “Political Institutions and Policy Competition.”in Gudrun
    Kochendorfer-Lucius and Boris Pleskovic (eds), The Institutional Foundations of a
    Market Economy, Villa Borsig Workshop Series 2000, The World Bank, 102-109.

 [7] Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 2003. "Centralized versus Decentralized Pro-
    vision of Local Public Goods: A Political Economy Approach." Journal of Public
    Economics 87(12): 2611-37

 [8] Bolton, Patrick, and Christopher Harris. 1999. “Strategic Experimentation.”
    Econometrica 67 (March): 349-374.

 [9] Buera, Francisco J., Alexander Monge-Naranjo, and Giorgio E. Primiceri. 2011.
    “Learning the Wealth of Nations.” Econometrica 79 (January): 1-45.

[10] Cai, Hongbin, and Daniel Treisman. 2009. “Political Decentralization and Policy
    Experimentation.”Quarterly Journal of Political Science 4: 35-58

[11] Cremer, Jacques, and Thomas R. Palfrey. 1999. “Political Confederation.” Amer-
    ican Political Science Review 93 (March): 69-83.

[12] Cremer, Jacques, and Thomas R. Palfrey. 2000. “Federal Mandates by Popular
    Demand.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (5): 905-927.

[13] de Figueiredo, Rui J.P., and Barry R. Weingast. 2005. “Self-Enforcing Federalism.”
    Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 21 (1): 103-135.


                                          64
[14] Harstad, Bård. 2007. "Harmonization and Side Payments in Political Cooperation."
    American Economic Review 97(3): 871-889.

[15] Keller, Godfrey, Rady, Sven, and Cripps, Martin, 2005. "Strategic Experimentation
    with Exponential Bandits", Econometrica 73(1): 39-68

[16] Kollman, Kenneth, John Miller, and Scott Page. 2000. “Decentralization and the
    Search for Policy Solutions.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 16
    (April): 102-128.

[17] Lockwood, Ben. 2002. "Distributive Politics and the Costs of Centralization." Re-
    view of Economic Studies, 69(2): 313-37.

[18] Mundell, R. 1961. “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas.” American Economic
    Review 51: 509-517.

[19] Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal Federalism. NewYork: Harcourt Brace.

[20] Oates, Wallace E. 1999. "An Essay on Fiscal Federalism." Journal of Economic
    Literature, 37(3): 1120-49.

[21] Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 1996. “Federal Fiscal Constitutions: Risk
    Sharing and Moral Hazard.” Econometrica 64 (May): 623-646.

[22] Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics. MIT Press: Cam-
    bridge, MA.

[23] Rabe, B.G. 2004. Statehouse and Greenhouse: The Emerging Politics of American
    Climate Change Policy. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

[24] Rabe, B.G. 2006. Race to the Top: The Expanding Role of US State Renewable
    Portfolio Standards. Washington, DC: Pew Center for Global Climate Change.

[25] Riker, William H. 1964. Federalism: Origins, Operations, and Signi…cance. Boston:
    Little Brown.

[26] Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 1980. “Risk Taking and Reelection: Does Federalism Pro-
    mote Innovation?” Journal of Legal Studies 9 (June): 593-616.

[27] Strumpf, Koleman S. 2002. “Does Government Decentralization Increase Policy
    Innovation?”Journal of Public Economic Theory 4(2): 207-241.


                                         65
[28] Strumpf, Koleman S., and Felix Oberholzer-Gee. 2002. "Endogenous Policy Decen-
    tralization: Testing the Central Tenet of Economic Federalism." Journal of Political
    Economy, 110(1): 1-36.

[29] Tiebout, Charles. 1956. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures.”Journal of Polit-
    ical Economy 64 (October): 416-424.

[30] Volden, Craig. 2006. “States as Policy Laboratories: Emulating Success in the
    Children’s Health Insurance Program.” American Journal of Political Science 50
    (April): 294-312.

[31] Volden, Craig, Michael M. Ting, and Daniel P. Carpenter. 2008. “A Formal Model
    of Learning and Policy Di¤usion.”American Political Science Review 102 (August):
    319-332.




                                          66
