                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FISCAL POLICIES AND
                  INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKETS




                         Alan C. Stockman




                      Working Paper No. 1961




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             June 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                Working Paper #1961
                                                June 1986




             Fiscal Policies and International Financial Markets




                                   ABSTRACT


 This paper examines the effects of fiscal policies in an open economy when

 international financial markets are well developed. Consumers use these

markets to hedge against the risk of uncertain future changes in government

policies. These portfolio allocations alter the effects of changes in

government policies, if and when they occur, as compared to a world with more

limited financial markets. Three examples are discussed. The first involves

a change in (productive) government spending, financed by a change in

lump—sum taxes, in a large open economy with two goods. The second example

concerns the effects of temporary changes in distorting taxes. The final

example concerns the open—economy effects of changes in government deficits,

due to changes in lump-sum taxes, without Ricardian equivalence. In each

example the existence of opportunities to trade on well—developed

international financial markets is shown to alter, in important ways, the

effects of changes in government policies. The empirical significance of

these differences should grow as international financial markets continue to

develop in breadth and sophistication.




                                              Alan C. Stockman
                                              Department of Economics
                                              University of Rochester
                                              Rochester, NY 14627
                  Fiscal Policies and International
                                                       Financial Markets
                                   Alan C. Stockman
  1.     Introduction

         The development of international
                                            financial markets over the past several
  years (like the development of domestic
                                               markets in the U.S.j is proceeding at
  a recolSd pace. Trade In foreign
                                     stocks has risen dramaticajlT in the U.S.
  and other countries, as have
                                 trades in foreign corporate and government
  bonds: domestic corporations issue debt denominated in
                                                         foreign currencies and
 sold on foreign markets. Trade in forward and futures markets
                                                                 has risen and
 the markets have proliferated
                                 Futures markets on indexes of assets have
 been formed: options trade has skyrocketed
                                              Finally, currency swaps (and
 interest rate swaps) — which
                               permit virtually any state-contingent
 arrangements - have become commonplace

        These developments raise many questions. What is the source of demand

 for these assets? Why have
                               these markets developed now. and wh did they not
 develop earlier? What new opportunities
                                              for corporations and individuals do
 thesemarkets offer? This paper discusses one major issue
                                                            raised by these
developments: the impact of sophisticated
                                          international financial markets on
the effects of government
                             policy. Specifica1lv this paper concentrates on
the international effects of fiscal policies.
                                                      One Important question the
paper does not address is the nature of
                                        the transition from a world with less
developed to more developed international
                                          financial markets. Instead, the
paper    compares two worlds: one with   and one without Sophisticated
international asset markets. The paper employs several models
                                                                    to make this
comparison:   the conclusion that these markets affect the results does not

depend on a specific model of fiscal policy.
                                                            to trade over time and
      International financial markets permit individuals

across prospective states of the world. By borrowing or lending with their

counterparts In other countries, individuals can. for example. try to

eliminate fluctuations in consumption caused by seasonal or cyclical
                                                of their success in this endeavor
variations in domestic output. The extent

depends. in equilibrium. on the timing of similar output fluctuations in

other countries. Intertemporal trade is one function of asset markets. In a

world of uncertainty, they have a second function: asset markets permit
                                                   If domestic output is low in one
individuals    to   hedge against unwanted risk.

state of the world and high      in another. individuals can choose a portfolio of
assets   with a positive return in the former state and a negative return in

the latter state. Future states of the world can be treated analogously to

future periods of time. The extent to which domestic individuals can succeed
                                                   depends. in equilibrium. on the
in smoothing their consumption across states

pattern   of   output across states in other countries.

      Consider a world with two countries that are identical except for

endowments.      Country A receives an endowment of a perishable good X and

country    B receives a perishable good Y. Identical. infinite—lived.

risk-averse     individuals inhabit these countries. Each has an Instantaneous
 utility function U(x)       U(y). where x and y are consumptionS of goods N and
 V.  In a stationary equilibrium country A exports to B half of its endowment
 of'N and imports half of the country B endowment of Y. Now introduce a
 simple government policy: the government
                                            of the domestic country imposes a
 lump—sum tax on domestic residents and uses the proceeds to make lump—sum

 ("foreign aid') transfer payments to residents of the other country. The
                                                                                3



 results of this policy, according to an economist using the method of

 comparative statics on th model's equilibrium, would be that wealth is

redistributed. Domestic wealth falls and foreign wealth rises. so domestic

consumption of each good falls and foreign consumption rises. Had this

government policy been perfectly anticipated. the results would have been the

same in the absence of international financial markets. The results would

also be the same. in the absence of international financial markets. if

individuals   had been uncertain about future government policies. Because
everyone in the   domestic country is identical by assumption, it is impossible
to   sell on domestic markets the risk inherent in   uncertainty about future
policy.
     Suppose that. in this example. there are international financial markets

in noncontingent claims, that is. simple borrowing and lending is allowed.

Uncertainty about future government policy in the domestic country will

induce risk—averse, expected-utility—maximizing domestic individuals to

self—insure by saving. They will consume less X and Y. and save more. in

periods   without the policy, that is. in periods when the government does not

tax them to provide foreign aid. They will dissave in periods with the

policy, in order to mitigate its effects. Foreigners will consume more in

periods without the policy. in anticipation of possible foreign-aid receipts

in some future period, and dissave in periods with the foreign aid. The size

ofthe change in consumption immediately following the imposition of the

government policy is smaller in the presence of borrowing and lending.

because loan markets permit consumption—smoothing. The magnitude of these

changes in saving and consumption, and of any associated changes in interest
                                                                             4



rates. depends on how expectations of future policy change over time (which

in turn depends on the stochastit process governing the policy), the

curvature of the utility function. etc. Clearly, some self—insurance

possibilities are present because of international capital markets. though

noncontingent claims are inferior to contingent claims for this purpose.

    Complete contingent claims would eliminate the effect of the actual

policy on consumption in this example. Because all individuals have the same

information and agree upon the relevant probability distributions in this

example. they will choose to trade in claims, prior to the realization of

policy, that undo" the income transfer from any potential policy. Because

only the domestic government may   impose this policy, foreigners are wealthier
than domestic residents and will consume more every period, regardless of

whether the domestic government actually makes the transfers. Given the

initial probabilities (at date 0 that the government will make transfers of

particular sizes in various time-periods, actual imposition of a transfer has

no effects whatsoever. introduction of complete international financial

markets. therefore, has major implications regarding the effects of this

policy.

    The treatment of government policy as uncertain and exogenous deserves

some comment. The assumption of exogeneity is inessential. though it

corresponds to questions economists frequently ask. such as "what would be

the effects of a rise in taxes?" Government policy might well be the outcome

of a political equilibrium with inputs such as lobbying. voting, and

exogenous shifts in opportunities, which operate through political

institutions that constrain bureaucrats. politicians. lobbyists, and voters.
                                                                                       0

  Generally,    such a model will have elements of randomness attached to its

  inputs. so that resulting policies will be
                                                   Stchastjc Policy can then be
  treated as a stochastic process (that
                                              might be correlated with stochastic
  processes on other disturbances to the economy). Lucas (1976). and.

 subsequently. Coolev, LeRoy. and Raymon (1984a.b) have argued that the

 assumption of rational expectations requires the stochastic process on policy

 to be specified as part of the environment of constraints under which

 individuals maximize utility.
                                      Lucas applied this argument to the investment
 tax credit and other policies. Coolev.
                                                LeRoy. and Raymon have applied the
 argument to policy on the growth      rate   of the money supply. Stockman and
 Dellas (1985) have applied it to tariffs, and Stockman and Hernandez (1985)

 to   exchange controls. Rather than changing government      policy in   a way that
 individuals thought was impossible when they maximized utilit       .   the economist
 is constrained to consider changes in policies that correspond to the
probability distributions that are part of a fully specified economic
environment     that is   known to individuals when they make their choices.2
      Without   international financial markets (and abstracting from differences

across individuals within a country), the
                                                 treatment of government policies as
outcomes of a stochastic process has no effect on allocations (though it may

affect   prices). Given the treatment of future government policy as part of

the stochastic environment facing individuals when they make choices, the

availability of international financial markets in state-contingent claims

can have major effects on the results of policies. The next three sections

of the paper present examples of these effects on fiscal policies.
                                                                            6


   When government policies are not simply redistributions. financial

markets will not simply undo the policies. Generally, pure social gains

and losses from policies will be shared among participants in financial

markets. Distortions introduced by policies. however, cannot be eliminated

by financial markets: substitution effects of policies will continue to

operate. In Stockman and Dellas (1985). for example. the effects of tariffs

are examined In a world with complete international asset markets. In a

two-country. two-good world with trade due to differing endowments. a small

tariff raises consumption of the exportable good and improves welfare in the

absence of financial markets. With these markets. however, a tariff reduces

consumption: consumption of both goods is lower with a domestic tariff and no

foreign tariff than with a foreign tariff and no domestic tariff. The

existence of contingent assets. therefore. has a major impact on the positive

implications of the theory. The results obtain from the ability of these

assets to eliminate income effects of changes in policy (as individuals

spread wealth optimally across prospective states of the world), leaving

substitution effects in   place.   Rosen's (1985) survey of implicit contracts

in labor economics makes a similar point about optimal contractual

arrangements.

    The following sections present three examples in which the effects of

fixed policy in an open economy are altered by the existence of sophisticated

international financial markets. Section 2 examines a change in government

spending under the assumptions that this spending play is productive and that

nondistorting taxes are varied to maintain a balanced budget. Section 3
 examines changes in distorting taxes holding fixed the government s budget

 deficit. Finally. section 4 examines changes in the budget deficit in an

 overlapping-generation model without Ricardian-equivalence.



 2. Government Spending and International Financial Markets

        This section discusses the effects of increases in domestic government

 expenditures. financed by increases in lump sum taxes on domestic residents.

 in a two—country world with complete contingent international asset markets.

 and contrasts the results to those in the absence of these markets.

    Government spending can serve a variety of roles. and the effects of

fiscal policy differ depending upon the type of government expenditures

analyzed. This section develops a simple illustrative model of the

international effects of changes in productive government expenditure. e.g.

on infrastructure. A key element of the model is that this productive

expenditure does not affect all goods in the same way. The effects of a

change in government spending are shown to depend on the availability of

international asset markets.

    Consider a two—country world in which the domestic country is endowed

with a tradeable good X and the foreign country is endowed with a tradeable

good V. There is a representative, risk-averse, expected—utility-maximizing

individual in each country who has instantaneous utility function 13(x) —

V(y).     Purchases or consumption of' X require a productive input to reduce

"transactions costs" that use up real resources. They may include costs of

shipping the good to its location of consumption, costs of consuming the

good. or costs of household production such as preparation. etc. It is
                                                                                 8



simplest to assume that X. besides being a consumption good. is a productive

input into this 'transactions" activity. X can be used privately by an

individual to produce transactions services, or it can be used by the

government to produce a public good that has a positive marginal product for

transactions services. One might think of X as system of roads and bridges.

police and security services, courts to enforce criminal law. or other

productive public goods. These public goods interact with private production

of transactions services and lower private        costs   of a given volume of

transactions. Let g be the        level   of government expenditure on these items

(and    neglect   all other government spending). Individuals who wish to consume

      units of X must purchase x09(g) units of X. where 9-1 > 0 of the goods are

used for transactions services and the rest are consumed. The productivity

of government expenditures motivates the conditions 9' < 0 and 9" > 0.

      The   representative   individual in the domestic country maximizes expected

utility of consumption of X and Y in each state of the world z. x(z) and

y(z). given the     exogenous probability distribution F(z) on states. So he
maximizes




(1)                    U(x(z))   V(y(z)) dF(zt)
                   J


subject to the budget constraint.
                                                                             9




 (2)                  p(z   -
                                p(z)9(z)x(z)   -   q(z)y(z)   -
                                                                  p(z)g dz
                  J



where X is the (state-independent) endowment of good X. and p(z) and q(z) are

domestic present-value state prices of X and V at date t. e.g. if z0 is a

possible value of z at date t. then Pizot) is the present—value (period zero)

price of X in state z0 at date t in the domestic country. The time

subscripts on the functions inside the integral have been suppressed. This

formulation permits complete markets within the country. In the absence of

complete international financial markets. state prices may differ across

countries. For simplicity. I abstract from all uncertainty except that which

enters through future government policy. The state vector can be written as



(3)         z =   (g. g*)


where     g and g* are the levels of government expenditure in the two

countries. The public-good aspects of government spending do not extend

outside national boundaries, by assumption, so 9 depends only on g and 9*

depends only on g*: these functions will be written 9(g) and e*(g*).

       The representative individual in the foreign country has a similar

maximization problem, though his utility function may be different and his

budget constraint is different. He maximizes
(4)                                         \?*(v*(z)) dF{z)
                      J U(x(z))


subject to




                   J q*() - p*(z)9*(z)X*(Z)                -
                                                               q*(z)y*(z)   p*(z)g* dz




where stars denote foreign variables. While foreign and domestic state

prices may differ in the absence of complete international financial markets.

arbitrage    in   the goods market on a state-by—state basis guarantees that the

relative   price    of X in terms       of V   in each state is     equal across countries.
i.e. p(zLq(z)p*(Z)q(Z) for                     everyz.

      In absence of international financial markets. equilibrium requires that
in whatever       state of the world       materializes,       world supply and demand are
equated for each good. that is.


            X        9(g)x         9*(g*)x* — g —

(6)
                                                                                         -
            V = y      —
                           y   .




In. addition, equilibrium in domestic asset markets (and similarly in foreign

asset markets) requires that demands and supplies of state-contingent assets

are equal. Because everyone is alike within a country. there are no net
                                                                                 11


  trades on these domestic asset markets. However, the equilibrium conditions

  can be used to price assets, that is, to find the prices at which individuals

 are satisfied with zero net trades. If asset prices differ across countries

 so that for some z, p(z-)       p*(z) or q(z)   q*(z), then there are private
 gains from trade. on international asset markets.

        Necessary conditions for utility maximization in each country and

 equilibrium conditions in the goods markets give three equations, for each

 date t, in domestic consumption of each good and, with the normalization q =

 1, the relative price p. These are (with time subscripts suppressed)



 (7a)             U'(x) =   p9V'(y),


 (7b)             U*I((X_ex_g_g*)/e*) =

and

 (7c)             pX =   p9x+y÷pg.

Foreign allocations can then be determined from equilibrium conditions.

        Using the last equation to eliminate the price, the system reduces to two

equations in two unknowns. Comparative statics can be used to determine the

effects of changes in government spending in either country. An increase in

government spending may move the economy toward or away from the socially

efficient level of spending. An increase in government spending in the

domestic country raises domestic consumption of X by      IxO'dgf for any given
gross domestIc purchases of X; the cost is dg units of X. The socially
                                                                                                                    12



optimal level of X is. therefore. implicitly given by xe' =                                        —1.     Similarly.

the socially optimal level of foreign government spending is given implicitiy

by x*9*I =   -1.     The analysis of changes in government spending is simplified

by consideration of changes In g or g* around the socially optimal points.3

The results of total differentiation are then4



(8a)               dx =      (l'(n1T5    -   24))(n35              dg —       7r26   dg*).

and

(8b)               dy = (1 (nl5 -            24) )(nln6 dg* — n3ir4                    dg).


where

                              (X - 8x         -
                                                      g)U''(x)    - 9L'       (x) <      0.

                   7r2 E     -y9V'   1(v) -       9V'   (y)        0.

                         E    y9\''(y)            <     0.

                   7T4                 - ex       _g)u*1u(x*!e* - OU*I(x*)

                                       l (*) —          e*V*I   (y*)      <    0.     and

                   7r6       y9*'\T*'(y*) < 0.


The sign of ir2 depends on the elasticity of the domestic marginal utility of

consumption of imports. If r                             —yV''/V' = 1 then ir2 =               0.        In that case. a

rise in domestic government expenditures unambiguously increases domestic

consumption of exportables. and reduces the foreign consumption of that good.

Even with a separable utility function (LTV). the increase in domestic

government spending may affect domestic imports. For example. if r and rx*
                                                                  y
E _x*C*/U*I are both equal to one. then 1T2 = 0 but ir4                                     > 0.    so a rise in

domestic government           spending       increases domestic imports as well as
                                                                                                   13


  consumption of exportables, For small
                                                           enough r*. imports will fall with       an
  increase in government spending.                A rise in foreign government
                                                                                     spending
  leaves domestic consumption of exportabjes unchanged if
                                                          r, = 1. and increases
  or decreases x as r is greater than or less than one. If
                                                                                r is close to
  one. then an increase in foreign
                                              government spending unambiguously raises
  domestic Imports. The effects of changes in government spending frequently

 depend on the curvature of the utility functions, even when the utility

 functjon is separable. As I will show
                                                           below, these ambiguities in the theory
 are removed once complete international financial markets are introduced,
        With complete international financial markets.
                                                       state-prices are equated
 across countries and equilibriuni conditions
                                                               for assets help determine
 allocations in goods markets as well                 as   asset prices. World supply of each
 good in   each   state (and time) must equal demand, so the previously stated

 equilibrium conditions must hold for each z (and t). The equilibriurn

conditions, together with         the    necessary conditions for utility maximization.
imply    that for   every z.




(10)              7*1(y    — y(z))   =    ' V'(y(z))        and

(II)              U*I((x   -
                               x(z)e(g)   -
                                              g   -
                                                      g*)/9*(g*))   =   # U'(x(z)) 9*(g*)/9(g),


where      is the ratio of the the marginal utility of wealth of                  the
representative foreign individual to the marginal                   utility   of wealth of the
represefltatj'e domestic individual.j.e.               the    multiplier on   (5) divided by the
multiplier   on (2). Note that •           is a       function of the probability
                                                                                         14


                                                                                      (10)
distribution F(z). but does not depend on realized values of g or g*.
                                        international asset markets. consumption of
and (11) imply that with complete

y is independent of realizations of z. An econometriclan examining
time—series or cross sectional data would see no response of y to observed

changes in z.       This contrasts with the ambiguous conclusions in the absence

of any international asset markets.

       In order to determine the relation between increases in government

spending and allocations, the second equation can be totally differentiated

(with        held fixed). Letting '(z) =      1-x(z)9'(g)   and *(z) =

the    result is



(12)           (—U 8/9* — U#9*9 ) dx(z)       =   (_9IUI9*/9
                                                                9
                                                                      *'/9*)dg
                                                  (Ub9*'#/8 —       .*u*/e*)   dg*.



                                                                                              =
The coefficients on dx(z) is positive.            At the socially optimal g and g*. .

      = 0.     In that   case small changes in    g or g* have no first—order effects on

 economic      efficiency,   the coefficient on dg is positive, and the coefficient

 on dg* is negative. An increase         in   domestic government spending raises

 domestic consumption of exportables. while an increase in foreign government

 spending reduces it. Because these results are obtained in the neighborhood
                                              and g*, have no income effects.
 of the social optimum. changes in g

 Therefore. an increase in domestic government spending reduces foreign
                                                                  them.6
 imports. while an increase in foreign government spending raises

 These results on the effects of changes in productive government expenditure
                                         international financial markets contrast
 in the presence of sophisticated

 with    the   ambiguous effects obtained in their absence.
                                                                                15


  3. DIstorting Taxes

      The previous section assumed that
                                           taxes were lump sum. This section
  examines the effects of changes in
                                       distorting taxes with and without
  Sophisticated international financial markets. As in the previous section.

  the results Illustrate that any effects of policy that operate through

  redistributions of wealth are eliminated
                                             by complete international financial
 markets. This section applies that principle to a tax on consumption. The

 tax might take the form of value-added tax or an income tax with various

 effective   deductions or credits for saving. This section uses a two-country

 mode] similar to the one in the last
                                         section. hut simplified to include only
 two time periods the extension to
                                       more is straightforward) and a single
 consumption good that is endowed to both countries,     then the timing of
 endowments differs across countries, there Is an obvious role for financial

 markets: borrowing and lending will
                                       facilitate intertemporal smoothing of
 consumption. Suppose that in the first period the home endowment is small

and the foreign endowment is large. and that this is reversed in the
                                                                     second
period. Then the home country will borrow
                                              from the foreign country in the
first period, and repay its loans in the second period.

    This section will examine the effects
                                             of a temporary increase in domestic
consumption taxes in the first period, under
                                                several assumptions about
accompanying changes required by the government's budget constraint. In the

absence of international financial markets other than those for simple.

noncontingent loans, a tax increase has a Substitution effect and an Income

effect. Starting from a situation of equal taxation in the two periods, a

rise Ifl first-period domestic taxes, with a lump-sum refund of the tax
                                                                                           16



revenue, reduces the domestic demand for loans and lowers the                interest   rate

at which the domestic country borrows. A small increase in taxes reduces

first—period consumption and raises second—period consumption.                 These results

are changed in the presence of complete international financial markets.

       Assume the representative individual In the domestic country maximizes




(13)                EU(c.1—L) --,&J(c'.l—L')



where c and L are consumption and leisure. one unit of time is available each

period, and primes denote second-period variables. For simplicity. it will
                                                                    reduces
be assumed that U12 = 0 (which does not affect the main results but

the algebra involved). Output. y. is a stochastic function of labor inputs:

y =    L.   where     is a positive random variable. Similarly, second-period

output is y' =    a'L'. The government taxes consumption at a rate r. Define                    T

  1 —     r. Denote the present value state price of goods in state z by pz)
Initially, assume that changes in government spending accompany changes in
taxes. and that such spending is neutral (it Is useless or it affects utility
          separable way). Changes             and tax revenue are   equal.    Then the
in    a                                in g

budget      constraint   facing the representative domestic individual is




 (14)
                           —
                               Tc   p(a'L' -   T'c')   dz   0.



where

 (15)               z E (a.    a*. T, T*. a'. a*' T'. T*I)
                                                                                           IT


  indexes states of the world, with stars
                                                            denoting foreign variables.
  Implicitly, c. L. c'. L'. and p are functions of z.

         The foreign country has an analogous description that will not be

  repeated here. In the absence of
                                                state-contingent international assets, but
 with noncontingent international loans markets, the budget constrai can be

 Simplified. The simplification reflects the zero net trades on internal

 asset markets due to the representative
                                                            agent assumption. The budget
 constrajit with only noncontingent international loans is effectively



 (16)             aL - Tc   —
                                p(&L'   —   T'c')       =   0.


 where    p       is the inverse of one plus the interest rate on default—free
 loans.
        Equilibrium Conditions are


 (17a)           at.   a*L* = c    —
                                       c*   -
                                                g   —



and

(17b)                  —           = c'     —   c           g'



Together with the necessary conditions for utility maximization by

individuals in each country. who choose consumption and leisure in each

period, this generates a set of equations with a solution that depends on the

concavity of utility and the relative sizes of various exogenous terms. The

main elements of the solution for this case (with only noncontingent
                                                                                         18



International loans) can be illustrated by assuming that labor supplies are

fixed at unity. so countries receive stochastic endowments. a and a*. Then

the model reduces to two equations in c and R:



(18)            U1(c) =TRE[U1[(a'R(a—TC))/T'I/T'].
and

(19)            U*1(a_a*_g_g*_c) =



(18) follows from maximization of (13) subject to (16). and (19) follows from
the analogous foreign maximization problem along with (17) and the

balanced-budget assumption. Recall that government spending varies with tax

revenue: dg = cdT -     (T-1)dc.
       Consider a realization of       and a' for which c   g <   a   in equilibriun:.

This would happen if. for example. the countries are identical ex ante. if

(a.a*) and (a.a*') are independently drawn. g=g*. and the realized value of

a* exceeds    that of a.      Then the domestic country is a net borrower in the

first period. Differentiation of (18)—(19) shows that (as long as c—a is not

too large) an increase in first—period domestic taxes reduces private

consumption but has an Indeterminate effect on aggregate demand and the

interest rate because of the increase in government purchases. Second period

consumption.



(20)             c' =   (a'     R(a—Tc))/T',



is also Indeterminate. It depends on the direction of the interest rate

change and the magnitudes of the substitution and wealth effects.
                                                                                              :19



          The effects of a consumption tax
                                                   are changed when individuals have access
      to complete international financial markets. Then the equilibrium conditions

      (17) must hold on a state-by-state basis.
                                                            These conditions, and the
  necessary conditions for utility maximization in
                                                                  each country. imply


  (21)
                        U*1[a,L(z)*L*(z)_g_g*_0()} =U1(c(z)) T*/T.


  (22)                  U1c(z)) /   U2(l—L(z)) =     T/a.


 (23)
                                                            /U2*(l_L*tz))T*,a* and


 (24)                  Tr(z)E1(C(z)) / p(z)T =   arbitrary     constant



 for all       z.    In these equations. • is    the ratio of the foreign marginal

 utility    of      wealth to the domestic marginal utility of wealth (a ratio of

 multipliers         on the wealth constraints ) .    and   the constant in the last equation
is arbitrary because one of the state prices can be normalized without loss
of' generality. The first three sets of'
                                         equations (for each z). (2fl—(23).
determine production, trade, and consumption, and (24) then determines state

prices, Another set of equations, identical in form to these. describes the

solution for equilibrium in the second period.

  -
       Total    differentiation of (2i.)—(24) yields the effects of a high

realization         of domestic taxes in the first period. compared to
                                                                              another state
with    a lower realization of domestic taxes, This
                                                                 comparison, across
alternative         realizations of taxes. requires that         be held fixed. because
                                                                                         20



is a function only of the probability distributions and other parameters of

the model. not of subsequent realizations of random variables. Note that if

L and L* are fixed. so that the model Is one with endowments. then (21)

alone, along with the government budget constraint, determines the effect of

a change in taxes on consumption. In that case. an increase In T lowers

domestic consumption and may raise or lower foreign consumption depending on

the magnitude of the substitution effect in the domestic country from the

tax. The change in T. however, leaves second—period consumption unaffected

in each country. This result contrasts with the implication of the model

without state—contingent international asset markets.

     With endogenous production, domestic and foreign output move in the same

direction, regardless of whether output rises because of the increased demand

by the government or falls because of the reduced demand by domestic
                   '
individuals.             (This   result is. however, sensitive to the assumption that

utility is separable in goods and leisure.) Unlike the case in which

international           financial markets are limited to noncontingent bonds. a change
in   taxes   and       government   spending in   the   first period leaves output in each
country unaffected in the second period.
      The assumption that government spending has no effect on marginal
utilities     of other goods is extreme. Kormendi (1983) and Aschauer (1985)

have estimated that roughly one-third of government consumption can be

treated as if it were private consumption. It is straightforward to examine

the implications of the model if government spending is a direct substitute

for private spending. Consider the extreme case in which instantaneous

utility depends on leisure and on cg. the sum of private and government
                                                                                     21


 consumption. As long as g is below the level of consumption that would be

 chosen privately, this is equivalent to a lump-sum transfer to the public of

 the revenue obtained from the consumption tax.         (Individuals effectjveJ'
 obtain this transfer by reducing private expenditure on the good as

 government expenditure rises. )      Assume also that the countries are identical
 ex ante.        In this case. an increase in first-period domestic taxes

 unambiguously reduces output in each country, reduces domestic consumption.

and raises foreign consumption,8 Intuitively, complete international capital

markets eliminate the direct income effects of the policy, but leave the

Substitution effect. Higher consumption taxes reduce domestic demand in the

first period. If world output were unchanged. as in the endowment model.

then consumption in the foreign country would unambiguously rise. Foreign

individuals attempt to spread this gain to current leisure. and to future

consumption and leisure. Asset trades have previously guaranteed that any

increase in consumption of goods or leisure. not due to a substitution

effect, will be shared by foreign and domestic individuals.         The net result
is an increase in       foreign consumption, and decreases in output in each
country   associated with the fall in domestic consumption. In this case. an

increase    in   government spending and taxes has   a contractionary effect on

output in each country. a contractionarv effect on domestic consumption. and

an expansionary effect on foreign consumption.



4. Budget Deficits without Debt Neutrality

    In this section I build upon the work by Frenkel and Razin (1986) on the

international transmission of budget deficits, Frenkel and         Razin apply
                                                                              22



Blanchard s (1985) model of uncertain lifetimes to analyze the international

implications of fiscal policies, and demonstrate that in the absence of

Ricardian equivalence, government budget deficits may increase domestic

aggregate demand but can be transmitted negatively to the rest of the world.

decreasing foreign aggregate demand. This section takes the Frenkel-Razin

model   as a point of departure. and introduces complete international
financial markets. subject to the natural limitation that the unborn cannot
trade in these markets. The results indicate that in the presence of these
asset   markets. the effects of deficits on the current account and other

variables is very different than in their absence.

    I follow the setup of Frenkel and Razin. There are two countries with

representative individual consumers (in equal numbers) and two governments.

A single good is endowed to these two countries, and the endowments follow an

exogenous stochastic process. The description of the two countries is

identical: each country is essentially described by Blanchard's model.

Foreign variables are denoted with an asterisk. Individuals face a fixed

probability of death in each period, regardless of age. denoted (1-c).      where

a is the survival—probability. They contract with life—insurance companies.

which collect an individual s assets and liabilities upon his death.     Yaari

(1965) discusses the equivalence between these companies and a set of annuity

and bond markets.     A transversality condition requires that the limit (as

the length of his life goes to infinity) of the present value of' net assets

is nonnegative. so an individual does not borrow an unrestricted amount in

the expectation that the life-insurance company will bail him out when he

dies. Insurance companies are perfectly competitive and operate costlessly
                                                                                         23

  so    that insurance pretnia are
                                       proportional factors equal to the   probability   of
  death. Under these assumptions, and with
                                                        denoting the present value price
  of a good at date t.
                                _1'a is one plus the one-period interest rate at t—i.
             is one plus the life-insurance premium at t—l. and the gross interest

 rate (including the insurance premium) faced by an individual           is
       t—l
              'a
              t —1
                   )
                                             .
                     The discount factor is fixed
                         .
                                                  .

                                                  at 6 and utility is

 time—separable and instantaneously logarithmic: individuals maximize expected

 utility,
              Following Blanchard. aggregate consumption Is then

 (25)              C =       (1—06)



 where       is aggregate wealth, which equals discounted disposable personal

 income (discounted with the gross interest rate) minus private debt. In

general, in the Frenkel—Razin analysis. the probabilities of death. discount

rates. etc. may        differ   across countries, It will be convenient here. though.

to focus on the simplest case in which all these parameters are equal across

Countries.

       Governments in each country finance an exogenous stochastic process of

spending, which has no effect on production
                                                      or any marginal rates of

                or marginal utilities, with either taxes or debt. The

government, which lives forever, discounts at a rate that does not

in'corporate an insurance premium. The present value of spending plus initial

government debt equals the present value of taxes.

   The equilibrium condition in the world goods market at t=O is
                                                                                                 24



(26)            (l—)             (l—&o)           -g        .    g*        y    y*.


Domestic and foreign wealth at date zero are. in the Frenkel—Razin model.



                   =         —                —             —
(27)                   y0          PV0(y—r)       Bg0           B0

and
                                                        -              —
(28)                   y0*       r0 PV0(y*_r*)                  Bg0*       B0



where PV0(x) denotes the present value at date 0 of subsequent values of x.
using the gross private discount factor. Bg is government debt at date 0                         (so


that   future tax liabilities and government debt are both included in wealth).

and B0 is net indebtedness at t=0 of the domestic consumers to foreign

consumers. To keep matters as simple as possible. I assume that this initial

private indebtedness is zero. that government debt is equal in each country.

that   current government spending is equal in                  each country. and     that the
probability distribution of future government spending is the same in the

two countries.

       Following Frenkel and Razin. dates after t=0 are assumed to have, with

probability one. some constant levels of government spending. taxes. and

outputs (which. while they are constant for t=l.2.3                             may differ from the

values at t=0). Then the present value function is PV0(x) = x1oR/(1—oR)

where x. is the future (t=l,2. . .     .) value    of x and R is an average

present—value price. (26)-(28) then determine R and wealth in each country

for given values in each country of government spending. initial government

debt. taxes. output. and initial private indebtedness.
                                                                                  25


       Now consider a tax cut financed by increased government borrowing in the

 domestic dountry at t=O. Assume that the foreign government has a balanced

 budget and that the domestic government budget was balanced prior to the tax

 cut. The government budget constraint implies that dT0 -             = 0
                                                           Rd71/(l—R)
 because taxes are raised in all future periods (equally) to offset the

 current tax cut. Using this fact. differentiation of (26)-(28) implies that

 the tax cut reduces R. i.e. raises the interest rate. raises domestic wealth.

 and lowers foreign wealth (see Frenkel and Razin).

       Consider now an extension of this analysis to Incorporate complete

 international financial markets. The results above apply to a world in which

individuals can trade on annuity markets with other residents of the same

country    (recall that the "insurance companies' are essentially annuity   and
bond markets), but they are unable to trade in contingent international
financial markets.9 In particular. suppose that it is possible to trade
assets whose returns are contingent on the level of domestic taxes. and other

assets whose returns are contingent on foreign taxes. Then the risk of tax

changes in either country can be shared internationally. Generations who are

not yet born are unable to trade on these markets. In the absence of

state—contingent international financial markets, domestic wealth (of

currently-living individuals) rises and foreign wealth falls from a cut in

domestic taxes, while the reverse results from a cut in foreign taxes.      In

either case, the wealth of the unborn in the country with the tax cut also

falls. Starting from this situation. domestic and foreign Individuals can

agree on mutually beneficial exchanges in which domestic individuals make

payments if there is a cut in domestic taxes and receive payments if there is
                                                                                              26


a cut in foreign taxes. For simplicity, assume that the probability

distributions of future taxes are identical in                the    two countries. Because I

have also assumed that tastes. horizons, government spending. and wealth are

the same in the two countries, this makes the two countries symmetric ex

ante. and these payments will equal exactly half of the tax cuts. Similarly.

individuals in each country gain expected utility from sharing the risk of

the subsequent tax increases associated with a current tax cut. With the

symmetry assumptions. all individuals, regardless of nationality, will                     share
in the   higher future domestic taxes associated with a tax cut: this occurs

through liabilities that will he exchanged prior to the realization of

policy. Domestic and foreign individuals can share the risks by exchanging

obligations    so that half of any tax cut (or increase) gets paid to (by)

individuals in the       other   country (who. like domestic individuals,            are   liable

for   taxes for each year they are alive. but only those years)
      Given these financial trades that result in asset market equilibrium, a
tax cut in either country increases wealth of currently—living individuals in
both countries. Their wealth can be expressed as


(29)              W0 = W0        =
                                     y0
                                          —
                                              (r0r0*)/2     PV0(v
                                                                    —
                                                                        (rr*)/2)   Bg0


where    y=   v   in   each period and BgO        = 5
                                                     go
                                                        .    All    individuals currently alive

gain    equally from a domestic tax cut. With the symmetry assumptions, the tax

cut has no effect on the current account. though the interest rate rises due

to the increase in        aggregate       demand. The rise in       the   interest rate reduces

the    quantity   demanded to the level of the fixed supply of goods and. in

equilibrium,      the current consumption of each individual is unaffected.
                                                                                   27

        The currently unborn in the   domestic   country suffer a fall in wealth front
  a domestic tax cut at date zero.
                                        The loss cannot be shared with the
  currently unborn in the foreign
                                      country because none can participate in
  financial markets. The increased debt sold by the domestic
                                                              government at
  date zero, when it cut taxes,
                                was purchased in equal amounts by both foreign
  and domestic individuals.
                             Therefore, the increased domestic government debt
  Is distributed throughout the world. As currently living individuals
                                                                       age and
  die. they sefl debt to new generations. As older individuals sell
                                                                    debt to
  younger ones, the life-cycle path of
                                           consumption is tilted: the young consume
  less and the old consume
                             more. This tilting is permanent, and raises the
 real interest rate. The higher
                                    real interest rate. in turn, lowers the
 present value of future labor income and
                                              tends to reduce wealth. On the
 other hand, the additional
                               government debt enters positively into wealth.

 Domestic individuals who were born after the tax cut differ from
                                                                  foreign
 individuals born after the tax cut in one respect:
                                                         the former must pay the
 higher domestic taxes. Consequently whether foreign wealth rises
                                                                     or falls
 in the new steady state, domestic
                                   wealth is smaller than foreign wealth.
Essentially world wealth     includes government bonds but does not include the
full   present value of the taxes associated
                                                 with those bonds. This. alone.
raises world wealth. But although the bonds are held by foreign
                                                                as well as
domestic Individuals, only the latter pay the higher taxes in the future.

Therefore, at the original interest
                                        rate, foreign wealth rises and domestic
wealth may rise or fall. The
                                tilting of consumption as the additional debt
is passed across generations
                               raises the interest rate and lowers the present
value of any given income stream,
                                      so the higher interest rate reduces wealth
                                                                                28



                                         effects. a domestic tax cut has an
in each country. Combining these two

indeterminate effect on steady state wealth in each country. though foreign

wealth rises by more (or falls by less) than domestic wealth.

    The international impact of a domestic tax cut in the short run and

during the transition to a new steady state is markedly different in the

                       international financial markets. though the steady—state
presence of complete
                                               this example has assumed complete
effects are not altered in kind. Although
                                         results apply to a world in which asset
markets. one may expect that similar

markets are more limited but still offer some opportunities for

te—contingent trade. The presence of money and nominal bonds. for

example. would introduce an asset with a state_contingent real return.



5. ConclusiOnS
                                          of changes in the international effects
    This paper has presented examples

of fiscal policies that can result from the existence of sophisticated

 international   financial   markets. The examples have assumed complete markets.

                                       it would be unrealistic to assume that
 In many historical circumstances.

 these markets were available to individuals either directly or indirectly
                                           financial intermediaries. However, the
 through multinational corporations or

 rapid development of these markets makes it useful to examine their effects.
                                        application would depend upon whether
 The proper model for any empirical
                                         time period or set of countries. The
 those markets are available in that
                                     useful benchmark case. While the assumption
 complete markets framework is a

 of complete markets is unrealistic, so is the more common assumption that

 there are no markets for contingent claims. For many purposes. it is not
                                                                              29


clear that economists should have much confidence in the implications of

theoretical models, or interpretations of economic statistics, that ignore

these markets.

    International financial markets remove some of the ambiguities associated

with opposing income and substitution effects, lead to models with stronger

predictions, and in some cases reverse the effects of policies. These

markets also tend to eliminate Intrinsic dynamics that would otherwise occur

through asset accumulation.   (Dynamics could stIll be extrinsic or occur

through other channels.) This is probably desirable, given that variations

In real exchange rates exhibit very little dynamics and, instead, seem to be

associated with "news".

    The examples in this paper have treated policy as exogenous. A model

that explains why particular economic policies are chosen by the political

process could be incorporated into the examples. Because gainers and 1osers

from economic policies are affected by financial markets, the model of policy

formulation will also be affected.

    There are many other fiscal policies, besides those examined above, whose

effects would be altered by the ability of households to trade in financial

markets. Personal and corporate income taxes, with provisions for

miscellaneous deductions, credits, and exclusions, may have very different

effects in the presence of financial markets without them. The effects of

Increased uncertainty about future taxes -   overall   levels, the

cross—sectional distribution of taxes, and the timing of taxation -   will   be

affected by the ability of Individuals to use financial markets to hedge this

risk. The issue of changes in uncertainty raises an important question:
                                                                                    30


which variations in government policy can be hedged by financial markets and

which cannot? With rational expectations and complete markets. individuals

could hedge against all   changes   in future policies -   including   changes in

"policy regimes." Which. if any. changes in policy (or rules' or "regimes'

are individuals unable to insure against? For example. could a

decision—maker in government choose to make policy decisions diverge

systematically from the probability distribution governing these policies

that is implicit in financial markets? Or would these implicit probability

distributions always incorporate the possibility that the decision-maker

would attempt to make decisions in    this way?   These are not academic.

metaphysical issues. but substantive questions that are directly related to

the effects of fiscal 'and   other) policies iii the presence   of contingent

international   financial markets
                                                                                    31


                                           Notes



     *    Alan C. Stockman is Associate Professor of Economics
                                                                    at the
 University of Rochester and a Research Associate of
                                                           the National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

     **   I   have benefited by comments from Andrew Abel. Patrick Kehoe. and

 Jacob Frenkel. This research was supported by National Science Foundation

 Grant SES-8309576.

     1.   1 do not want to (or need to. in this paper) take a stand on whether

 Coolev. LeRoy. and Raymon are expanding on Lucas's point or are. as they

 believe, in disagreement with some of what Lucas says.

     2. This does not imply that individuals have perfect knowledge of all

parameters in the model. it does imply. though, that individuals "know that

they don t know' certain things.

    3. Given foreign consumption of X and foreign government spending.

domestic consumption if maximized by g such that xe'=-i. Andrew Abel has

correctly pointed out in his comments that while the world social optimum is

characterized by Xe'   = x*9*I   = —1.
                                         this may not be the optimum for either

country individually. Changes in g or g* around some other value that might

describe the equilibrium of a policy game between the two countries involve

additional ambiguities in the results. The additional terms reflect changes

1n the distortion caused by not having government spending at the optimal

level for the world.
                                                                                                          32


    4.    Substitution of (7c) into (7a) and (7b) gives



                                  (X — Ox —      g) U'(x) =          eV'(y)y


                           (X — Ox     —
                                           g) U*JUX —        Ox —        g   —
                                                                                 g*)/9*)


                                            =   y e*V*'(Y — y)


Recall that 9 =      0(g) and 9* = 9*(g*).                 Total differentiation gives



                 X — Ox — g)U'. - 9C'                            —       O(yV'      V')
                                                                                           fdx

                  (X   -   Ox -   g)               -   eU*       _9*(V*' - yV*")           I.dy



                                                                                                  0
=
    O'vV'
    (x91)V*'
               (xO'—l)V'
                 -     (X-Gx-g)
                                       x81       V*'       yG*V*' -                (X_9x_g)(l9*IX*)   [   *]
which reduces to (8) and (9) if Xe' = X0K'                           =    1.

     5.     Letting A and ) be the domestic and foreign marginal utilities of

wealth. necessary conditions for maximization of (1.) subject to (2) include.

for every z and t.



                                                       =   A p(z) 9(g)
                                                       and
                                           *V'(y(z)) =       A   q(z).
                                                                                        33


 Similarly, the foreign maximization problem yields necessary conditions



                                                 A*   p*(z)   e*(g*)

                                                and

                                  *T*I(y*(Z)) = A* q*(z),



 Dividing these equations. noting that          state prices are equated
 internationally so p(z) = p*(z) and q(z) = q*(z). and using equiibriun!
 conditions to eliminate x*z) and y*(z). yields (101 and (11). where
 A*   'A.

        6.    If i   0 then the   coefficient   on    dg includes an additional term.
This term is negative if ' >        0.   reflecting an inefficiently large g. or
positive if ',' <    0. reflecting a suboptimal        g .A change in g away from the
social optimum increases the magitude of the inefficiency and lowers

consumption of X in      both countries. Similarly, a change in g toward the
optimum reduces the Inefficiency and raises consumption of X in both

countries, This is evident from the fact that the coefficients on dg and dg*

in (12) have terms involving          or     with signs opposite to those of 'r and
.       These results illustrate that any income effects from efficiency
                                                                         gains
or losses are shared internationally.

       7.    ThIs result follows directly from (2iJ—(23). which imply that



                              *U2(1-L)/ =


Given        and * (and ). L and L* move together.
                                                                                                34



      8. Modifying the model so that utility depends on c-g. necessary

conditions for utiJity maximization. equiiibrium conditions, and government

budget constraints g =     (T-l)c    and g* =        (T*_1)c*       imply, in the case with (ex

ante) identical countries.



                                            cdi) = — TU22dL -
                          aU11(Tdc                            L2dT


                                           cdT*) =                   -
                     U11(Tdc*                           _TC22dL*         U2dT


                     (dL_dL*)              T(dc —    dc*)    -   c(dT    -   dT*)


             T*U11(Tdc - cdT) — U1dT* = TU11(TdC* *                      cdT*)      -
                                                                                        C1dT.



Using the first two equations to eliminate dc and dc* and solving for di. and

dL* gives



                          dL -_dL*    --           L2
                                                        -
                                               2a2U11       2TU22



                   dc =     I U2               2a2U11       TI'22 1 —
                                                                             < O•
                            IaTU11J                                      T
                                               2aU11 --     2TUJ
and

                     dc* = f               1
                                                 _______________
                              ,
                                                 2a2U11 2TU
                                                                                   35

    9. An alternative story
                               Consistent with   the   previous analysis is that
Individuals do not have rational
                                   expectations about possible changes in
policy, instead attributing
                              zero Probability to a tax cut).
                                                                                   36


                                     References
Aschauer,   David, 1985, "Fiscal Policy and Aggregate Demand." Americap

    Economic Review, March, 117—27.

Blanchard, Olivier, 1985. "Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons," Journal of

    Political Economy 93 no. 21. April. 223—251.

Cooley. Thomas. Steve LeRoy, and Neil Raymon. 1984 (a). "Econometric

    Policy Evaluation: Note'. American Economic RevIew.            467-70.
                                                  .   1984 (b) .    "Modeling Policy
    Interventions", unpublished. University of California at Santa Barbara.
Frenkel.    Jacob A.. and Assaf Razin. 1986. "Fiscal Policies in the World

    Economy'. Journal of Political Economy 94. no. 3. June.

Kormendi. Roger. 1983. "Government Debt. Government Spending. and            Private
    Sector Behavior '. American Economic RevIew. December. 994-1010.

Lucas. Robert E.. 1976. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique'. In

    K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer (eds. ). The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets.

    Vol.1. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. Journal

    of Monetary Economics, supplement. 19-46.

Rosen. Sherwin. 1985. "Implicit Contracts: A Survey". Journal of Economic

    LiteratureL, September. 1144-76.

Stockman, Alan C., and Harris Dellas, 1985. "Asset Markets, Tariffs, and

    Political Risk". Journal of International ECOnOmICS,           forthcoming.
                    ,   and Alejandro Hernandez D.. 1985, "Exchange Controls.

     Capital Controls. and International Financial Markets". Rochester Center

     for Economic Research Working Paper #25. September.
