NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY ASK WHY? FORWARD CAUSAL INFERENCE AND REVERSE CAUSAL
QUESTIONS
Andrew Gelman
Guido Imbens
Working Paper 19614
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19614

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We thank Judea Pearl and several other blog commenters for helpful input and the National Science
Foundation for partial support of this work. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andrew Gelman and Guido Imbens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Why ask Why? Forward Causal Inference and Reverse Causal Questions
Andrew Gelman and Guido Imbens
NBER Working Paper No. 19614
November 2013
JEL No. C01
ABSTRACT
The statistical and econometrics literature on causality is more focused on "effects of causes" than
on "causes of effects." That is, in the standard approach it is natural to study the effect of a treatment,
but it is not in general possible to define the causes of any particular outcome. This has led some researchers
to dismiss the search for causes as "cocktail party chatter" that is outside the realm of science. We
argue here that the search for causes can be understood within traditional statistical frameworks as
a part of model checking and hypothesis generation. We argue that it can make sense to ask questions
about the causes of effects, but the answers to these questions will be in terms of effects of causes.

Andrew Gelman
Department of Statistics
and Department of Political Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
gelman@stat.columbia.edu
Guido Imbens
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
Imbens@stanford.edu

Why ask why?
Forward causal inference and reverse causal questions∗
Andrew Gelman†

Guido Imbens‡

5 Oct 2013
Abstract
The statistical and econometrics literature on causality is more focused on “effects
of causes” than on “causes of effects.” That is, in the standard approach it is natural
to study the effect of a treatment, but it is not in general possible to define the causes
of any particular outcome. This has led some researchers to dismiss the search for
causes as “cocktail party chatter” that is outside the realm of science. We argue here
that the search for causes can be understood within traditional statistical frameworks
as a part of model checking and hypothesis generation. We argue that it can make
sense to ask questions about the causes of effects, but the answers to these questions
will be in terms of effects of causes.

Introductory example: cancer clusters
A map shows an unexpected number of cancers in some small location, and this raises
the questions: What is going on? Why are there so many cancers in this place? These
questions might be resolved via the identification of some carcinogenic agent (for example,
a local environmental exposure) or, less interestingly, some latent variable (some systematic
difference between people living in and not living in this area), or perhaps some statistical
explanation (for example, a multiple-comparisons argument demonstrating that an apparent
anomalous count in a local region is no anomaly at all, after accounting for all the possible
clusters that could have been found). The question, Why so many cancers in that location?,
until it is explained in some way, refers to a data pattern that does not fit one’s pre-existing
models. Researchers are motivated to look for an explanation because this might lead to a
deeper understanding and ultimately, through the identification of some carcinogenic agent,
to recommendations for policy that may lead to a reduction in cancer rates.
The cancer-cluster problem is typical of a lot of scientific reasoning. Some anomaly is
observed and it needs to be explained. The resolution of the anomaly may be an entirely new
paradigm (Kuhn, 1970) or a reformulation of the existing state of knowledge (Lakatos, 1978).
In the cancer example, potential causes might be addressed via a hierarchical regression
model as in Manton et al. (1989).
The purpose of the present paper is to place “Why” questions within a statistical framework of causal inference. We argue that a question such as “Why are there so many cancers
in this place?” can be viewed not directly as a question of causal inference, but rather indirectly as an identification of a problem with an existing statistical model, motivating the
development of more sophisticated statistical models that can directly address causation in
terms of counterfactuals and potential outcomes.
∗

We thank Judea Pearl and several other blog commenters for helpful input and the National Science
Foundation for partial support of this work.
†
Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, N.Y.
‡
Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, California.

Forward and reverse causal questions
Following Gelman (2011), we distinguish two broad classes of causal queries:
1. Forward causal questions, or the estimation of “effects of causes.” What might happen
if we do X? What is the effect of some manipulation, e.g., the effect of smoking on
health, the effect of schooling on earnings, the effect of campaigns on election outcomes,
and so forth?
2. Reverse causal inference, or the search for “causes of effects.” What causes Y? Why
do more attractive people earn more money? Why does per capita income vary some
much by country? do many poor people vote for Republicans and rich people vote for
Democrats? Why did the economy collapse?
When statistical and econometric methodologists write about causal inference, they generally focus on forward causal questions. We are taught to answer questions of the type
“What if?”, rather than “Why?” Following the work by Rubin (1977) causal questions are
typically framed in terms of manipulations: if x were changed by one unit, how much would
y be expected to change? But reverse causal questions are important too. They are a natural
way to think (consider the importance of the word Why, or see Sloman, 2005, for further
discussion of causal ideas in cognition). In many ways, it is the reverse causal questions
that motivate the research, including experiments and observational studies, that we use to
answer the forward questions.
The question discussed in the current paper is: How can we incorporate reverse causal
questions into a statistical framework that is centered around forward causal inference?1 Our
resolution is as follows: Forward causal inference is about estimation; reverse causal questions
are about model checking and hypothesis generation. To put it another way, we ask reverse
causal questions all the time, but we do not perform reverse causal inference. We do not
try to answer “Why” questions; rather, “Why” questions motivate “What if” questions that
can be studied using standard statistical tools such as experiments, observational studies,
and structural equation models.
Before going on, let us clarify that we are using the terms “forward” and “reverse” to refer
not to time but to the sequence of the statistical model. As Fearon (1991) and Yamamoto
(2012) discuss, counterfactual reasoning can also be applied to assess attributions of causes
of past events. We label this historical reasoning as “forward causal inference” as well, as
it is based on the estimation of effects of defined treatments. For a recent example, Ashraf
and Galor (2013) estimate a nonlinear effect of genetic diversity on historical economic performance of countries around the world. This study may well have been motivated by a
reverse causal question (Why are African and South American countries relatively poor?)
and a feeling that such a question was not adequately answered by existing models such as
the geographical explanations popularized by Diamond (1997), but once the question has
been framed in terms of the effect of a specific variable, its resolution is conducted within the
realm of forward causal reasoning. In that sense, macro studies of the causes of variation in
1

Even methods such as path analysis or structural modeling, which in some settings can be used to
determine the direction of causality from data, are still ultimately answering forward casual questions of the
sort, What happens to y when we change x?

2

economic growth are related to micro studies of the effects of particular interventions (Banerjee and Duflo, 2011). The anomalies identified by Why questions motivate experiments and
observational studies for forward causal inference and, ultimately, policy recommendations.

Example: political campaigns
An important forward causal question is, What is the effect of money on elections? This is
a very general question and, to be answered, needs to be made more precise, for example
as follows: Supposing a challenger in a given congressional election race is given a $100
donation, how much will this change his or her expected vote share? It is not so easy to
get an accurate answer to this question, but the causal quantity is well defined (and can
be specified even more precisely, for example with further details about the contribution, as
necessary).
Now a reverse causal question: Why do incumbents running for reelection to Congress
get so much more funding than challengers? Many possible answers have been suggested,
including the idea that people like to support a winner, that incumbents have higher name
recognition, that certain people give money in exchange for political favors, and that incumbents are generally of higher political “quality” than challengers and get more support of
all types. Various studies could be performed to evaluate these different hypotheses, all of
which could be true to different extent (and in some interacting ways).
Now the notation. It is generally accepted (and we agree) that forward causal inferences
can be handled in a potential-outcome or graphical-modeling framework involving a treatment variable T , an outcome y, and pre-treatment variables, x, so that the causal effect is
defined (in the simple case of binary treatment) as y(T = 1, x) − y(T = 0, x). The actual
estimation will likely involve some modeling (for example, some curve of the effect of money
on votes that is linear at the low end, so that a $20 contribution has twice the expected
effect as $10), but there is little problem in defining the treatment effect. The challenge
arises from estimating these effects from observational data; see, for example, Levitt (1994)
and Gerber (1998).
Reverse causal reasoning is different; it involves asking questions and searching for new
variables that might not yet even be in our model. We can frame reverse causal questions
as model checking. It goes like this: what we see is some pattern in the world that needs
an explanation. What does it mean to “need an explanation”? It means that existing
explanations—the existing model of the phenomenon—does not do the job. This model
might be implicit. For example, if we ask, Why do incumbents get more contributions than
challengers, we are comparing to an implicit model that all candidates get the same. If we
gather some numbers on dollar funding, compare incumbents to challengers, and find the
difference is large and statistically significant, then we are comparing to the implicit model
that there is variation but not related to incumbency status. If we get some measure for
candidate quality (for example, previous elective office and other qualifications) and still see
a large and statistically significant difference between the funds given to incumbents and
challengers, then it seems we need more explanation. And so forth.

3

Further examples
Kaiser Fung, a statistician who works in the corporate world, writes:
A lot of real world problems are of the reverse causality type, and it’s an embarrassment for us to ignore them. . . . Most business problems are reverse causal.
Take for example P&G who spend a huge amount of money on marketing and
advertising activities. The money is spread out over many vehicles, such as television, radio, newspaper, supermarket coupons, events, emails, display ads, search
engine, etc. The key performance metric is sales amount.
If sales amount suddenly drops, then the executives will want to know what
caused the drop. This is the classic reverse causality question. Of course, lots of
possible hypotheses could be generated . . . TV ad was not liked, coupons weren’t
distributed on time, emails suffered a deliverability problem, etc. By a process
of elimination, one can drill down to a small set of plausible causes. This is all
complex work that gives approximate answers.
The same question can be posed as a forward causal problem. We now start
with a list of treatments. We will divide the country into regions, and vary
the so-called marketing mix, that is, the distribution of spend across the many
vehicles. This generates variations in the spend patterns by vehicle, which allows
us to estimate the effect of each of the constituent vehicles on the overall sales
performance.
This is the pattern: a quantitative analyst notices an anomaly, a pattern that cannot be
explained by current models. The reverse-causal question is: Why did this happen? And
this leads to improved modeling. Often these models are implicit. For example, consider the
much-asked question, Why did violent crime in American cities decline so much in recent
decades? This is a question asked in reference to summaries of crime statistics, not with
reference to any particular model. But the Why question points to factors that should be
considered. Our country has had similar discussions along the lines of, Why was there a
financial crisis in 2008, and why did it happen then rather than sooner or later?
Again, the goal of this paper is to discuss how such Why questions fit into statistics
and econometrics, not as inferential questions to be answered with estimates or confidence
intervals, but as the identification of statistical anomalies that motivate improved models.

Relation to formal models of causal inference
Now let us put some mathematical structure on the problem using the potential outcome
framework (Neyman, 1923, Rubin, 1974).
Let Yi denote the outcome of interest for unit i, say an indicator whether individual i
developed cancer. We may also observe characteristics of units, individuals in this case, that
are known to, or expected to, be related to the outcome, in this case, related to the probability
of developing cancer. Let us denote those by Wi . Finally, there is a characteristic of the
units, denoted by Zi , that the researcher feels should not be a cause of the outcome, and

4

so one would expect that in populations homogenous in Wi , there should be no association
between the outcome and Zi :
Yi ⊥ Zi Wi .
This atribute Zi may be the location of individuals. It may be a binary characteristic, say
female versus male, or an indicator for a subpopulation. The key is that the researcher a
priori interprets this variable as an attribute that should not be correlated with the outcome
in homogenous subpopulations.
However, suppose the data reject this hypothesis, and show a substantial association
between Zi and the outcome, even after adjusting for differences in the other attributes. In
a graphical representation of the model there would be evidence for an arrow between Zi
and Yi , in addition to the arrow from Wi and Yi , and possibly a general association between
Zi and Wi .
Such finding is consistent with two alternative models. First, it may be that there is a
cause, its value for unit i denoted by Xi , such that the potential outcome given the cause
is not associated with Zi , possibly after conditioning on Wi . Let Yi (x) denote the potential
outcomes in the potential outcome framework, and Yi (Xi ) the realized outcome. Formally
we would hypothesize that, for all x,
Yi (x) ⊥ Zi Wi .
Thus, the observed association between Yi and Zi is the result of a causal effect of Xi on Yi ,
and an association between the cause Xi and the attribute Zi . In the cancer example there
may be a carcinogenic agent that is more common in the area with high cancer rates.
The second possible explanation that is still consistent with no causal link between Zi
and Yi is that the researcher omitted an important attribute, say Vi . Given this attribute
and the original attributes Wi , the association between Zi and Yi would disappear:
Yi ⊥ Zi Wi , Vi .
For example, it may be that individuals in this area have a different genetic background that
makes them more susceptible to the particular cancer.
Both these alternative models could in principle provide a satisfactory explanation for
the anomaly of the strong association between Zi and the outcome. Whether these models
do so in practice, and which of these models do, and in fact whether the original association
is even viewed as an anomaly, depends on the context and the researcher. Consider the finding that taller individuals command higher wages in the labor market. Standard economic
models suggest that wages should be related to productivity, rather than height, and such
an association might therefore be viewed as an anomaly. It may be that childhood nutrition
affects both adult height and components of productivity. One could view that as an explanation of the first type, with childhood nutrition as the cause that could be manipulated to
affect the outcome. One could also view health as a characteristic of adult individuals that
is a natural predictor of productivity.
As stressed before, there are generally not unique answers to these questions. In the case
of the association between height and earnings, one researcher might find that health is the
omitted attribute, and another researcher might find that childhood nutrition is the omitted
5

cause. Both could be right, and which answer is more useful will depend on the context.
The point is that the finding that height itself is correlated with earnings is the starting
point for an analysis that explores causes of earnings, that is, alternative models for earnings
determination, that would reproduce the correlation between height and earnings without
the implication that intervening in height would change earnings.

What does this mean for statistical practice?
A key theme in this discussion is the distinction between causal statements and causal questions. A reverse causal question does not in general have a well-defined answer, even in a
setting where all possible data are made available. But this does not mean that such questions are valueless or that they fall outside the realm of statistics. A reverse question places
a focus on an anomaly—an aspect of the data unlikely to be reproducible by the current
(possibly implicit) model—and points toward possible directions of model improvement.
It has been (correctly) said that one of the main virtues of the potential outcome framework is that it motivates us to be explicit about interventions and outcomes in forward causal
inference. Similarly, one of the main virtues of reverse causal thinking is that it motivates
us to be explicit about what we consider to be problems with our model.
In terms of graphical models, the anomalies also suggest that the current model is inadequate. In combination with the data, the model suggests the presence of arrows that do not
agree with our a priori beliefs. The implication is that one needs to build a more general
model involving additional variables that would eliminate the arrow between the attribute
and the outcome.
By formalizing reverse casual reasoning within the process of data analysis, we hope to
make a step toward connecting our statistical reasoning to the ways that we naturally think
and talk about causality. This is consistent with views such as Cartwright (2007) that causal
inference in reality is more complex than is captured in any theory of inference. The basic
idea expressed in this paper—that the search for causal explanation can led to new models—
is hardly new (see, for example, Harris, 1999, for an example from inventory control). What
we are really suggesting is a way of talking about reverse causal questions in a way that
is complementary to, rather than outside of, the mainstream formalisms of statistics and
econometrics.
Just as we view graphical exploratory data analysis as a form of checking models (which
maybe implicit), we similarly hold that reverse causal questions arise from anomalies—
aspects of our data that are not readily explained—and that the search for causal explanations is, in statistical terms, an attempt to improve our models so as to reproduce the
patterns we see in the world.

References
Ashraf, Q., and Galor, O. (2013). The “out of Africa” hypothesis, human genetic diversity,
and comparative economic development. American Economic Review.
Banerjee, A. J., and Duflo, E. (2011). Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way
to Fight Global Poverty. New York: PublicAffairs.
6

Cartwright, N. (2007). Hunting Causes and Using Them: Approaches in Philosophy and
Economics. Cambridge University Press.
Diamond, J. (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York:
Norton.
Fearon, J. D. (1991). Counterfactuals and hypothesis testing in political science. World
Politics 43, 169–195.
Fung, K. (2013). Causal thinking. Numbers Rule Your World blog, 17 July. http://
junkcharts.typepad.com/numbersruleyourworld/2013/07/causal-thinking.html
Gelman, A. (2011). Causality and statistical learning. American Journal of Sociology 117,
955–966.
Gerber, A. (1998). Estimating the effect of campaign spending on Senate election outcomes
using instrumental variables. American Political Science Review 92, 401–411.
Harris, B. (1999). Pipeline inventory: the missing factor in organizational expense management. National Productivity Review 18, 33–38.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, second edition. University of
Chicago Press.
Lakatos, I. (1978). Philosophical Papers. Cambridge University Press.
Levitt, S. D. (1994). Using repeat challengers to estimate the effect of campaign spending
on election outcomes in the U.S. House. Journal of Political Economy 102, 777–798.
Manton, K. G., Woodbury, M. A., Stallard, E., Riggan, W. B., Creason, J. P., and Pellom,
A. C. (1989). Empirical Bayes procedures for stabilizing maps of U.S. cancer mortality
rates. Journal of the American Statistical Association 84, 637–650.
Neyman, J. (1923). On the application of probability theory to agricultural experiments.
Essay on principles. Section 9. Translated and edited by D. M. Dabrowska and T. P.
Speed. Statistical Science 5, 463–480 (1990).
Pearl, J. (2010). Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference, second edition. Cambridge
University Press.
Rubin, D. B. (1974b). Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies. Journal of Educational Psychology 66, 688–701.
Rubin, D. B. (1977). Assignment to treatment group on the basis of a covariate. Journal of
Educational Statistics 2, 1–26.
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal Models: How People Think About the World and Its Alternatives. Oxford University Press.
Yamamoto, T. (2012). Understanding the past: statistical analysis of causal attribution.
American Journal of Political Science 56, 237–256.

7

