NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PASS-THROUGH OF EMISSIONS COSTS IN ELECTRICITY MARKETS
Natalia Fabra
Mar Reguant
Working Paper 19613
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19613

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We are grateful to Peter Eccles, Denny Ellerman, Jose-Antonio Espín, Joe Harrington, Koichiro Ito,
Matti Liski, Thierry Magnac, Marti Mestieri, Juan Pablo Montero, Nancy Rose, Stephen Ryan, Juan
Toro, Michael Waterson and Ali Yurukoglu for helpful comments. We also want to thank seminar
audicences at CEMFI (Madrid), EARIE Conference (Rome), Jornadas de Economía Industrial (Murcia),
5th Atlantic Workshop on Energy and Environmental Economics (La Toja), University of Arizona
(Tucson), the Berkeley-Stanford IO Fest (2011), Toulouse School of Economics, UC Davis, University
of Michigan, Columbia University, and Yale University. We are grateful for the contribution of Antonio
Jesús Sánchez-Fuentes to this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Natalia Fabra and Mar Reguant. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Pass-through of Emissions Costs in Electricity Markets
Natalia Fabra and Mar Reguant
NBER Working Paper No. 19613
November 2013
JEL No. D44,L13,L94
ABSTRACT
We measure the pass-through of emissions costs to electricity prices and explore its determinants.
We perform both reduced-form and structural estimations based on optimal bidding in this market.
Using rich micro-level data, we estimate the channels affecting pass-through in a flexible manner,
with minimal functional form assumptions. Contrary to many studies in the general pass-through literature,
we find that emissions costs are almost fully passed-through to electricity prices. Since electricity is
traded through high-frequency auctions for highly inelastic demand, firms have weak incentives to
adjust markups after the cost shock. Furthermore, the costs of price adjustment are small.

Natalia Fabra
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
nfabra@eco.uc3m.es
Mar Reguant
Knight Management Center
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
mreguant@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

The cost pass-through, namely the change in prices resulting from a cost shock, is an important
concept in Economics. In Industrial Organization, the analysis of pass-through sheds light into
a wide range of topics, including the welfare effects of price-discrimination (Aguirre et al., 2010),
merger assessment (Jaffe and Weyl, 2013), or the quantification of cartel damages (Verboven and
van Dijk, 2009); in International Economics, a key question is whether exchange-rate fluctuations
are passed-through to the prices of imported goods (Goldberg and Knetter, 1997); and in Public
Economics, pass-through is central to the theory of tax incidence (Marion and Muehlegger, 2011).
From an empirical perspective, the measurement of pass-through has proved challenging mainly
because marginal costs and markups are typically non-observable. The common approach is to first
estimate demand parameters, and then back-out markups from the first order conditions of profit
maximization. However the implications of modeling choices for pass-through remain an open
empirical question (Goldberg and Hellerstein, 2008). This is particularly relevant in oligopolistic
settings, as under imperfect competition the curvature of demand - and not only its elasticity may have a profound effect on the quantification of pass-through (Weyl and Fabinger, 2013).1 In
this paper, we measure and explore the determinants of the pass-through of emissions costs to
electricity prices. We do so using a framework that relies on minimal assumptions on the shape of
the demand curve and on firms’ strategic behavior.
The availability of high frequency and highly disaggregated data make electricity markets a
uniquely suited setting for a pass-through analysis. Electricity markets are organized as auctions,
which enables us to observe not only market clearing prices and quantities, but also the hourly
demand and supply schedules. Furthermore, it is possible to construct reliable engineering-based
marginal cost estimates, given that the electricity production function is well known and fossil fuels
are traded in international markets. Marginal emissions costs can also be measured very accurately,
since these depend on the carbon price and on the emissions rate of the price-setting unit, whose
identity is revealed by the bid data. Last, but not least, the institutions that shape firms’ strategic
behavior in electricity markets are well understood,2 making it possible to construct structural
models that mimic closely the way firms actually compete in these markets.
The cost shocks induced by changes in carbon prices, as opposed to changes in other cost
components, are also particularly suitable for an empirical analysis of pass-through. First, the
effects of carbon prices on the marginal costs of generating electricity are significant and vary both
across time as well as across technologies. And second, fluctuations of emissions permit prices are
a source of plausibly exogenous cost shocks to firms (at least in a partial equilibrium sense) since
pollution permits are traded across many countries and sectors.
In our empirical analysis of pass-through, we use data from the Spanish wholesale electricity
1
For instance, see Bulow and Pfleiderer (1983) for an analysis of tax pass-through in the tobacco industry and
the importance of the demand functional form assumptions. More generally, the dependence of mark-up estimates
on the assumed functional forms has been acknowledged by the empirical IO literature (see e.g. Bresnahan (1982,
1989), Reiss and Wolak (2007), and Kim and Knittel (2006), among others).
2
See the seminal papers by Green and Newbery (1992) and von der Fehr and Harbord (1993), among others.

1

market covering the period in which the European cap-and-trade program for carbon emissions
was introduced.3 We focus on pass-through in the wholesale market given that retail prices are
regulated and therefore invariant, at least in the short-run, to changes in production costs.
We follow an instrumental variables approach to measure the effects of an increase in emissions
costs on electricity market prices. We find the average pass-through in this market to be above
80%, implying that a one euro increase in emissions costs translates, on average, into an increase
in electricity prices of more than eighty cents. If we separate the estimates between hours of low
and high demand, we find that firms are more able to pass-through costs in high demand hours,
when dynamic constraints are less relevant. In fact, this estimate goes up to 100% during peak
times when firms face no start-up costs.4
In the broader pass-through literature, the finding of an almost complete pass-through is the
exception rather than the rule. A great number of studies have measured the pass-through of
exchange-rates to prices of imported goods, and they robustly report pass-through estimates lower
than fifty percent, if not less. For instance, in the beer market, Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013)
document that only 5% of an exchange rate change is transmitted to final prices; similarly, in the
coffee industry, Nakamura and Zerom (2010) report a long-run pass-through elasticity of commodity
prices of 25%.5
Given our finding of an almost complete pass-through, it is natural to ask: Why is the passthrough so high in electricity markets? Are the channels of price-through incompleteness identified
in other settings not relevant in ours? And, are there other relevant channels?
The pass-through literature has identified three main channels of pass-through incompleteness:
(i) the strategic adjustment of markups due to cost shocks, (ii) the presence of certain costs that
remain unaffected by the observed cost shock (the exchange-rate pass-through literature refers to
these as non-traded costs), and (iii) the presence of price rigidities that restrict firms from adjusting
prices optimally. A robust conclusion of the literature is that non-traded costs are the main source
of incomplete pass-through, followed by markup adjustment (Goldberg and Hellerstein, 2008).
Nominal price rigidities might delay price adjustment, but otherwise have a minor impact on the
long-run pass-through (Nakamura and Zerom, 2010; Goldberg and Hellerstein, 2013).
To the list of potential channels we add an additional one, namely (iv) the mismatch between
observed cost shocks and firms’ actual or opportunity costs. This could be an important source
of incomplete pass-through in the presence of transaction costs in input markets. This mismatch
could also arise if firms are not fully equipped to understand the value of opportunity costs.6 In our
3

See Ellerman et al. (2010) for a description of the European cap-and-trade program.
This evidence is consistent with the results reported in other studies in the context of the European cap-and-trade
program. Sijm et al. (2006) estimate pass-through rates using equilibrium prices and fuel cost data in the German
electricity market, and find pass-through rates that range between 0.60 and 1.17, depending on market conditions.
See the Annex by Keppler in Ellerman et al. (2010) for a review of this and other studies. These studies are based on
market outcomes, in contrast to our analysis, which uses finer micro-level data. See Bushnell et al. (2013) for related
evidence.
5
See also Bonnet et al. (2013), Goldberg and Verboven (2001) and Hellerstein (2008), among others.
6
Nakamura and Zerom (2010) argue that firms might respond differently to changes in commodity prices versus
fluctuations in exchange rates because of limited information capacity (Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2012). They
4

2

setting, we show that we can infer firms’ actual costs from their bidding behavior, and separately
identify them from their equilibrium effect on prices.
We propose a variety of tests to quantify the relevance of these channels. Within a structural
framework that is commonly used in the electricity auctions literature (see Wolak (2000) and
Hortaçsu and Puller (2008), among others), we first test if firms’ behavior is consistent with full
internalization of permit prices. We cannot reject that the emissions price reflects the actual
cost of emissions permits. Interestingly this finding shows that the Spanish electricity firms fully
incorporated the opportunity cost of permits, despite the fact that the emissions market had just
been created and firms did not participate very actively in it. This is also consistent with the
allocation of free permits having no distortionary effects in the short run.7
To assess the incentives for markup adjustment, we use the same structural model to develop
a first-order approach that decomposes the pass-through after a one euro increase in emissions
costs. Price changes are driven both by changes in marginal costs and changes in markups. The
high correlation of cost shocks across firms together with the highly inelastic nature of aggregate
demand implies that the incentives to adjust markups are very weak in these markets. As a
consequence, prices tend to move one-to-one with changes in emissions costs.
Next, we show that our measured pass-through is not affected by the presence of other cost
components that do not depend on the emissions price. In our baseline model, we use a linear
specification for the pass-through while controlling for the presence of other costs since (i) emissions
costs enter the cost function in a linear fashion, (ii) we are able to measure these costs with
high precision and (iii) we observe the other components of marginal costs. This implies that
our pass-through estimate is already net of non-emissions costs. Given that we observe total
marginal costs, we can also measure their pass-through to final prices. We find consistent results as
compared to when we measure the pass-through of marginal emissions costs only, thus highlighting
the advantages of having detailed micro-level cost data.
Last, price rigidities might be a source of incomplete pass-through as they might limit firms’
ability to adjust prices optimally (Nakamura and Zerom, 2010; Goldberg and Hellerstein, 2013).
Intuitively, the costs of price adjustment in electricity markets are likely to be small given that
firms have to participate in the electricity auction on a daily basis. However, if there are some
costs of bid preparation, firms might prefer not to update their bids as often as allowed to do so.
A close look at the data reveals the presence of very small price rigidities. Indeed, firms change
their bids frequently, about 80% of the days on average. This frequency is even higher for Mondays
and Saturdays, when the payoffs from bid adjustment are enhanced by weekday-weekend demand
seasonality.
In conclusion, the institutional framework in electricity markets stands as the main factor
acknowledge that such a “cognitive divide” in decision-making may play a role in explaining incomplete pass-through,
but decide to abstract from it.
7
See also Reguant and Ellerman (2008), Fowlie (2010) and Kolstad and Wolak (2008) for related evidence on
whether firms internalize emissions costs. The last two report a situation in which short run incentives are distorted,
so that the opportunity cost is not given by the permit price.

3

explaining our high measured pass-through. In particular, since electricity is traded through highfrequency uniform-price auctions for an almost perfectly inelastic demand, firms have weak incentives to adjust markups after a cost shock. Furthermore, the costs of price adjustment are
relatively small. The fact that most other markets analyzed in the pass-through literature are
organized through bilateral negotiations contributes to explaining why our measured pass-through
rate is higher than usual. In this sense, the auction mechanism, unlike other market institutions,
proves efficient in almost instantaneously passing through changes in input costs to wholesale prices.
Our results have important policy implications. Since January 2013, full auctioning of emissions
permits has become compulsory for the power sector. The finding that firms internalize the value
of free permits suggests that the short run effects of a system with taxes or without grandfathering
should not differ much from the one with free allowances.8 In contrast with the conventional
wisdom, the use of auctions to allocate permits should not have any additional inflationary effects
on electricity prices, at least in the short run.9
Furthermore, the high measured pass-through rate suggests that the introduction of emissions
regulation implies a wealth transfer from consumers to producers, not only because of the free
allocation of permits, but also due to increased market prices. Full auctioning of emissions permits
will thus not remove these gains from the existing non-polluting technologies.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the context and data of the analysis. In
Section 3, we measure the pass-through rate by means of a reduced-form regression. In Section 4,
we present a structural framework to explore the role of demand, supply and markup adjustments
in explaining the pass-through. We also explore whether and how the cost decomposition affects
the pass-through estimates, and measure the extent of price rigidities in this market. Section 5
concludes.

2

Context and Data

2.1

The Context

We study the pass-through of emissions costs to wholesale electricity prices in the Spanish electricity
market. We focus on the period from January 2004 to February 2006, which comprises the first
phase (2005-2007) of the European cap-and-trade program for carbon, known as the European
Union’s Emissions Trading System (ETS).10 The ETS is currently the largest carbon market in the
8

See Fowlie et al. (2012) for a situation in which grandfathering can have long run impacts on investment, entry
and exit decisions.
9
A high UK government official stated that “[Auctioning permits] is ultimately going to show up in higher prices
for goods, most obviously higher energy prices,” Harvey and Eaglesham (2008). See also the response by Klemperer
(2008).
10
We do not include the period from March 2006 onwards because there was an important regulatory change in the
Spanish electricity market (Royal Decree-Law 3/2006) that distorted the market clearing procedure in the auctions.
It implied that market prices would only be paid to firms’ net sales; more specifically, firms’ production covered by
the purchases of their downstream subsidiaries would be bought and sold at a regulated price. We have experimented
including this period in the sample and the overall conclusions of the analysis hold.

4

world, and it is the European Union’s flagship instrument to fight climate change.11
Under cap-and-trade, the total amount of emissions is capped, and emissions permits summing
up to the cap are distributed among pollutants. On a yearly basis, emitters are required to surrender
a permit for each tonne of carbon they emit. For this purpose, they can either use their own permits
or they can trade them in the OTC market or through exchanges. During the first and second phases
of the ETS, emissions permits were distributed almost entirely for free.12
One half of total regulated emissions in Europe come from the power sector as thermal plants
burn fossil fuels (coal, gas and oil) to generate electricity. Under the new emissions regulation
these plants now face the cost of carbon. In Spain, which is the focus of our paper, thermal units
produce approximately 50% of total electricity production during the sample period. The other
technologies for electricity generation are nuclear (20-25%), traditional hydro power (8-11%), and
renewable resources (9-12%), all of which are carbon-free.
There are 89 thermal units subject to emissions control, 36 of which are coal plants, 38 are new
combined cycle gas plants, and 15 are traditional oil and gas plants. The average emissions rate of
coal plants is 0.95 tons/MWh, although this rate varies across units depending on the type of coal
they burn. Combined cycle natural gas units (CCGTs) have much lower emissions rates, averaging
0.35 tons/MWh with little dispersion across plants. Since coal plants typically have lower marginal
costs than CCGTs, on average they operate closer to their full potential (65% versus 37% over the
sample). Finally, traditional oil-fired or gas-fired plants that are more inefficient than newer gas
plants, only operating at 7% of their capacity on average.
During the sample period, the Spanish electricity market was supplied by four vertically integrated incumbent firms, plus a set of small fringe players. Table 2.1 provides a closer look at
the characteristics of the thermal units owned by these companies. Altogether, the four main incumbents own 61 of the 89 production units affected by the emissions regulation. Additionally,
these firms also own nuclear and hydro plants, specially the two largest firms. In terms of total
production, the market share of these two firms exceeds 80% during this period.

2.2

Overview of Prices

Since we will be measuring the pass-through of emissions costs to electricity prices, it is illustrative to provide a first look at their evolution over the sample period. As can be seen from
Figure 2.1, electricity prices are highly volatile as a result of frequent changes in demand and supply conditions. Movements in demand display strong seasonal components (e.g., winter-summer,
weekday-weekend), and supply conditions vary with the availability of renewable resources (hydro
11

The first phase covered only carbon dioxide emissions from energy related industries (combustion installations
with a rated thermal input exceeding 20MW, mineral oil refineries, coke ovens), production and processing of ferrous
metals, the mineral industry (cement clinker, glass and ceramic bricks) and the pulp, paper and board industry.
These activities represent around 40% of CO2 emissions in the European Union. For more details on the EU ETS,
see Ellerman et al. (2007) and Bahringer and Lange (2012).
12
A few countries decided to auction a small share of permits, which was capped by law to be at most 5% of
the total amount of permits (Ellerman et al., 2007). Since January 2013 (a period not covered in our analysis), full
auctioning of permits has become compulsory for the power sector.

5

Table 2.1: Characteristics of thermal plants of the 4 main firms

Total number of units
Avg. emissions rate (tons CO2 /MWh)
Avg. thermal capacity (MW)
Avg. coal capacity share (MW)
Avg. CCGT capacity share (MW)
Avg. oil/gas capacity share (MW)

Firm 1
23
0.80
7,191
0.65
0.15
0.20

Firm 2
17
0.75
4,933
0.22
0.27
0.51

Firm 3
15
0.86
3,591
0.56
0.15
0.30

Firm 4
6
0.90
1,914
0.81
0.19
0.00

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, including all thermal units (except nuclear power
plants) in the Spanish electricity market that are active. Average measures are based on hourly values
during the period.

and wind) and with changes in input prices (coal, gas, oil and carbon).
While the figure suggests that emissions costs affected electricity prices, it tells us little about
the magnitude of the pass-through. We next describe the data set that enables us to perform a
rigorous empirical analysis of the magnitude and determinants of the pass-through.

2.3

Supply and Demand Bid Data

We use detailed data on the bids submitted to the Spanish day-ahead electricity market from
January 2004 to February 2006.13 The day-ahead market concentrates approximately 70% of all
electricity traded in Spain. It operates as a multi-unit uniform-price auction, similarly to other
auction-based markets, e.g. the Treasury Bill market.
On a daily basis, electricity producers submit 24 hourly supply functions specifying the minimum
price at which they are willing to produce a given amount of electricity at a given hour of the
following day. Similarly, retailers and large electricity consumers submit 24 hourly demand functions
specifying the price-quantity pairs at which they are willing to purchase electricity. The market
operator orders the individual bids to construct the aggregate supply and demand functions for
every hour, and the intersection of these two curves determines the market clearing price and
quantities allocated to each bidder.14 Sellers (buyers) receive (pay) the market clearing price times
their sales (purchases). Accordingly, for each of the 24 hours of the 790 days in the sample, we
observe the price-quantity pairs submitted by each firm for each of their power plants.15 We also
observe all the price-quantity pairs submitted by the buyers.
Access to such a detailed and high-frequency bid data set presents several advantages. First,
we observe the identity of the production unit that is actually setting the market price. This will
13

These data are publicly available at the system and market operator web sites, www.esios.ree.es and www.omie.es.
These 24 hourly markets clear independently of each other, with one exception, the so-called “Minimum Revenue
Requirement”, which allows bidders to withdraw their bids if their minimum revenue over the day is not above a
given value. See Reguant (2013) for a complete treatment of the market algorithm.
15
Supply functions can be made up to 25 price-quantity pairs for each production unit, even though in practice
most units submit at most 5 or 6 steps. For thermal units, the average number of steps is 4.33 and the median is 3.
At the aggregate level, the overall supply function of a big firm in a given hour can still contain over hundred steps.
14

6

Figure 2.1: Evolution of carbon permit prices during our sample

0

20

40

Euros

60

80

100

Electricity and CO2 Prices

2004

2005
Daily Electricity Prices (E/MWh)

2006
Emissions Prices (E/ton)

be crucial throughout the analysis as it enables us to construct the relevant marginal costs and
emissions costs data. Second, we can construct the hourly supply functions submitted by all firms
in the market and the hourly residual demand functions faced by each firm. We can thus measure
the slope of these curves directly so as to understand the role of markup adjustments in determining
the pass-through (Section 4.1). Third, we observe the frequency of bid changes, which allows us to
assess whether nominal price rigidities play any role in this market (Section 4.3).

2.4

Marginal Costs and Emissions Data

The marginal costs incurred by thermal plants can be decomposed into two elements: marginal
input costs and marginal emissions costs. The former depend on the price of the fossil fuel used
and the plant’s “heat rate”, i.e., the amount of energy used per unit of electricity produced. The
latter depend on the carbon price and on the plant’s “emissions rate”, i.e., the amount of carbon
emissions per unit of electricity produced.
To compute engineering estimates of marginal input costs, we use information on heat rates, fuel
types, and variable operating and maintenance costs of all thermal plants in the Spanish electricity
industry.16 We also use publicly available information on coal, gas, and oil prices in international
16

This information has been provided to us by the System Operator, which used to be in charge of dispatching
production units according to their reported costs. We have updated this data set to include the new production
units (mainly CCGTs). The same data are also used in Fabra and Toro (2005). The techniques used to compute
engineering estimates of marginal input costs are similar to those in Wolfram (1999) and Borenstein et al. (2002),
among others.

7

markets.17 Our marginal cost estimates may contain some measurement error to the extent that
plants’ efficiency may have been upgraded, or the observed commodity costs do not reflect firms’
actual input costs.
In order to estimate marginal emissions costs, we have collected annual information on carbon
emissions at the plant level from the National Registry, for the years 2001-2004. These data are
merged with the emissions data reported during the first phase of the European Trading System
(2005-2007). We have thus estimated emissions rates at the plant level for each year, by dividing
total emissions by total output. Emissions rates do not fluctuate much at the unit level and are
consistent with typical fuel benchmark emissions for the generation plants involved (IEA, 2012).
Among coal units, imported coal plants have the lowest emissions rate, around 0.90 tons/MWh,
whereas lignite units are the dirtiest, with an emissions rate ranging from 1.00 to 1.10 tons/MWh.
Meanwhile, natural gas generators tend to have an emissions rate around 0.35 tons/MWh.
In the empirical estimation, the relevant marginal emissions rate is that of the price-setting
unit. Whenever such a unit is thermal, we use its emissions rate to compute the marginal emissions
cost. If we do not observe the emissions rate of the unit exactly setting the price, we use data
from the System Operator that reports the marginal technology at each hour. The definition of the
marginal technology used by the System Operator is broader than ours, as it takes into account not
only the unit exactly setting the price, but the marginal production units during a given hour. We
set the marginal emissions rate equal to the average emissions rate of coal units if coal is reported
marginal, and the average for gas plants when gas is reported marginal.18
Figure 2.2 reports the average marginal emissions rate in the market, as a function of the
hour of the day. One can see that the marginal emissions rate is highest at night, when coal power
plants are usually producing at the margin. During the day, emissions rates are lower, as demand is
higher and gas plants produce at the margin. Consequently, marginal emissions rates are negatively
correlated with market prices, since they tend to be higher in periods of low demand.
We combine emissions rates and spot permit prices to compute the marginal emissions costs.
We use the spot permit price under the assumption that the emissions market is efficient, i.e.,
permit prices convey all relevant information. This implies that firms cannot make any informed
arbitrage by either hoarding or overselling permits.19 In our application, and given the small share
of Spanish electricity emissions in the overall EU ETS market, we also assume that the Spanish
17

For coal units, we use the MCIS Index, for gas units we use the Gazexport-Ruhrgas prices, and for peaking units
we use the F.O.1% CIF NWE prices. All series are in e/te. We have obtained this information from Bloomberg.
18
Given that the Market Operator does not necessarily classify all hours as coal or gas only, there still remain
10% of the hours in which the marginal emissions rate is not observed. In the baseline regression, we exclude these
hours from the sample. To complete all observations, we have experimented constructing the marginal technology by
interpolating the marginal technologies reported by the Market Operator. For example, if coal is marginal at 2am
and 4am, and pumped storage is reported marginal at 3am, we would consider that coal is at the margin also at 3am.
Results are similar if we also include these additional observations. See Table A.3 in the Appendix.
19
As supporting evidence to this assumption, we collect additional data from the EU ETS Transactions Log Register,
which reports all permit trades during the period. We examine the transactions made by the Spanish electricity firms
in our data set and find that they transacted very few times during the sample period. Had they had additional
information not conveyed in market prices, they would have for instance sold permits before the collapse in prices
that occurred in April 2006, but they did not.

8

.6

Emissions Rate (Tons CO2/MWh)
.65
.7
.75
.8

.85

Figure 2.2: Average Marginal Emissions Rate across the Day

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Hour of the Day
Emissions Rate

CI 95%

electricity firms are price takers in the permit market.

3

Measuring the Pass-Through Rate

3.1

Empirical Framework

We use an instrumental variables approach to measure the equilibrium effect of a marginal increase
in emissions costs on electricity market prices. In our baseline specification, the dependent variable
is the hourly price of electricity (pth ), whereas the main independent variable is the marginal
emissions cost. Since the pass-through is an equilibrium outcome, we include additional exogenous
demand and supply factors to control for other market forces that could affect market prices.20
The main specification is as follows:
D
S
pth = ρτ t eth + Xth β 0 + Xth
β 1 + Xth
β 2 + ω th + th ,

(3.1)

where ρ identifies the equilibrium cost pass-through. The emissions rate of the unit that sets the
price at a given hour is captured by eth , and τ t represents the price of emissions permits. Therefore,
τ t eth is the marginal emissions costs that firms face at a given hour h and day t. The controls Xth ,
D , and X S stand for exogenous common, demand and supply controls, respectively, and ω
Xth
th is a
th

vector of fixed effects.
20
Busse et al. (2013) follow a similar approach when measuring the equilibrium effects of gasoline prices on car
prices, while including both demand and supply controls.

9

The main specification includes month of sample, day of the week and hour fixed effects to
control for potential trends and fluctuations. In some specifications, we also allow the hourly fixed
effects to be different for every month, due to seasonal changes in sunlight and weather that affect
electricity demand. As common controls, we include fossil-fuel prices (coal, gas and oil). On the
demand side, we include economic activity indicators and weather controls. On the supply side, we
include wind speed due to the presence of significant wind power generation in Spain.
When estimating this equation, it is important to realize that the hourly marginal emissions
cost, τ t eth , is likely to be endogenous. Indeed, the identity of the marginal unit, and thus the
marginal emissions rate (eth ), is likely to be endogenous, as it is potentially affected by highfrequency unobserved supply and demand shocks. The main variation in emissions rates comes
from the technology side: coal plants are up to three times dirtier than natural gas plants. In turn,
coal plants also tend to have lower marginal costs than gas plants. Hence, in periods of low demand,
when electricity prices tend to be lower, coal plants are dispatched more often than gas plants, as
already shown in Figure 2.2. If one did not account for the endogeneity of the marginal emissions
rate, one could misleadingly attribute low prices to the higher emissions costs of coal plants. Not
surprisingly, when we regress the market price on the marginal emissions cost, the pass-through
rate is negative, ranging from -0.17 to -0.22.
To address this problem, we can use the emissions price, τ t , to instrument for marginal emissions
costs, τ t eth . Conditional on the emissions price being exogenous, we can obtain a consistent estimate
of the cost pass-through in this market. In fact, the emissions price is likely to be exogenous to the
Spanish electricity companies. Emissions permits are traded across several countries and sectors in
the European Union, of which the Spanish electricity sector is only a small part.
In a broader sense, the emissions price could still be endogenous to the Spanish electricity
market due to common macroeconomic trends across the EU and due to general equilibrium effects
of emissions prices on fuel cost and the electricity demanded by other sectors. We address this
potential endogeneity by including a rich set of controls in the regression; notably, commodity
prices. To address the potential concerns that could arise due to omitted variables bias, we also
include month of sample fixed effects in all our specifications.

3.2

Main Results

Table 3.1 reports our estimates of the pass-through rate. Column (1) presents the baseline results,
with a pass-through estimate of 0.862. This implies that a one euro increase in emissions costs
translates, on average, into an eighty-six cents increase in electricity prices. All the other covariates
have the expected signs. On average, temperature is negatively correlated with electricity prices,
with maximum temperature having a positive effect. This is consistent with electricity demand
being higher during winter and in very hot summer days. Wind speed reduces electricity prices due
to the presence of substantial renewable wind power in Spain. This effect is however partly reduced
in very windy days, as wind mills need to be switched off when wind speed is too high. Consistently,
we find a positive correlation between wind speed squared and electricity prices. Finally, coal and
10

Table 3.1: Cost Pass-through Regression Results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mg. Emissions Costs (ρ)

0.862
(0.181)

0.804
(0.175)

0.835
(0.173)

0.771
(0.165)

0.788
(0.161)

Temperature

-0.231
(0.060)

0.065
(0.112)

-0.204
(0.057)

0.091
(0.108)

0.102
(0.101)

Maximum Temperature

0.137
(0.050)

0.020
(0.051)

0.112
(0.047)

-0.005
(0.047)

-0.030
(0.045)

Wind Speed

-2.086
(0.354)

-2.086
(0.351)

-2.089
(0.333)

-2.111
(0.328)

-2.152
(0.320)

Wind Speed Squared

0.055
(0.025)

0.055
(0.024)

0.054
(0.023)

0.056
(0.023)

0.056
(0.022)

Coal

57.477
(4.035)

38.631
(4.268)

57.496
(3.885)

38.438
(4.086)

50.669
(8.873)

Gas

5.638
(0.407)

3.331
(0.403)

5.604
(0.391)

3.316
(0.386)

5.525
(1.593)

Brent

-2.896
(0.881)

-0.952
(0.909)

-2.938
(0.834)

-1.005
(0.857)

-3.160
(1.634)

F-test

124.8

122.4

129.9

127.9

127.1

N
N
N

Y
N
N

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

MonthXTemperature
MonthXHour FE
HourXInput

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. All specifications include month of sample, weekday, and hour fixed effects, as well as weather
and demand controls (temperature, maximum temperature, humidity), supply controls (wind speed and
wind speed squared); and common controls (commodity prices of coal, gas, and oil). The marginal
emissions cost is instrumented with the emissions price. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Number
of observations: 16, 186.

11

natural gas prices are positively correlated with electricity prices, whereas the correlation between
the price of Brent and electricity prices is negative. This latter effect could be capturing some
aggregate macroeconomic effects.
Specifications (2) − (5) introduce several additional controls to the baseline regression. Column
(2) allows the effect of temperature to have a different effect on price depending on the month of
the year. This can be important, as a relatively warm day tends to reduce electricity consumption
during the winter, but to increase it during the summer. Column (3) introduces an hourly fixed
effect for each month of the year to more flexibly control for seasonality due to temperature and also
due to changes in day/night demand differences over the year. Column (4) combines both sets of
controls. Finally, specification (5) allows the effects of commodity prices to be different depending
on the hour of the day. The rationale behind this specification is that coal (gas) plants tend to be
marginal during low (high) demand hours. Pass-through estimates are robust across specifications,
with the pass-through being between 77 and 86%.21
A relevant question is whether the pass-through differs in peak versus off-peak hours. There are
good reasons to suspect this is the case. Generators face several constraints when operating their
plants due to ramping costs (i.e., the speed at which they can change their production), start-up
costs, minimum load, or minimum downtime. This may affect pass-through, as it has an effect
on firms’ opportunity costs and hence on their pricing behavior. For instance, firms might find it
optimal to bid below marginal costs to avoid switching off their plants (Mansur, 2008; Bushnell
et al., 2008). Since these constraints are more likely to be binding during off-peak times, the main
hypothesis is that the pass-through rate should be lower during these hours.
Table 3.2 presents estimates of the cost pass-through rates when allowed to differ for peak and
non-peak hours. In all five specifications, the pass-through rate is approximately 60% during offpeak hours. The estimates for on-peak hours, on the other hand, are higher than the estimates
in the baseline regression and very close to 100%. These results provide further evidence that the
pass-through in this market was very high, particularly in those hours in which we would expect
firms to price marginally. Except for non-peak hours, we are unable to reject full pass-through in
all specifications.

4

Understanding an Almost Complete Pass-Through

Our finding of an almost complete pass-through of emissions costs to wholesale electricity prices is
the exception, rather than the norm, in the pass-through literature. In this section, we exploit the
richness of our micro-level data to closely explore why cost pass-through is so high in this market.
21
The Appendix includes additional regressions that allow for more flexible functional forms for temperature, wind
speed and commodity prices, all of which are consistent with the above results. See Table A.2.

12

Table 3.2: Cost Pass-through Regression Results: Peak vs. Non-Peak
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mg. Emissions Costs - Peak

1.085
(0.185)

1.027
(0.178)

1.055
(0.178)

0.992
(0.171)

1.048
(0.169)

Mg. Emissions Costs - Off Peak

0.635
(0.170)

0.581
(0.164)

0.608
(0.164)

0.548
(0.157)

0.439
(0.158)

N
N
N

Y
N
N

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

MonthXTemperature
MonthXHour FE
HourXInput

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. Only peak hours are included (between 8am and 8pm). All specifications include month of
sample, weekday, and hour fixed effects, as well as weather and demand controls (temperature, maximum
temperature, humidity), supply controls (wind speed and wind speed squared); and common controls
(commodity prices of coal, gas, and oil). The marginal emissions cost is instrumented with the emissions
price. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Number of observations: 16, 186.

4.1

Demand, Supply and Markup Adjustments

A standard explanation for incomplete pass-through is the presence of demand, supply and markup
adjustments. In the presence of a cost shock, firms’ incentives to increase or decrease prices are
generally affected by the shape of the demand curve, the shape of marginal costs, other firms’ cost
shocks, and the nature of competition among firms. The contribution of markup adjustments to
pass-through incompleteness has been documented in several studies (see Goldberg and Hellerstein,
2013, for a review).
Thanks to the richness of our bidding data, we can flexibly approximate the contributions
of demand, supply and markup adjustments to pass-through. Instead of posing a fully-fledged
structural model, we perform a structural decomposition using minimal assumptions, some of which
we can test. In particular, we first test whether the cost shocks that we observe are consistent with
firms’ observed strategies. Next, we simulate the changes on firms’ first order conditions triggered
by emissions cost shocks to assess their incentives to adjust markups.
4.1.1

Structural framework

Following the electricity auctions literature, we use a structural model of bidding behavior to derive
firms’ first-order conditions of profit-maximization. The optimality condition takes the general form
of
bidit (qit ) = mcit (qit ) + markupit (qit ).

(4.1)

The equation states that firms set bids equal to their marginal cost of production plus a markup.
The marginal cost component, as explained above, is the result of a combination of emissions

13

costs and input costs, i.e.,
mcit (qit ) = marginal emissions costit (qit ) + marginal input costit (qit ),
both of which we can measure. Note that these cost components are allowed to differ both across
as well as within firms.
We do not observe the markup component directly in the data, but we can construct it. From
the first order condition of profit maximization,22 the markup is given by,
markupit (qit ) =

∂pit (qit )
q̃it ,
∂qit

where q̃it is the net quantity sold by the firm, i.e., its production minus its vertical commitments
(Bushnell et al., 2008), and pit is the inverse residual demand a firm faces, i.e., it gives the resulting
market clearing price if the firm produces qit . A firm possesses greater market power the steeper
the inverse residual demand it faces, given that a steep inverse residual demand allows the firm to
raise the price with only a small reduction in output. Furthermore, the bigger the net quantity of
a firm, the more it benefits from the price increase.
Our data enables us to approximate the two main terms of the markup component: firms’ net
quantities and the slopes of their residual demand curves. For the former, we subtract the firm’s
physical and demand side contracts (e.g. purchases of its downstream subsidiary) from its output.23
For the latter, as it is common in the electricity economics literature, we can directly approximate
the slope of the residual demand curves from the observed bid data (see Wolak, 2003; Hortaçsu and
Puller, 2008; among others). Figure 4.1 depicts the residual demand curves faced by each of the
four major firms in the Spanish electricity market. As shown in the graphs, residual demand curves
are complex highly non-linear objects, with elasticities varying substantially along the curves. The
data allow us to estimate the elasticities around the market price with great flexibility.24
4.1.2

Measuring opportunity costs

Once we have constructed all the components of the structural equation, we can test equation (4.1).
More specifically, we estimate the following empirical equation in those hours in which firm i is
setting the market price through its marginal unit j:
bijth = γej τ t + βcjt + θm
b ijth + ijth ,
22
See Wolfram (1998), Wolak (2003), Borenstein et al. (2002) and Hortaçsu and Puller (2008) for applications
to the British, Australian, Californian and Texas market, respectively. See Reguant (2013) for a derivation in the
context of the Spanish electricity market.
23
To the extent that firms have additional financial contracts, the measured net quantity will generally be an upper
bound of the actual net position.
24
As in Wolak (2003), we use a non-parametric smoothing Kernel estimator to approximate the slope of the residual
demand curves.

14

Figure 4.1: Inverse Residual Demand Data
(a) Sample Inverse Residual Demands for Firm 1

(b) Sample Inverse Residual Demands for Firm 2

(c) Sample Inverse Residual Demands for Firm 3

(d) Sample Inverse Residual Demands for Firm 4

Notes: Inverse residual demands faced by each firm at midday. For better comparison, the sample of
random days is depicted across firms.

15

where bijth is the marginal bid of firm i when setting the price with unit j at hour h and day t, ej
is the emissions rate of unit j, τ t is the daily price of emissions permits, cjt are the unit-specific
marginal input cost estimates, m
b ijth is the approximated markup, and ijth is the error term, which
could arise due to cost shocks at the unit level, modeling error and/or firm optimization error.
We need to make a modeling choice when estimating the structural equation, as the first-order
condition is only valid (i) for units that set the price with positive probability, and (ii) when the
unit’s capacity constraints are not binding. Accordingly, and for the sake of simplicity, we limit
ourselves to those observations in which (i) units set the price ex-post, implying that they were
indeed marginal, and to those observations in which (ii) the bid is not the first nor the last one in
the unit’s supply function, implying that they could indeed adjust their output.25
The main parameters to be estimated are β, γ and θ. Our focus of interest is testing γ = 1,
which would imply that firms, on average, fully internalize the emissions permit price in their
bidding decisions. It is important not to confuse the degree of internalization of permit prices (γ)
with the resulting effect on equilibrium prices or pass-through rate (ρ). The former is a supply-side
object reflected in firms’ strategic behavior, while the latter is an equilibrium outcome resulting
from the interplay of both supply and demand factors.
It is well known that tradable permits have an opportunity cost, namely, the price at which
they can be sold at secondary markets, regardless of whether those permits were allocated for free
or, more generally, regardless of the price paid for them. However, in our particular setting, several
reasons have been put forward for why the price of the permits might not accurately reflect firms’
opportunity costs of emissions. The first two explanations rely on firms being fully rational. For
sellers of permits (which is the relevant case because of grandfathering), the opportunity cost of
emissions is below the permits’ market price (i) in the presence of transaction costs in the emissions
market (Stavins, 1995), or (ii) under the expectation that future permit allocations will be based on
current emissions (Fowlie, 2010). A third explanation rests on firms’ limited information capacity
(Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2012): (iii) firms might be unable to understand that free permits have
an opportunity cost (Goeree et al., 2010). More broadly, this can be an important test when some
cost shocks are observed, but the way in which they enter the profit function might be unobserved
or measured with error, as γ gives the structural estimate of how firms incorporate this cost shock
in their behavior.
Table 4.1 presents our structural estimates. The estimation is performed at the industry level
and at the firm level. Standard errors are clustered at the unit level.26 All specifications include
marginal cost estimates as a control. To the extent that this variable might not accurately reflect
all relevant costs, we introduce unit fixed effects in specifications (2) to (4). Specifications (3)
to (4) also include seasonal fixed effects. All specifications, except for specification (4), constrain
the markup parameter to be equal to one (θ = 1), as implied by the first order condition. In
25
As shown in Reguant (2013), firms use their non-marginal steps very differently in this market due to the
interaction of dynamic costs and minimum and maximum capacity constraints.
26
We present alternative clusters in the Appendix (see Table A.4). The implications of our results do not change
substantially as a function of the degree of clustering.

16

specification (4), we relax this constraint. Given that the markup depends on market demand
and, thus, it is endogenous, we use weather data (temperature, wind speed, humidity) as residual
demand shifters.
The estimated opportunity cost parameter γ is not distinct from one at the industry level and
for the three largest firms in the industry. This finding is important on two grounds. First, it
highlights the uniqueness of our cost shock for a pass-through analysis. Not only are permit prices
exogenous to firms, but also they capture very accurately the cost shock they suffer. This rules
out the possibility that a potential mismatch between the observed and the actual cost shock is
biasing our pass-through estimates. Second, this finding is relevant from a policy perspective, since
it implies that (i) transaction costs in this market are negligible, (ii) the permit allocation rule
did not distort firms’ short run incentives, and (iii) firms understood that free permits have an
opportunity cost given by the permit price.
In contrast, the parameter estimates for β vary more across specifications and across firms. All
estimates are very sensitive to the inclusion of the unit fixed effect, probably revealing the fact
that the constant is capturing relevant costs not included in our marginal cost variable. Overall,
it seems that firms do not respond at high frequency to changes in fossil fuel prices as they do to
changes in carbon prices. One potential explanation is that, in many cases, fossil fuels are sold
through take-or-pay long term contracts, implying that spot prices do not not always reflect the
true opportunity cost of using the fuel. Similarly, some regulations oblige firms to use a certain
amount of national coal, which again create a mismatch between observed commodity prices and
firms’ actual opportunity costs of burning coal. Last, marginal production costs might not be as
accurately measured as marginal emissions costs. For instance, coal has to be transported from
either the national coal mines or from the harbor to the coal plants, whose locations differ.
Finally, the parameter estimate for θ appears to be broadly consistent with the structural model,
although the relationship between markups and prices is particularly noisy for the smaller firms.
This is in part explained by the fact that markups are much smaller for these firms. Whereas
the residual demand that the two biggest firms face is quite inelastic, the residual demand curve
that the other two firms face is substantially elastic, with average elasticities being 4.5 and 6.5,
respectively. Reassuringly, the noise in the markup estimates has little bearing on the estimates on
the internalization of marginal emissions costs (γ) and marginal input costs (β).
4.1.3

Measuring incentives for markup adjustments

Once we have confirmed that firms fully internalize emissions costs, we explore the implications of
the emissions regulation on firms’ strategies and market outcomes. As pointed out in the literature,
the degree of correlation of cost shocks across firms, as well as the shape of demand and supply
curves can have implications for pass-through. A firm’s incentive to pass-through a cost shock is
weaker if its rivals do not face the same shock. Similarly, if demand responds substantially to price
increases, even a common cost shock across all firms can induce an attenuated pass-through due to
movements along the supply and demand curves, as well as due to markup adjustments.
17

Table 4.1: Test based on structural equations
All

Firm 1

Firm 2

Firm 3

Firm 4

(1) No FE

0.939
(0.070)

0.925
(0.039)

0.998
(0.032)

1.117
(0.039)

0.806
(0.073)

(2) Unit FE

0.971
(0.034)

0.947
(0.031)

0.963
(0.039)

1.062
(0.046)

0.803
(0.102)

(3) Unit FE + Season

0.957
(0.034)

0.959
(0.028)

0.963
(0.027)

1.008
(0.053)

0.784
(0.085)

(4) Spec.3 + Markup (IV)

0.959
(0.062)

1.036
(0.058)

0.962
(0.024)

1.013
(0.197)

0.834
(0.101)

(1) No FE

0.812
(0.047)

0.476
(0.029)

0.892
(0.021)

0.952
(0.021)

1.037
(0.014)

(2) Unit FE

0.598
(0.064)

0.494
(0.057)

0.303
(0.055)

0.821
(0.037)

0.643
(0.053)

(3) Unit FE + Season

0.601
(0.058)

0.497
(0.047)

0.348
(0.039)

0.769
(0.043)

0.640
(0.027)

(4) Spec.3 + Markup (IV)

0.604
(0.069)

0.487
(0.038)

0.335
(0.060)

0.773
(0.172)

0.683
(0.114)

0.973
(0.398)

0.515
(0.227)

1.037
(0.177)

0.934
(2.411)

-1.086
(6.117)

9,257

3,029

1,988

2,805

1,435

Emissions cost (γ)

Input cost (β)

Markup (θ)
(4) Spec.3 + Markup (IV)

Obs.

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. Standard errors clustered at the unit level.

18

To assess these effects, we simulate changes on firms’ best responses following a one euro increase
in the carbon price. We use a first-order approach to simulate how optimal prices change.27 A full
decomposition of the changes of equilibrium price as implied by a change in emissions costs in the
first-order condition can be expressed as follows:
 ∂p0 (q 0 )
∂p0 (qi0 ) 0
∂p(qi ) 
i
(q̃
−
q̃
)
+
−
q̃i .
i
i
∂qi0
∂qi0
∂qi
|
{z
}
|
{z
}

∆p = mc0i (qi ) − mci (qi ) + mc0i (qi0 ) − mc0i (qi ) +
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Direct cost shock

|

Cost shift due to qi

{z

Cost change

}

Markup change due to q̃i

|

Markup change due to slope

{z

Markup change

}

The first term is the direct cost shift from an increase in emissions costs. The second term accounts
for the fact that an increase in costs can change the optimal quantity produced by the firm. Because
marginal costs are not necessarily constant within each firm, this can induce a change in marginal
costs. The third term implies that a change in the firm’s quantity can increase or decrease the
firm’s inframarginal quantity, and thus affect its markup. Finally, the fourth term captures the fact
that the slope of the residual demand can also change, due to two reasons: first, the firm’s quantity
might be different; and second, the residual demand itself may change as a result of an increase in
the emissions costs faced by other firms.
Computing the endogenous changes in these components in a full structural fashion can be a
difficult task, due to the fact that the first-order conditions across all firms are a highly non-linear
system of differential equations. The supply function nature of the game is also known to potentially
suffer from multiple equilibria (Klemperer and Meyer, 1989). Generalizing the computation of such
equilibria is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, we use a simplified methodology that allows
us to conclude that, in the context of electricity markets, markup adjustments are indeed small.
We proceed by first assuming that markups are unchanged (last two terms), and thus firms only
shift their supply curves by their emissions rates. With that shift, we can endogenously compute
changes in prices due to marginal cost changes (first two terms).28 We then check whether firms’
incentives to adjust markups are indeed small by checking that, at the margin, demand changes
are small, reshuffling of production across firms is limited, and the slopes of the residual demands
do not change significantly.
Table 4.2 shows the changes in quantities, slopes of residual demands and markups, after a
one euro increase in carbon prices. As can be seen in the table, aggregate demand response is
very limited, which is consistent with demand being very inelastic in the short run. Quantities
within the firm also remain very stable, which is consistent with emissions cost shocks being highly
correlated across firms at the margin.
These two facts - inelastic aggregate demand and very correlated cost shocks across firms 27

See Jaffe and Weyl (2013) for a derivation and application of the first-order approach in the context of mergers.
Figure A.1 in the Appendix shows the perturbed optimal strategies around the equilibrium price. This perturbation of optimal strategies is only valid at the margin. Given that the change in emissions costs is small, we take
participation decisions as given. Characterizing the optimal startup decision is beyond the scope of this paper. See
Reguant (2013) for a computation of optimal best responses in the presence of startup costs.
28

19

Table 4.2: Percent Changes in Quantities, Markups and Slopes
Mean

SD

P25

P50

P75

Aggregate Demand

-0.2%

0.3%

-0.2%

0.0%

0.0%

Firm 1

-0.3%

1.3%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

Firm 2

-0.2%

0.8%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

Firm 3

-0.3%

7.1%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

Firm 4

-0.3%

1.2%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

Firm 1

1.1%

7.1%

-2.0%

0.8%

4.1%

Firm 2

0.3%

7.0%

-2.5%

0.2%

3.1%

Firm 3

0.9%

7.0%

-2.0%

0.6%

3.7%

Firm 4

0.8%

6.8%

-1.9%

0.5%

3.5%

Firm 1

-0.9%

9.6%

-4.5%

-1.0%

1.9%

Firm 2

0.1%

10.3%

-3.3%

-0.3%

2.5%

Firm 3

-0.7%

12.3%

-4.2%

-0.8%

1.9%

Firm 4

-0.6%

10.1%

-3.9%

-0.7%

1.9%

Changes in Quantity

Changes in Slope
of Inverse Residual Demand

Changes in Markup

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. Table expresses percent changes in quantities, markups and the slope of the inverse residual
demand for a one euro increase in carbon prices. Number of observations: 18,960.

20

suggest that firms have limited incentives to adjust markups. In fact, as shown in Table 4.2, the
markups suffer little changes on average, as implied by the small changes in the slopes of the residual
demands and firms’ quantities. Even though the slopes of the residual demands are relatively noisy
and sensitive to the perturbation on the supply schedules, on average the changes are very limited
and the resulting markups change by less than 1%. Since markups tend to be a relatively small
fraction of the price, a 1% change in the markup implies an even smaller price change.

4.2

Emissions Costs vs. Non-Emissions Costs

When measuring the pass-through, the researcher has to identify the cost shock faced by firms as
well as to understand how that cost shock enters into the firms’ cost function. For example, in the
exchange-rate pass-through literature, the cost shock that is observed affects costs multiplicatively
through its impact on the terms of trade. A log-log specification is more suited in these occasions.
However, the researcher typically does not observe the weight of other costs not affected by exchange
rate fluctuations, often called non-traded costs. As stressed in the exchange rate pass-through
literature, the presence of non-traded costs may lead to pass-through incompleteness.29
In the context of electricity markets, emissions costs also represent a small share of total costs,
particularly so in periods of low permit prices. However, our detailed data allows us to observe
emissions costs separately from other non-emissions costs. The structural model and results developed in the previous section allow us to be confident that the observed emissions costs are the ones
that firms actually take into account. Additionally, in our setting, emissions costs enter linearly
into the cost function.
These factors allow us to use a linear specification for the pass-through regression, while flexibly
controlling for the presence of other costs. This approach does not directly deliver a pass-through
elasticity, but has the advantage of being unaffected by the relative share of unobserved costs.
Indeed, as shown in the second column of Table 4.3, a log-log specification using emissions costs
would reflect an incomplete pass-through. This is consistent with the fact that emissions costs are
only 15-30% of total costs on average during this period.
Alternatively, one could estimate the pass-through using total marginal costs. In such a case,
the log-log estimates would not be affected by non-traded or non-observed costs.30 In our case,
and thanks to our detailed data, we can recover total marginal costs with our engineering marginal
costs. The emissions price is still a valid instrument for total marginal costs, as total marginal costs
are the sum of both input marginal costs and emissions costs.
We present the results for the different specifications in Table 4.3, where we separate peak
and non-peak hours for marginal emissions costs and total marginal costs. The differences across
specifications highlight the advantages of having detailed cost data. The specifications that use
29
Goldberg and Hellerstein (2008) report that in existing studies non-traded costs contribute 50 to 78% to incomplete pass-through.
30
The suitability of this alternative approach might be industry specific and/or data dependent. For example, this
is the approach followed in DeLoecker et al. (2012), who are able to recover total marginal costs using detailed census
data on output, prices and expenditures.

21

Table 4.3: Emissions vs. Non-Emissions Costs: Peak vs. Non-Peak
Mg. Emiss. Costs

Total Mg. Costs

Linear

Logs

Linear

Logs

Peak Pass-Through

1.045
(0.174)

0.146
(0.038)

0.893
(0.120)

0.799
(0.156)

Off-Peak Pass-Through

0.453
(0.162)

0.094
(0.036)

0.218
(0.089)

0.268
(0.124)

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. Only peak hours are included (between 8am and 8pm). All specifications include month of
sample, weekday, and month-hour fixed effects, as well as weather and demand controls (temperature,
maximum temperature, humidity), supply controls (wind speed and wind speed squared); and hourly
linear (logarithmic) controls for commodity prices of coal, gas, and oil). (Log of) Costs are instrumented
with (the log of) the emissions price. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Number of observations:
13, 536.

total marginal costs (linear or logarithmic) provide relatively similar estimates as those obtained
when emissions costs are used instead (linear case). Furthermore, they do not suffer from downward
bias in the log-log case. The estimates using marginal costs are somewhat smaller, specially for
non-peak hours. This could be partly induced by some potential measurement error in our marginal
costs estimates, as suggested by our findings in Section 4.1. Overall, the estimates are consistent
with the hypothesis of complete pass-through in peak hours, and also suggest that marginal costs
are not fully priced at night, when dynamic production constraints are most binding.

4.3

Price Rigidities

Finally, understanding the potential role of barriers of price adjustment is very important as it
can severely limit firms’ ability and/or their incentives to pass-through cost changes to final prices.
Recent studies have documented that nominal price rigidities can be particularly relevant at the
wholesale level, which is the focus of our study. For instance, Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013)
attribute 31.8% of the incomplete pass-through to the presence of repricing costs in the beer market,
and Nakamura and Zerom (2010) show that menu costs explain the delayed response of coffee prices
to cost shocks, even though their impact on the long-run pass-through is negligible.
Intuitively, one would expect price rigidities to be not particularly relevant in electricity markets,
due to the presence of daily auctions. However, there could be costs of bid preparation that restrain
firms from continuously adjusting prices. A close look at the bid data reveals that firms do not
change their bids on a daily basis, but they do adjust their bids quite frequently. Table 4.4 shows
that the average frequency of bid adjustment per production unit is approximately once every three
days. If one were to look at changes at the company level, instead of the unit level, firms adjust
at least one of their bids between 70 and 90% of the days. Taking into account that demand and
supply conditions might not change vastly on a daily basis, we interpret this number as being high.

22

Table 4.4: Frequency of Bid Changes
Previous Day
Unit-Level

Previous Week
Unit-Level

Previous Day
Firm-Level

All days

0.375

0.710

0.795

Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday

0.490
0.304
0.276
0.277
0.287
0.605
0.392

0.705
0.691
0.682
0.691
0.697
0.739
0.764

0.907
0.774
0.719
0.694
0.713
0.932
0.831

Notes: Table reports the average frequency of times in which the average price bid of a given
unit changes. The average bid is defined as the average of prices across the supply function
of a unit. Columns 1 compares the bids with the same hour of the previous day. Columns 2
compares the bids with the same hour and weekday of the previous week. Columns 3 reports
whether any changes occured at the firm level.

The frequency of bid adjustment is even larger for Mondays and Saturdays, the two days in which,
intuitively, the value of adjusting would appear to be the highest because of weekend-weekday
seasonalities. It thus seems that, while present, price rigidities in wholesale electricity markets are
much weaker than in other sectors.31 Thus, this finding also contributes to uncovering the reasons
why our measured pass-through is higher than the ones reported in other studies.

5

Conclusions

We have presented an empirical assessment of the introduction of emissions regulation in the Spanish
electricity market. Overall, we find that the power companies in our data appear to have responded
very closely to changes in emissions permit prices. This led to an almost complete pass-through of
emissions costs to electricity prices.
In order to explain why the pass-through in this market is so high, we have explored whether
and why the channels that lead to partial pass-through in other settings are not present in electricity
markets. For this purpose, the richness of our micro-level data has allowed us to perform a structural
estimation without strong assumptions on the shape of the demand and supply curves. It has also
enabled us to accurately measure firms’ opportunity costs, as well as to observe emissions costs
separately from other cost components.
The analysis reveals that the high measured pass-through is explained by (i) weak incentives
31

For instance, for the coffee industry, Nakamura and Zerom (2010) report 1.3 price changes over an 8 year period;
for the beer industry, Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013) report prices remaining constant during several weeks in a row
before they jump to a new level; and for the transport equipment sector, Goldberg and Hellerstein (2009) report that
the average duration of a price change is roughly one month.

23

for markup adjustment, which is in turn explained by the high correlation of cost shocks among
firms and by the limited demand elasticity, and (ii) the absence of relevant price rigidities. The
only instances in which we measure incomplete pass-through appear to arise due to the presence
of dynamic costs, which make firms less likely to price in cost changes at night.
From a policy perspective, the finding that firms fully internalize the costs of permits suggests
that auctioning permits should have no inflationary effect on electricity prices, at least in the
short run. The extent of pass-through reported here also demonstrates that electricity producers
benefited from windfall profits due to both free permit allocation and increased market prices, which
specially benefited nuclear and hydro power plants. Indeed, the large windfall profits obtained by
electricity producers in Europe generated great discomfort, and some countries decided to claw back
part of these gains. In our setting, the Spanish government taxed these windfall profits ex-post,
which derived into a lengthy contentious trial.32 Given that our findings are consistent with what
economic theory would predict, an important lesson is that market interventions should take into
account their distributional effects and, if problematic, address them ex-ante through good market
design.

References
Aguirre, I., Cowan, S., and Vickers, J. (2010). Monopoly Price Discrimination and Demand Curvature. American Economic Review, 100(4):1601–15.
Bahringer, C. and Lange, A. (2012). The EU Emissions Trading System. Elsevier.
Bonnet, C., Dubois, P., and Villas Boas, S. B. (2013). Empirical Evidence on the Role of Non
Linear Wholesale Pricing and Vertical Restraints on Cost Pass-Through. Review of Economics
and Statistics.
Borenstein, S., Bushnell, J., and Wolak, F. (2002). Measuring Market Inefficiencies in California’s
Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market. American Economic Review, 92(5):1376–1405.
Bresnahan, T. F. (1982). The Oligopoly Solution Concept is Identified. Economics Letters, 10(12):87–92.
Bresnahan, T. F. (1989). Empirical Studies of Industries with Market Power. In Schmalensee, R.
and Willig, R., editors, Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 2 of Handbook of Industrial
Organization, chapter 17, pages 1011–1057. Elsevier.
Bulow, J. and Pfleiderer, P. (1983). A Note on the Effect of Cost Changes on Prices. Journal of
Political Economy, 91(1):182–85.
32

In October 2013, the European Union’s Court of Justice has ruled that the claw-back did not violate European
Law.

24

Bushnell, J., Chong, H., and Mansur, E. (2013). Profiting from Regulation: Evidence from the
European Carbon Market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Bushnell, J., Mansur, E., and Saravia, C. (2008). Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure, and
Competition: An Analysis of Restructured US Electricity Markets. American Economic Review,
98(1):237–66.
Busse, M. R., Knittel, C. R., and Zettelmeye, F. (2013). Are Consumers Myopic? Evidence from
New and Used Car Purchases. American Economic Review, 103(1):220–256.
DeLoecker, J., Goldberg, P. K., Khandelwal, A. K., and Pavcnik, N. (2012). Prices, Markups and
Trade Reform. NBER Working Papers 17925, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Ellerman, A. D., Buchner, B. K., and Carraro, C. (2007). Allocation in the European Emissions
Trading Scheme. Cambridge University Press.
Ellerman, A. D., Convery, F. J., and de Perthius, C. (2010). Pricing Carbon: The European Union
Emissions Trading Scheme. Cambridge University Press.
Fabra, N. and Toro, J. (2005). Price Wars and Collusion in the Spanish Electricity Market. International Journal of Industrial Organisation, 23(3-4):155–181.
Fowlie, M. (2010). Allocating Emissions Permits in Cap-and-Trade Programs: Theory and Evidence. Technical report, University of California, Berkeley.
Fowlie, M., Reguant, M., and Ryan, S. P. (2012). Market-Based Emissions Regulation and Industry
Dynamics. NBER Working Papers 18645, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Goeree, J. K., Holt, C. A., Palmer, K., Shobe, W., and Burtraw, D. (2010). An Experimental
Study of Auctions versus Grandfathering to Assign Pollution Permits. Journal of the European
Economic Association, 8(2-3):514–525.
Goldberg, P. and Hellerstein, R. (2009). How Rigid Are Producer Prices? Working Papers 1184,
Princeton University, Department of Economics, Center for Economic Policy Studies.
Goldberg, P. K. and Hellerstein, R. (2008). A Structural Approach to Explaining Incomplete
Exchange-Rate Pass-Through and Pricing-to-Market. American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings, 98(2):423–29.
Goldberg, P. K. and Hellerstein, R. (2013). A Structural Approach to Identifying the Sources of
Local Currency Price Stability. Review of Economic Studies, 80(1):175–210.
Goldberg, P. K. and Knetter, M. M. (1997). Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have We
Learned? Journal of Economic Literature, 35(3):1243–1272.
Goldberg, P. K. and Verboven, F. (2001). The Evolution of Price Dispersion in the European Car
Market. Review of Economic Studies, 68(4):811–848.
25

Green, R. and Newbery, D. (1992). Competition in the British Electricity Spot Market. Journal
of Political Economy, 100(5):929–53.
Harvey, F. and Eaglesham, J. (2008). Environmentalist Sticks to Guns. Financial Times, May
30th.
Hellerstein, R. (2008). Who Bears the Cost of a Change in the Exchange Rate? Pass-Through
Accounting for the Case of Beer. Journal of International Economics, 76(1):14–32.
Hortaçsu, A. and Puller, S. L. (2008). Understanding Strategic Bidding in Multi-unit Auctions: A
Case Study of the Texas Electricity Spot Market. RAND Journal of Economics, 39(1):86–114.
IEA (2012). CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion. IEA Statistics.
Jaffe, S. and Weyl, E. G. (2013). The First-Order Approach to Merger Analysis. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.
Kim, D.-W. and Knittel, C. R. (2006). Biases in Static Oligopoly Models? Evidence from the
California Electricity Market. Journal of Industrial Economics, 54(4):451–470.
Klemperer, P. (2008). Permit Auction Will not Affect Prices. Financial Times, June 9th.
Klemperer, P. D. and Meyer, M. A. (1989). Supply Function Equilibria in Oligopoly under Uncertainty. Econometrica, 57(6):1243–77.
Kolstad, J. and Wolak, F. (2008). Using Environmental Emissions Permit Prices to Raise Electricity
Prices: Evidence from the California Electricity Market. Csem working paper, UC Energy
Institute.
Mackowiak, B. and Wiederholt, M. (2012). Information Processing and Limited Liability. American
Economic Review, 102(3):30–34.
Mansur, E. T. (2008). Measuring Welfare in Restructured Electricity Markets. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 90(2):369–386.
Marion, J. and Muehlegger, E. (2011). Fuel Tax Incidence and Supply Conditions. Journal of
Public Economics, 95(9):1202–1212.
Nakamura, E. and Zerom, D. (2010). Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through. The Review of
Economic Studies, 77(3):1192–1230.
Reguant, M. (2013). Complementary Bidding Mechanisms and Startup Costs in Electricity Markets.
Working Paper, Stanford GSB.
Reguant, M. and Ellerman, A. D. (2008). Grandfathering and the Endowment Effect: An Assessment in the Context of the Spanish National Allocation Plan. Working papers, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research.
26

Reiss, P. C. and Wolak, F. A. (2007). Structural Econometric Modeling: Rationales and Examples
from Industrial Organization. volume 6, Part A of Handbook of Econometrics, pages 4277 – 4415.
Elsevier.
Sijm, J., Neuhoff, K., and Chen, Y. (2006). CO2 Cost Pass-Through and Windfall Profits in the
Power Sector. Climate Policy, 6:49–72.
Stavins, R. (1995). Transaction Costs and Tradable Permits. Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management, 29:133–148.
Verboven, F. and van Dijk, T. (2009). Cartel Damages Claims and the Passing-On Defense. Journal
of Industrial Economics, 57(3):457–491.
von der Fehr, N. H. and Harbord, D. (1993). Spot Market Competition in the UK Electricity
Industry. Economic Journal, 103:531–546.
Weyl, E. G. and Fabinger, M. (2013). Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of Incidence
under Imperfect Competition. Journal of Political Economy, 121(3):528–583.
Wolak, F. A. (2000). An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Hedge Contracts on Bidding Behavior
in a Competitive Electricity Market. International Economic Journal, 14(2):1–39.
Wolak, F. A. (2003). Identification and Estimation of Cost Functions Using Observed Bid Data: An
Application to Competitive Electricity Markets, chapter 4, pages 133–169. Cambridge University
Press.
Wolfram, C. (1999). Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot Market. American
Economic Review, 89(4):805–826.
Wolfram, C. D. (1998). Strategic Bidding in a Multiunit Auction: An Empirical Analysis of Bids
to Supply Electricity in England and Wales. The RAND Journal of Economics, 29(4):703–725.

27

A

Additional Tables and Figures

Table A.1: First Stage for Marginal Emissions Costs
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Emissions Price

0.588
(0.053)

0.595
(0.054)

0.581
(0.051)

0.589
(0.052)

0.589
(0.052)

Temperature

0.040
(0.024)

0.104
(0.042)

0.042
(0.024)

0.106
(0.041)

0.106
(0.041)

Maximum Temperature

-0.029
(0.019)

-0.032
(0.021)

-0.030
(0.019)

-0.032
(0.020)

-0.032
(0.020)

Wind Speed

0.053
(0.142)

-0.034
(0.149)

0.035
(0.140)

-0.050
(0.147)

-0.050
(0.147)

Wind Speed Squared

0.001
(0.010)

0.007
(0.010)

0.002
(0.010)

0.008
(0.010)

0.008
(0.010)

Coal

-1.296
(1.281)

-1.931
(1.549)

-1.317
(1.295)

-2.022
(1.551)

-2.022
(1.551)

Gas

-0.368
(0.089)

-0.384
(0.097)

-0.381
(0.087)

-0.398
(0.094)

-0.398
(0.094)

Brent

0.774
(0.361)

0.512
(0.387)

0.760
(0.356)

0.486
(0.382)

0.486
(0.382)

N
N
N

Y
N
N

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

MonthXTemperature
MonthXHour FE
HourXInput

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. All specifications include month of sample, weekday, and hour fixed effects, as well as weather
and demand controls (temperature, maximum temperature, humidity), supply controls (wind speed and
wind speed squared); and common controls (commodity prices of coal, gas, and oil). Robust standard
errors in parentheses. Number of observations: 16, 186.

28

Table A.2: Cost Pass-through Regression - Additional controls
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Mg. Emissions Costs (ρ)

0.788
(0.161)

0.821
(0.169)

0.810
(0.170)

0.823
(0.171)

Temperature

0.102
(0.101)

0.070
(0.102)

-0.085
(0.165)

-0.214
(0.168)

Maximum Temperature

-0.030
(0.045)

-0.008
(0.046)

-0.004
(0.045)

-0.010
(0.045)

0.013
(0.009)

0.009
(0.010)

Temperature Squared
Wind Speed

-2.152
(0.320)

-2.216
(0.324)

-2.181
(0.326)

-1.215
(0.344)

Wind Speed Squared

0.056
(0.022)

0.059
(0.023)

0.057
(0.023)

0.055
(0.023)

Wind Speed X Trend

-1.031
(0.107)

Coal

50.669
(8.873)

-0.468
(52.938)

0.441
(52.825)

-13.498
(51.754)

Gas

5.525
(1.593)

11.750
(1.961)

11.667
(1.962)

12.981
(1.990)

Brent

-3.160
(1.634)

7.739
(4.065)

7.929
(4.046)

5.465
(4.003)

Coal Squared

34.306
(33.280)

33.465
(33.223)

41.574
(32.586)

Gas Squared

-1.012
(0.190)

-1.005
(0.189)

-1.140
(0.192)

Brent Squared

-1.687
(0.691)

-1.710
(0.687)

-1.347
(0.678)

127.1

113.9

111.7

111.2

N
N
N

Y
N
N

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

F-test
Quadratic Inputs
Temperature Squared
Wind Speed Trend

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. All specifications include month of sample, weekday, and hour fixed effects, as well as weather
and demand controls (temperature, maximum temperature, humidity), supply controls (wind speed and
wind speed squared); and common controls (commodity prices of coal, gas, and oil). The marginal
emissions cost is instrumented with the emissions price. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Number
of observations: 16, 186.

29

Table A.3: Cost Pass-through Regression Results for different Emissions Assumptions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Interpolated Emissions Costs
Obs. = 18,744

0.894
(0.181)

0.847
(0.179)

0.894
(0.163)

0.847
(0.159)

0.847
(0.151)

Mg. Emissions Costs
(Units & Technologies)
Obs. = 16,186

0.862
(0.181)

0.804
(0.175)

0.835
(0.173)

0.771
(0.165)

0.788
(0.161)

Mg. Emissions Costs
(Units Only)
Obs. = 14,928

0.861
(0.178)

0.732
(0.168)

0.895
(0.065)

0.720
(0.164)

0.720
(0.160)

MonthXTemperature
MonthXHour FE
HourXInput

N
N
N

Y
N
N

N
Y
N

Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. All specifications include month of sample, weekday, and hour fixed effects, as well as weather and
demand controls (temperature, maximum temperature, humidity), supply controls (wind speed and wind
speed squared); and common controls (commodity prices of coal, gas, and oil). The marginal emissions
cost is instrumented with the emissions price. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

30

Table A.4: Test based on structural equations – Effects of Clustering
All

Firm 1

Firm 2

Firm 3

Firm 4

(1) Unit

0.971
(0.034)

0.947
(0.031)

0.963
(0.039)

1.062
(0.046)

0.803
(0.102)

(2) Robust

0.971
(0.010)

0.947
(0.012)

0.963
(0.013)

1.062
(0.024)

0.803
(0.022)

(3) Firm-Day

0.971
(0.019)

0.947
(0.023)

0.963
(0.021)

1.062
(0.045)

0.803
(0.029)

(4) Firm-Month of Sample

0.971
(0.039)

0.947
(0.061)

0.963
(0.064)

1.062
(0.081)

0.803
(0.082)

(1) Unit

0.598
(0.064)

0.494
(0.057)

0.303
(0.055)

0.821
(0.037)

0.643
(0.053)

(2) Robust

0.598
(0.022)

0.494
(0.027)

0.303
(0.028)

0.821
(0.036)

0.643
(0.115)

(3) Firm-Day

0.598
(0.037)

0.494
(0.039)

0.303
(0.041)

0.821
(0.058)

0.643
(0.235)

(4) Firm-Month of Sample

0.598
(0.062)

0.494
(0.054)

0.303
(0.080)

0.821
(0.103)

0.643
(0.259)

9,257

3,029

1,988

2,805

1,435

Emissions cost (γ)

Input cost (β)

Obs.

Notes: Sample from January 2004 to February 2006, includes all thermal units in the Spanish electricity
market. Regression includes unit fixed effects.

31

Figure A.1: Example of Strategy Perturbations
(a) Strategy Perturbations for Firm 1

(b) Strategy Perturbations for Firm 2

(c) Strategy Perturbations for Firm 3

(d) Strategy Perturbations for Firm 4

Notes: Figures depict the shift in supply and inverse residual demand curves as a result of an increase in
the carbon price by one euro. For better comparison, the same day and hour is used for all firms.

32

