                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CONFUCIANISM AND PREFERENCES:
             EVIDENCE FROM LAB EXPERIMENTS IN TAIWAN AND CHINA

                                            Elaine M. Liu
                                           Juanjuan Meng
                                         Joseph Tao-yi Wang

                                        Working Paper 19615
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19615


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2013




We thank Dan Benjamin, Colin Camerer, Xi Chen, Aimee Chin, Angus Deaton, Benjamin Ho, Nathan
Nunn, Chunlei Yang, Ying Zhang, seminar participants at Chapman University and conference participants
at the NBER conference on Culture and Religion, ESA and NEUDC for helpful discussion and comments.
We thank editor and anonymous referees for comments. Elaine M. Liu thanks Chiang Ching-kuo
Foundation for financial support. Joseph Tao-yi Wang thanks National Taiwan University and the
National Science Council of Taiwan (NSC 99-2410-H-002-060-MY3, NSC 102-2628-H-002-002-MY4)
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19615.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Elaine M. Liu, Juanjuan Meng, and Joseph Tao-yi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Confucianism and Preferences: Evidence from Lab Experiments in Taiwan and China
Elaine M. Liu, Juanjuan Meng, and Joseph Tao-yi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 19615
November 2013
JEL No. C91,Z10

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper investigates how Confucianism affects individual decision making in Taiwan and in China.
We found that Chinese subjects in our experiments became less accepting of Confucian values, such
that they became significantly more risk loving, less loss averse, and more impatient after being primed
with Confucianism, whereas Taiwanese subjects became significantly less present-based and were
inclined to be more trustworthy after being primed by Confucianism. Combining the evidence from
the incentivized laboratory experiments and subjective survey measures, we found evidence that Chinese
subjects and Taiwanese subjects reacted differently to Confucianism.


Elaine M. Liu                                      Joseph Tao-yi Wang
Department of Economics                            National Taiwan University
University of Houston                              Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204                                  Taipei, Taiwan
emliu@uh.edu                                       josephw@ntu.edu.tw

Juanjuan Meng
Department of Applied Economics
Guanghua School of Management
Rm. 323, Hall 2
Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
jumeng@gsm.pku.edu.cn
“The power behind the recent surge in Asia’s economy may have developed from the tenets of one of that

continent’s earliest philosophers.”

Hofstede and Bond (1988)


1.       Introduction


         Confucian values are widespread throughout East Asia--China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore,

South Korea, and Japan. Scholars have long hypothesized that that Confucian values affect social norms,

influence individual decision making, and possibly contribute to economic growth. In particular, the

Confucian emphasis on the accumulation of human capital, perseverance, and a future orientation can be

key components of economic growth. (See Hofheinz & Calder,1982; Hofstede & Bond, 1988; Dai, 1989;

Rozman, 1992; Ornatowski, 1996; Chan, 1996; Lam, 2003; Liang, 2010).1 Surprisingly, however, little

has been done in the way of empirical research to test these claims, and most of that work has been

ethnographic in nature.

         Whether there is a causal relationship between Confucianism and economic outcomes is

extremely difficult to determine. This study takes the first step in probing this relationship with lab

experiments. We adopt the priming method to investigate how Confucianism affects individual behaviors.

To our knowledge, this is the first paper that primes the salience of Confucianism.

         The priming method has been widely used in psychology and marketing. (Turner, 1985; Macrae

& Johnston, 1998; Dijksterhuis & Bargh, 2001; Wheeler, Jarvis, & Petty, 2001). In recent years, several

economic studies, including Afridi, Li, and Ren (2012), Benjamin et al. (2010, 2012), have used this

technique to study the impact of religion, race, and group identities. In one interesting example where

cultural prime is used, Westernized Hong Kong-Chinese subjects were primed with either American or


1
 Another line of studies suggests that Confucianism may be a barrier to capitalism because of the strict hierarchy of
the social order and the avoidance of individual confrontation with the world. For example, Max Weber suggested
that enthusiasm for action is rare in Confucianism and that active pursuit of wealth is unbecoming to proper
Confucians (Bendix, 1960; Chung, Shepard & Dollinger 1989).


                                                                                                                        1
Chinese culturally-laden icons, then they were shown a picture with one fish swimming ahead of four

others and were asked to describe what they see (Hong, Chiu, & Kung, 1997; picture first used in Morris

Nisbett, & Peng, 1995). When they were primed with American icons such as an American flag, subjects

were more likely to describe that the lone fish was leading the others. Whereas subjects being primed

with Chinese primes were more likely to describe that the lone fish was being chased by the other fish.2

         In this study, subjects in the experiments were randomly assigned to receive Confucius-prime or

neutral-prime. The primes were designed to introduce variation in the salience of Confucianism, so that

the normally dormant aspects of the Confucian values may be temporarily activated by the Confucian

prime. After randomly manipulating the salience of Confucianism to our subjects, we elicited subjects’

risk preferences (risk aversion, loss aversion), time preferences (present bias and discount factor), and

trust and trustworthiness using an incentive-compatible protocol. Others have shown that these individual

preferences play a central role in economic outcomes (Shaw, 1996; Knack and Keefer 1997; Laibson,

1997; La Porta et al. 1997). If there is any difference in their outcomes between these Confucius-prime

and neutral-prime groups, we can attribute it to their reaction to the Confucius prime.

         Our findings suggest that subjects became more trustworthy and risk loving, exhibited less

present bias, and, interestingly, became more impatient when they were exposed to the Confucius prime.

Our evidence also showed that subjects in Taiwan and in China reacted differently to the Confucius prime.

In contrast to the control group, subjects in China became more risk loving, less loss averse, and more

impatient, behaviors not in alignment with Confucian values. The subjects in Taiwan became less

present-biased than the control group and also mainly drove the more trustworthy results, in accord with

Confucian values. We performed validation checks of our priming instruments by asking subjects to rank

on a scale of 1 to 10 how much they agreed with each of four different belief systems: Confucianism,

rationalism, Eastern religion, and Western religion. We found that Chinese subjects, but not subjects in

2
 This paper is also related to another line of literature discussing why culture matters in economics outcomes, some
papers in the literature include Inglehart and Baker (2000), Guiso et al. (2006), Fernandez (2011), and
Gorodnichenko & Roland (2013).



                                                                                                                   2
Taiwan, who were primed on Confucianism were more likely to rank Confucius lower and agreed less

with Confucian values than the control group did.

         There are many possible explanations for the observed differences in the priming effect across

the two schools. Our regression analysis excludes background differences in the two samples as the main

reason for the different reactions to Confucius prime. One important possibility is the different historical

experiences in regard to Confucian values in the two places.

          Although Confucian values have long influenced a number of Asian countries, Confucius was

excoriated as a political swindler and Confucian values were denounced during China’s Cultural

Revolution (1967-1976) (Lu, 2004). Sociologists now suggest that as a result, Confucian tradition is

better preserved and practiced today in Asian countries other than China, for example, in Taiwan (Ip,

2009). Nevertheless, some researchers, for example Herman Kahn and Geert Hofstede, have suggested

that cultural traits can be rather sticky, and therefore difficult to change (for more discussion see Hofstede

& Hofstede, 2005).3 Most Taiwanese trace their ancestry to China, share the same language, and have

similar culture today as in China. In addition, Confucian values have been passed down in Taiwan from

parents to children and from teachers to students. Based on our observation of Taiwanese subjects, we can

conclude that the Confucianism cultural traits have persisted. However, our study also suggests that

young generations of Chinese and of Taiwanese have diverging reactions to Confucianism. Whether this

interruption and discourse of Confucian belief in China is caused by Cultural Revolution is beyond the

scope of this paper, and it is a topic for future research.4




3
  Some economic papers suggest that certain traits can be quite sticky. For example, Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)
suggest that although the slave trade took place in Africa more than 400 years ago, it has a long-lasting impact on
mistrust even today. Similarly, Alesina, Guiliano, and Nunn (2013) find that beliefs about women’s roles in different
societies today can be traced to different agricultural practices hundreds of years ago.
4
  The subjects in our sample were too young to have had direct exposure to Cultural Revolution, but their parents
would have experienced the Cultural Revolution. If their views of Confucius have changed as a result of the Cultural
Revolution, it suggests that the Cultural Revolution has had a long-lasting impact that extends beyond the generation
that experienced it directly.


                                                                                                                   3
         The rest of the paper is organized as followed, Section 2 presents some background on

Confucianism and our hypothesized links between preferences and Confucianism, section 3 sets out the

experiment, section 4 discusses the results, and section 5 concludes.


2. Background on Confucianism and Hypothesized Links between Confucian Values and Economic

behavior


         Confucianism is often regarded as advocating conservative behavior in society; therefore, we

hypothesized that the primary effect of Confucianism priming would be to encourage more risk aversion

and loss aversion behaviors. To our knowledge, Confucius himself did not directly say whether taking a

risk should be encouraged or not, but there are some famous quotes from Mencius, the second most

important person in Confucianism and one of its principal interpreters, that can be viewed as encouraging

risk aversion--for example, “One who understands destiny will not stand beneath a tottering wall.”5

Confucian values also emphasize the role of individuals within a society and their relationship to others.

For example, a male can view himself as a son, a brother, a husband, and a father but rarely as an

autonomous individual (Hwang, 1987; Gao, 1998). Based on this theme of an individual’s role in a group,

scholars such as Tse (1996) and Yeh and Xu (2010) suggest that individual risk-taking behavior can be

regarded as challenging a group’s interest and even existence, and thus is discouraged.6 As for loss

aversion, extending what Yeh and Xu (2010) suggest, incurring loss can also threaten a group’s harmony.

         Being more future oriented is a central theme in Confucius teaching and captured in many well-

known Confucius sayings—for example, “Impatience over trivial things may ruin important pursuits,”




5
  The quote is from the book The Mencius.
6
  Alternatively, economic studies such as Barr and Genicot (2008) find that the availability of a risk-sharing
arrangement can increase individual risk-taking behavior in a lab experiment. It is also possible that when the
salience of Confucianism reminds individuals of their role in a group and their risk-sharing network, the subjects in
the Confucian prime group may take more risks in a lottery. However, we think this effect is secondary.


                                                                                                                        4
and, “If a man takes no thought about what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand.”7 Thus, we would

predict that subjects should become more patient after being primed. 8

         In the case of trust and trustworthiness, according to Koehn (2001), one distinct feature of

Confucian thinking is that the virtue of trustworthiness is more important than actual trust. For example,

in The Analects of Confucius there are sayings like, “I do not know how a man without truthfulness is to

get on.” and, “I daily examine myself on three points:—whether, in transacting business for others, I may

have been not faithful;—whether, in interaction with friends, I may have been not been trustworthy;—

whether I may have not mastered and practiced the instructions of my teacher.” We predicted that

subjects would become more trustworthy after being primed. Given that the Confucian values put a great

emphasis on trustworthiness, it is natural to trust those who follow Confucian practice as well (Tan and

Chee, 2005). Therefore, we also predicted that subjects would become more trusting after being primed.

However, the priming effect on trust may not as salient as the priming effect on trustworthiness.


3. Experimental Design


         This study drew subjects from the student pools of National Taiwan University (NTU) and

Peking University (PKU) by soliciting students on campus through flyers and e-mails.9 Our final study

had 380 subjects: 195 NTU students and 185 students from PKU. A total of nineteen experimental

sessions were carried out with paper and pencil from September 2012 to April 2013. When subjects

arrived at an experimental session, their seats were assigned randomly. They were instructed not to

communicate with one another during the experiment and given oral instructions for the general rules and

written instruction for each part of the experiment (the full experimental protocol is in the web appendix).


7
  Both quotes are from the book The Analects of Confucius. The translations of The Analects of Confucius texts used
in this paper are from Legge (1893).
8
  In a recent work, Liang (2010) develops a general equilibrium model with specified Confucian parameters. Under
the assumption that countries exposed to Confucian values have lower discount rates, he calibrates the model to
assess the quantitative importance of these cultural effects and to examine their implications for the future evolution
of these economies.
9
  NTU subjects recruited through the online recruiting system of Taiwan Social Sciences Experimental Laboratory
(TASSEL).


                                                                                                                      5
Subjects were told the total number of games they would participate in but not the specific content of the

games before the experiment started.


        Subjects were first given instructions for the priming experiment (see details in section 3.1).

There were no time constraints. Immediately after the prime, they participated in games that were

designed to elicit their individual attitude toward risk, their individual attitude toward loss, their time

preferences (i.e., regarding being patient and therefore future oriented or impatient and more interested in

short-term gains), and their individual attitude toward trust and trustworthiness, followed by a short

questionnaire with survey questions. The instructions for each game were given after the decisions they

had made in the previous game were collected.


        One of the risk, loss, and time preference games was randomly chosen and played for a monetary

prize. The investment game, to elicit trust and trustworthiness, always involved a monetary prize.10 This

determination of the payments was explained to subjects before the experiment began. At the start of each

experiment, each subject was told that they receive 100 tokens as their show-up fee. On average, subjects

received an additional 400 tokens for the experiment that took approximately one hour. At the end of the

experiment, every token they earned was converted to 1 national Taiwan dollar or 0.1 Chinese yuan.11

The exchange rates between tokens and local currencies were scaled for parity, using the hourly wage of a

student research assistant as the common metric. To avoid present biases triggered by transaction costs of

future payments when eliciting time preferences, all payments (including the participation fee) were

transferred by wire to subjects’ bank accounts.12


3.1 Priming Experiment



10
   Investment game is a 2-person game. Each subject is paired with an anonymous subject. The fact that the
investment game may ultimately not be selected for a payout (by their partner) could subtly affect subjects’
decisions during the game. For this reason, we decided to always pay out on the investment game.
11
   The exchange rate of 1 national Taiwan dollar to 1 Chinese yuan was 4.8 to 1 at the time of the experiments.
12
   Based on our observation, having a bank account was common in our sample pools. In fact, NTU requires its
students to receive most university payments and reimbursements via direct deposit.


                                                                                                                  6
           We employed a between-subjects design where each subject participated in the experiment once

only. Half of the subjects in each school were randomly assigned to the Confucius prime (treatment group)

and half assigned to the neutral prime (control group). For those in the treatment group, we selected six

pieces of classic texts from the Analects of Confucius and Mencius and inserted one incorrect character in

each of the quotes; we refer to these as word problems hereafter. The incorrect characters were either

phonetically similar or had a similar meaning. Subjects were asked to identify the wrong characters and to

rewrite the entire sentence with the corrected characters on the answer sheet. If they could not identify the

mistake, they were told to simply copy the entire sentence anyway. For the control group, we selected six

sentences from contemporary Chinese writing that were unrelated to Confucianism and asked subjects to

perform the same task. In fact, we were not interested in whether the subjects could identify the incorrect

character; rather, what was important was that our priming worked by having them read and then rewrite

the text, therefore manipulating the salience of Confucianism.13


           For example, this is one of the statements for the treatment group (translation: “Confucius said:

Learning without thought is labor lost; thought without learning is perilous.”):

       (wrong) 子曰：学而不思则罔，思而不学则迷

       (correct) 子曰：学而不思则罔，思而不学则殆

           This is one of the statements for the control group (translation: “I want to write about those

family stories told from the generations to generations”):

       (wrong) 我要寫的是那些傳誦不已的親情故事

       (correct) 我要寫的是那些傳頌不已的親情故事

           We carefully selected texts that were unrelated to any of the preferences we elicited about risk,

loss, time preference, and trust and trustworthiness. (The full list of the texts we chose is presented with

translation in the web appendix.) For example, we avoided using as a prime the Confucius saying: “If a


13
     To our knowledge, this is the first paper that primes Confucianism. We created and tested this priming instrument.


                                                                                                                      7
man takes no thought about what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand.” This saying could have a

direct impact on time preference even without evoking one’s attitude about Confucianism. Had we used

this saying as a prime, it would have been difficult to disentangle the effect of Confucianism with the

direct effect of this particular reminder. We also conducted pilot tests to ensure that the tasks of

identifying wrong characters were of similar difficulty for the treatment and control groups.

        For comparison reasons, we asked both the treatment and control groups to complete each other’s

word problem at the end of the entire experiment. In addition, subjects’ performance on these word

problems provided an objective assessment of their knowledge of Confucianism.14


3.2 Incentivized Lottery Choice Task I: Risk Aversion


        In this experiment, modeled after Holt and Laury (2002), each subject was asked to make

decisions on a series of nine binary-choice questions between a safe option and a risky option. The

choices and the difference in expected payoff between risky and safe options are presented in Table 1.

Subjects who are more risk averse should choose safer options than those who are less risk averse.

Subjects who are risk neutral should choose the safe options (choice A) for questions 1 to 4 (Q1-Q4) and

risky options (choice B) for questions 5 to 9 (Q5-Q9). Subjects’ degree of risk aversion was based on the

number of safe options they chose. Following Holt and Laury’s methodology, we assume the following

utility functional form:


(1)


        Subjects’ choices allowed us to estimate their coefficient of relative risk aversion,


3.3 Incentivized Lottery Choice Task II: Loss Aversion



14
  In the exit survey, we asked subjects questions about their upbringing background. We found that subjects who
had a more traditional or conservative upbringing performed better on these word problem when controlling for
basic demographic characteristics, such as gender, undergraduate major, and parental education.


                                                                                                                  8
         In order to measure subjects’ attitude toward loss, we asked them to decide between binary

choices that involve the possibility of losing money in this game. The choices and the differences in

expected payoff are presented in Table 2.15 For each question, both choice A and choice B have a 50/50

chance of winning or losing money. The amount of possible loss is always lower in choice A (lose 35

tokens) than choice B (ranges from losing 40 to 65 tokens). In Q1, the expected payoff of choice A is

better than the expected payoff of B. As one move down the series, choice B (with a higher expected

payoff) becomes increasingly more appealing than Choice A. A subject who is risk neutral and not loss

averse would choose choice A from Q1 to Q3, would be indifferent between choices A and B in Q4, and

would choose choice B from Q5 to Q7. Someone who is loss averse and risk neutral would not be

indifferent between choices A and B in Q4 since choice B incurs larger losses than choice A. Ceteris

paribus, the more loss-averse person would choose choice A (a low-loss option) more often than a less

loss-averse individual before switching to choice B (a high-loss option). This experimental protocol,

presented in Table 3, is modeled after Tanaka, Camerer and Nguyen (2010) and Liu (2013). We follow

their estimation methodology assuming that the utility functional form is


(2)                                          if        and                         if


         Subjects’ choices from the risk aversion game and this one allow us to jointly estimate

coefficients of relative risk aversion    and loss aversion      The standard expected utility is nested in

equation 2; if we fail to reject the null hypothesis that         , there is no evidence of loss aversion.


3.4 Convex Time Budget Method: Time Preferences


         We adapted Andreoni and Sprenger’s (2012) convex time budget (CTB) method to elicit time

preferences. Subjects were given 300 experimental tokens to allocate between receiving some tokens at

time t and t  h , with varying interest rates r over these h periods. Allocating           tokens to time t and

15
  To prevent the possibility of subjects paying out of pocket, the participation money for the participants was more
than the maximum loss possible in the game.


                                                                                                                       9
(300 - ) to time t  h would mean that the subject receives x tokens at time t and receives

        at time t  h .16 Specifically in the experiment, we asked subjects to make 10 decisions (see Table

4). We set the values of t to be today or 6 weeks later, h equals 4 weeks, and the interest rates, r, range

between 0.5% and 2.5%.17 Thus, for a given interest rate, more impatient subjects would allocate more

tokens to the earlier payment date (today in games 1 to 5 and 6 weeks in games 6 to 10) than more patient

individuals. By varying the earlier payment between today and 6 weeks later, with some assumptions of

the utility function form, these choices allow us to estimate the coefficients of exponential discounting

and present bias.18


        We needed to ensure that receiving payments today would be as costly as receiving payments a

month later. Otherwise subjects might choose to receive payment today to reduce the possible transaction

cost regardless of their discount factor. We announced at the beginning of all experimental sessions that

there would be no cash payments to subjects at the end of the experiment; rather, all payments would be

transferred to the subjects’ bank account. Another concern with elicitation of time preference is that

subjects needed to trust that they would actually receive the later payments due them from the

experimenters. To gain subjects’ trust, we followed the protocol similar to that of Andreoni and Sprenger

(2012): all subjects were given the business card of the professors who were in charge of the experiment.


3.5 Investment Game: Trust and Trustworthiness



16
   We chose the CTB experimental method for several reasons. First, unlike most of the existing literature, such as
Andersen et al. (2008) and Tanaka, Camerer and Nguyen (2010), which offer a set of binary choices between X at
time t and Y at time (t + h), CTB gives subjects more flexibility and offers a continuum of choices. Second, other
than Andersen et al. (2008) and Andreoni and Sprenger (2012), much of literature assumes a linear utility function
when estimating time preference parameters. Not incorporating a risk preference measure would cause an upward
bias in the estimation of discount rates.
17
   The original CTB experiment protocol also varies the duration of the postponement h, which gives authors a more
precise estimate of the parameters. By eliminating the variation in h, our version of the experiment is shorter than
the original CTB due to worries about the strength of the priming effect. The 0.5-2.5% is the interest rate that
occurred after 4 weeks. The annualized interest rates would range between 6% and 30%. This range of interest rates
is based on estimates from Andreoni and Sprenger (2012).
18
   The CTB methodology has also been adapted by Giné, Goldberg, Silverman, and Yang (2012) and Carvalho,
Prina, and Sydnor (2013) in Malawi and in Nepal, respectively.


                                                                                                                 10
        To measure individuals’ interpersonal trust and trustworthiness, we modeled our game after Berg,

Dickhaut, and McCabe (1995). Each subject was randomly assigned the role of being an investor or a

trustee. The investors were given 150 tokens and were paired with a subject who was a trustee, but they

were not told who that person was. Investors had seven choices (between 0 and 150 in increments of 25

tokens) of how much to send to their trustee. We tripled the amount the investors decided to send to the

trustee in each of six possible scenarios. The share of tokens that the investor gave out served as a proxy

for interpersonal trust. Those who were more trusting would invest a higher share of the 150 tokens. The

share of tokens returned by a trustee to the investor was a proxy for the trustworthiness of the trustee,

where a higher share of tokens being returned indicated the trustee was more trustworthy.


3.6 Survey


        The survey collected basic information on the participants, including age, gender, major, parental

education, and graduate student status; a set of questions asking about their upbringing, which sought to

determine how much emphasis their parents had placed on observing Chinese traditions; and a set of

questions about their subjective views (e.g., whether they agreed that it is unfortunate to have a daughter

and no son). Having these answers to the subjective questions allowed us to construct a proxy for their

conservatism that we used in the later analysis.


3.7 Data and Sample Selection


        Table 4 presents the summary statistics of subject characteristics by university. The last column

in the table shows p-values on a test of equality of means between PKU and NTU. Among the recruited

students, PKU students were more likely to be in graduate studies than the students at NTU. Their parents

were also slightly less educated than the parents of NTU students. There are no statistical differences in

gender, or in the students’ subjective evaluation of their parents’ emphasis on a traditional upbringing.


        Table 5 performs a randomization check within each school. In neither school are there

statistically significant differences between treatment and control groups in all reported background

                                                                                                             11
characteristics. Given that the randomization between control and treatment groups was successful, in

later analysis we can conclude that any detected difference between treatment and control groups is

attributed to the reactions to the Confucius prime.


4. Empirical Analysis


4.1 Descriptive Findings


        We first examined the differences between the treatment and control group across each of the

games. Figure 1 presents the cumulative distribution over the number of safe choices by treatment status

for the risk aversion game. It shows that the distribution of lottery choices for the treatment group is to

the left relative to the distribution of the control group, that is, the treatment group chose fewer safe

lotteries compared to the control group. Therefore, the treatment group was more risk loving than the

control group.


        Figure 2 presents the distribution over the number of choice A (low-loss options) by the treatment

and control groups in the loss aversion games. Similar to Figure 1, the distribution of the treatment group

is also to the left of the distribution of the control group: these groups tended to choose fewer low-loss

option, indicating that it was less loss averse than the control group.


        In the investment game, investors were asked to invest 0, 25, 50, 75, 100, 125, or 150 tokens with

an anonymous trustee. Figure 3 presents the distribution over investment choices by treatment and control

group. Here, an interesting pattern emerges: the treatment group was more likely to have extreme choices

than the control group. A significant higher proportion of the control group invested half of the 150

tokens with the trustee than did those in the treatment group. The treatment group was more likely than

the control group likely to invest either 0 or 150 tokens with the trustee. This suggests that after receiving

the Confucius prime, subjects become more extreme in their interpersonal trust than subjects who were

not treated.



                                                                                                              12
        In this same investment game, trustees would receive 0, 75, 150, 225, 300, 375, or 450 tokens.

We asked trustees how many of the tokens they would return to the investors for each of the six scenarios

(there is no token to be returned if they receive zero). Figure 4 presents the mean share of tokens that

trustees returned for each of the scenarios by treatment status. The first noteworthy point is that the more

tokens the trustees received, the more they would reciprocate and return a higher share of tokens. The

treatment group returned a higher proportion of the tokens to the investors than the control group did

regardless how much they received. In other words, the treatment group was more trustworthy than the

control group.19


        Figure 5 shows the choices in the CTB task by treatment status for each of the games. The left

panel presents the decisions for the allocation of tokens between receiving it today versus in 4 weeks

(games 1 to 5 in Table 3), and the right panel presents the choices made between receiving the tokens in 6

weeks versus 10 weeks (games 6 to 10 in Table 3). Each bar indicates the mean proportion of the tokens

allocated to the earlier payment date. The lower the bar is, the more patient the subjects were. There are a

few noteworthy points here. First, when interest rates increased, the share of tokens allocated to the earlier

date decreased. Second, there seems to be some evidence of present bias to allocating more tokens to an

earlier payment for any given interest rate in the left panel than the right panel. However, for the purpose

of the comparison across treatment and control groups, the difference is negligible.


4.2 The Effect of Confucius Prime on Risk Preferences, Trust/Trustworthiness, and Time Preferences


        In this section, we pursued regression analysis in examining the differences in priming effect and

report the result in Table 6. First, we compared the responses of the treatment and control groups for their

choices in the incentivized lottery tasks. In these regressions, both the direct measure of risk or loss

aversion from the experiments (the number of safe options and number of low-loss options) and the



19
  Interestingly, the mean proportion of tokens returned (20%-30%) in both the treatment and control groups were
lower than other trust experiments done with Chinese subjects (Buchan, Johnson, & Croson, 2006, reported 34%).


                                                                                                              13
imputed measures of risk or loss aversion coefficients (σ, λ from equation 2) were the dependent variables.

These regressions controlled for a subject’s gender, age, whether he or she was a graduate student, his or

her father’s and mother's education levels, a dummy indicating whether the major was science- or

engineering-related, and a dummy indicating that he or she was a PKU student.20 Standard errors are

clustered at the session level. The regression results and the mean and standard deviation of each of the

dependent variables are presented in Table 6. The coefficients of relative risk aversion have a mean of

0.45 and are similar to other experiments using different experimental protocols in China (Liu, 2013;

Frijters, Kong, & Liu, 2013). We found that the treatment group was less risk averse than the control

group at a 5% level in both the direct and imputed measures of risk aversion. The size of the treatment

effect is considerable: one-fifth of a standard deviation.21 The treatment group also behaved in a less loss-

averse way than the control group, although the coefficients are not statistically different from 0. Based

on our hypothesis in section 2, it is possible that the salience of Confucianism caused subjects to react

negatively to Confucian values. We later found that this result was driven by the reaction of PKU students

who were behaving in opposition to Confucian values.

         Next, we examined interpersonal trust and trustworthiness. Given our finding that the treatment

group had more extreme choices than the control group (from Figure 3), it is not surprising that the

average treatment effect of the Confucius prime on trust was not statistically different from 0. In terms of

trustworthiness, subjects returned almost 4.57 percentage points more tokens to the investor, a nearly 20%

increase from the baseline. This suggests that the treatment group behaved in a more trustworthy way

compared to the control group, in accordance with our prediction.

         To examine the impact of treatment on time preference, we had two sets of measures: the share of

tokens allocated to the earlier payment (the direct measure) and structurally estimated parameters of

discount factors. For the direct measure, each subject was asked to make decisions between receiving


20
   Results are robust when these individual characteristics are excluded. This table is available in the Web Appendix
on the authors’ website, www.uh.edu/~emliu.
21
   To compare the magnitude to other covariates, the treatment effect is larger than coefficients on being female.


                                                                                                                  14
payment today or 4 weeks later with varying interest rates (games 1 to 5 in Table 3) and another set of

decisions between receiving payments in 6 weeks or 10 weeks later (games 6 to 10 in Table 3). The

following equation is estimated for games 1 to 5 and games 6 to 10 separately:

(3)

where i is indexed for subject, g is an index for game, and r is the corresponding interest rate for game g.

The dependent variable is the share of tokens allocated to an earlier payment.              includes the same set of

control variables as in other columns of Table 6. However, standard errors are clustered at the individual

level. The regression results for the allocation choices for today versus 4 weeks is presented in column 7,

and allocation choices for 6 weeks versus 10 weeks are presented in column 8 of Table 6. The

intertemporal choices between 6 versus 10 weeks capture the discount factor, while the intertemporal

choice between today versus 4 weeks encapsulate the present bias and discount factor. As shown here, the

direct measures of the effect of the Confucius prime on time preference in a reduced form are not

statistically different from 0.

           However, such a simple comparison would ignore the role of concavity in the utility function. For

example, two individuals with the same allocation of tokens for an earlier payment in games 1 to 10 could

still have different estimated time preference parameters if their risk aversion parameters differed. In

particular, following Laibson (1997) and Andreoni and Sprenger (2012), suppose the utility function

forms from different periods are time separable and can be expressed as

(4)




In this proposed utility function,       is the exponential discount factor and       is the present bias.22 If        ,

there is no evidence of present bias; if            , present bias exists. A higher     would indicate that a subject

is more patient and better able to delay gratification.



22
     Anderson et al. (2008) suggest that ignoring the concavity would result in upward bias estimates of discount rates.


                                                                                                                     15
         As we have shown in Table 6, columns 1 and 2, the concavity of utility function, , differs

between treatment and control groups, so it is important to incorporate risk aversion coefficient in our

estimation of the time preference parameters by treatment status. Using the estimated risk preference

parameters based on subjects’ response from the Holt and Laury game and following Andreoni et al.’s

(2013) interval censored regression estimation method, we impute the present bias           ) and exponential

discounting factors    ). These parameters are stratified by treatment status and shown in Table 7.23 is

statistically different from 1 for both treatment and control groups, so we cannot reject the existence of

present bias. Interestingly, the treatment group had less present bias but a lower discount factor (the

subjects were less patient), which is surprising. In the next section, we find that the reduction in present

bias was being driven by the NTU subjects, and the surprising finding of subjects becoming more

impatient was being driven by the PKU students, who were reacting negatively to Confucius teaching.



4.3 Experimental Results by School

         In this section, we examine whether the Confucius priming effect was different between the

groups from the two institutions in this study, and we investigate whether the puzzling finding from the

previous section is being driven by the negative reaction of PKU students. Our regression specification is

(5)

where i indexed for subject i; NTU is a dummy indicating whether the subject was an NTU student;

includes a subject’s gender, age, graduate student status, whether major is science and engineering related,

and father’s as well as mother's education level; treat equals 1 if a subject was in the Confucius-prime

group;     captures the treatment effect on PKU students; and         is the difference between the treatment


23
   Andreoni et al. (2013) propose several different methods of estimating parameters in CTB, including nonlinear
least squares and two-limit tobit (censored) maximum likelihood regressions. As they suggest, tobit is a better
method when there are corner solutions. In our experiments, we have a considerable number of choices, and for the
purpose of our analysis, we do not need individual estimates since we only need to compare the mean across the
treatment and control groups. Thus we opted for the censored regression method. In our estimation, we also used the
weekly expenditure of 1539 TWD (for PKU students) and 1746 TWD (for NTU students). These expenditures are
based on the exit survey.


                                                                                                                16
effect on NTU students and on PKU students. The treatment effect on NTU students would be equal to

          ). The dependent varible       is the same as those in Table 6. Table 8 shows the coefficients

(            and the p-values from the F-test               =0).

         In section 4.2, we saw that being primed on Confucianism caused subjects to behave in a more

risk-loving and less loss-averse manner. From columns 1 to 3 of Table 8, it is evident that the negative

treatment effect on risk preference and loss aversion was mostly driven by the reactions of the PKU

students. The F-test results reported in columns 1 to 3 suggest that the priming effects on NTU students

were not statistically different from 0 at a 10% level. Moreover, there was no priming effect on trust for

students from either school. Although there is also no significant treatment effect on trustworthiness in

each school if separately estimated, the sign of the estimates suggests that the signficantly positive effect

of Confucius primes on trustworthiness, reported in the pool regressions of Table 6, stemmed mainly

from the positive reactions of NTU students. Columns 7 and 8, which show the share of tokens invested

to the earlier payment, reveal little change in these direct measures of time preferences. 24

         Table 9 presents the structural estimates of present bias and the discount factor from equation 3

stratified by school and treatment status. The treatment groups at NTU (column 4) exhibited less present

bias, but those at PKU (column 3) show no statistically significant differences. However, the surprising

results from Table 7 that those receiving the Confucius prime became less patient (lower discounting

factor) is driven mainly by the changes in PKU students (see Column 1).

         In this section, we have presented some evidence that PKU students reacted against the

commonly understood Confucian values when they were primed with Confucian teachings, but NTU

students reacted in a way that is either consistent with or not affected by the Confucian values. That the




24
  As a robustness check, we also split the sample and estimate the treatment effect for the two schools separately.
One reason to do this is that the control variables may have different effects on the dependent variables for the
Chinese and the Taiwanese students. The results are consistent with the findings in Table 8. However, due to the
small sample and a lack of degree of freedom, the standard errors are larger than those in Table 8. This table is
available in the Web appendix on the corresponding author’s website, www.uh.edu/~emliu.


                                                                                                                      17
same primes evoked different feelings in students from the two schools is an interesting finding.25 An

explanation for these differences may be that the priming instrument we developed was not priming

Confucianism but instead evoked other feelings of the PKU students, the reason for this opposite reaction.

We investigate this possibility in the next section.

4.4 Validation Check

         We conducted a few extra surveys at both universities to validate the efficacy of our priming

instrument. The surveys, distributed in several economic undergraduate classes to 389 students (none of

whom participated in the experiment) in both schools, took about 5 to 10 minutes and the students were

not paid. As with our full experiments, subjects were randomly assigned to receive either the Confucius

prime or a neutral prime. Immediately after the prime, they were asked to complete a short questionnaire

asking about their evaluation of Confucianism and some of their individual characteristics. Two of the

questions allowed us to conduct a validation check: “Among the following belief systems (Rationalism,

Confucianism, Eastern Religion (Buddhism, Taoism), Western Religion (Catholicism, Christianity, etc),

please rank them based on their values from most agree (1) to least agree (4),” and, “On a scale of 1 to10,

how much do you agree with each of the following belief systems (1 being least agree and 10 being most

agree)?” Because these questions were answered immediately after the priming questions, the priming

effect, if any, should be clear.

         The regression results using these answers are reported in Table 10. In column 1, the dependent

variable is the ranking of Confucianism (1 being the best, 4 being the worst), and ordered probit

estimation method is used. Column 2, the dependent variable, shows how much the students agreed with

Confucianism.26 In column 3, we created a dummy indicating whether Confucianism was ranked as the

most important. The results suggest that the PKU students ranked Confucianism lower and disagreed


25
   Psychologists Wheeler and Berger (2007) suggest that the same priming instrument can have different effects on
the subsequent choices of different groups of people.
26
   Each person reported the values for all four belief systems. Some people tended to agree and put down a higher
value for all, while others tended to disagree with everything and had lower values for all systems. Thus, the
dependent variable is their rating on Confucian value minus their individual mean of evaluation of all four systems.


                                                                                                                  18
more with Confucian values after they received Confucian prime. For NTU students, the Confucius

prime improved the ranking of Confucianism and increased how much NTU students agreed with

Confucian values than the control group did. Combining the results here with those in the previous

section reinforces the idea that PKU students reacted to the Confucius prime differently from the NTU

students.

4.5 Discussion

         While we cannot clearly identify the reasons behind the observed differences in reaction to the

Confucianism priming in the two schools, there are a few possible explanations. First, the differences in

the sample characteristics may play a role. For instance, Table 4 suggests that the PKU students are

slightly older, more likely to be in science- and engineering-related majors, and more likely to be graduate

students than NTU students. The parents of PKU students are also less likely to hold a bachelor’s degree.

However, unreported regressions show that the estimated priming effects in almost all dimensions are not

affected by these variables (i.e., students’ majors, graduate degree, etc.).27 Therefore the school

differences in the priming effect are not caused by the differences in these characteristics.

         Second, Table 10 shows that Taiwanese students exposed to the neutral prime hold significantly

less favorable attitudes toward Confucianism than their Chinese peers. It could be that those who started

from a lower identification with Confucianism can demonstrate a larger positive reaction to the priming.

However, this line of reasoning cannot explain why PKU students’ high level of identification with

Confucianism in the neutral treatment is associated with a negative reaction to the Confucianism priming.

In a regression not reported here, we investigated whether the treatment effects can differ based on

students’ subjective view of traditionalism (based on their answers in the exit survey), but found no

statistically significant evidence.

         Third, there were historical differences in the experiences with Confucianism in these two regions.

As we have suggested earlier, the Cultural Revolution in China has devastated many Confucian values for

27
 The only significant effect is that if the parents' education levels are higher, then subjects tend to demonstrate
more positive treatment effects on the degree of trustworthiness.


                                                                                                                      19
a decade, which may have long-lasting effects even today, while in Taiwan Confucianism was relatively

well preserved.

        As with most laboratory experiments, our studies have certain limitations. First, our subjects are

students in top universities in China and Taiwan. Having university students as subjects often raises the

question of the external validity of experiments. However, this problem may be less severe given that the

key motivation of our study is to understand how Confucian philosophy shapes Chinese society. For more

than a thousand years, Confucianism had remained influential in Chinese society because of its key role

in imperial civil service examination system (Mayer and Schmidt, 2004). Memorization of Confucian

texts had been a necessary preparation for examinations (Elman, 1991), and Confucian morals have been

inculcated in intellectuals (Brokaw, 1991). These intellectuals possessed political power and shaped the

norms and the thinking of the society. The rest of society was influenced by the Confucian teachings

indirectly. Similarly, today, Confucian texts are taught in middle schools and high schools in Taiwan and

China, and students are often tested on Confucian texts during college entrance examinations. Hence,

university students who are well-versed in Confucian sayings are in fact the subjects we were most

interested in. They are influenced by Confucianism directly through active learning and reading texts,

unlike the rest who are only indirectly influenced through societal norms. We suspect that those who are

uneducated (in Confucian texts) may not have as much reaction to our priming task at all.

        Second, our validation tests were carried out on a more special group of students who had

economics major, and so the validation results may not directly apply to students in other majors. In

unreported regressions, we find that the priming effects are not affected by students’ majors, which to

some extent alleviates the problem.


5. Conclusion


        We investigated how Chinese and Taiwanese subjects reacted to Confucius primes and whether

there were differences of reaction between the two groups. Our findings suggest that subjects became

more risk loving, more impatient, less present-biased and more trustworthy when they were exposed to a

                                                                                                            20
Confucius prime. However, this simple characterization of the impact of Confucianism is misleading

since we found differences in priming effects depending on whether they are from China or from Taiwan.

        Chinese subjects who were primed for Confucianism became more risk loving, less loss averse

and more impatient than the control group, behaviors not in accord with Confucian values. Taiwanese

subjects who were primed for Confucianism demonstrated less present bias than the control group, and

was also the main driver force for the more trustworthy treatment effect, in accordance with Confucian

values. We performed validation checks of our priming instruments by asking subjects to rank four

different belief systems (Confucianism, rationalism, Eastern religion, and Western religion) and reported

on a scale of 1 to 10 on how much they agreed with each of these systems. Chinese subjects who were

primed for Confucianism were more likely to rank Confucianism lower and also tended to agree less with

Confucian values than the control group did. We did not find this effect on the Taiwan subjects. Our study

therefore suggests that Chinese and Taiwanese subjects have different reactions to Confucianism.

Different historical events and experiences in the two places are a very likely explanation for these

differences.

        There has been a revival of interest in Confucianism in China. Unlike the anti-Confucius rhetoric

from the 1960s and 1970s, government officials have once again acknowledged Confucius as a great

contributor to the glorious Chinese tradition. Professor Yu Dan at Beijing Normal University has a

popular TV show on the Analects of Confucius and her book, Reflection on the Analects, became a top

seller in 2009. Our study suggests that social norms and social identities may be sticky, but they can also

be altered. It is possible that we will see the currently diverging paths between China and Taiwan

converging again.




                                                                                                         21
             Figure 1: Cumulative Distribution of Safe Choices in Lottery Game I
                                    By Treatment Status
     1


 .8


 .6


 .4


 .2


     0
         0               2               4              6            8         10
                             # of Safe Choices in Risk Aversion Game

                              c.d.f. of Control          c.d.f. of Treatment




     Figure 2: Cumulative Distribution of Low-Loss Choices in Lottery Game II
                                By Treatment Status
1


.8


.6


.4


.2


0
         0                  2                4                  6              8
                         # of Low-Loss Choices in Loss Aversion Task

                             c.d.f. of Control          c.d.f. of Treatment




                                                                                    22
                         Figure 3: Probability Distribution of Tokens Invested
                                     By Tokens Given and Treatment Status
                   .4
                   .3
                   .2%
                   .1
                     0




                           0        25       50         75         100         125   150
                                              Treatment                  Control




                               Figure 4: Average Share of Tokens Returned
                                    By Token Received and Treatment Status
                   .3
% Token Returned




                   .2
                   .1
                     0




                           75         150         225        300            375      450
                                              Treatment                  Control




                                                                                           23
 Figure 5: Proportion of Tokens Allocated to Earlier Payment
             Stratified by Treatment Status and by Interest Rates
           Today versus 4 Weeks                 6 weeks versus 10 Weeks
.8




                                          .8
.6




                                          .6
.4




                                          .4
.2




                                          .2
 0




                                           0
     .5%      1%    1.5%   2%    2.5%          .5%   1%     1.5%    2%    2.5%
             Treatment          Control              Treatment           Control




                                                                                   24
                                     Table 1: Risk Aversion Experiment
    Choice A (Safe Option)                 Choice B (Risky Option)              Differences in Expected
                                                                                Payoff (A-B)
1   10% Probability Winning 200 tokens     10% Probability Winning 385 tokens   116.5
    90% Probability Winning 160 tokens     90% Probability Winning 10 tokens
2   20% Probability Winning 200 tokens     20% Probability Winning 385 tokens   83
    80% Probability Winning 160 tokens     80% Probability Winning 10 tokens

3   30% Probability Winning 200 tokens     30% Probability Winning 385 tokens   49.5
    70% Probability Winning 160 tokens     70% Probability Winning 10 tokens

4   40% Probability Winning 200 tokens     40% Probability Winning 385 tokens   16
    60% Probability Winning 160 tokens     60% Probability Winning 10 tokens

5   50% Probability Winning 200 tokens     50% Probability Winning 385 tokens   -17.5
    50% Probability Winning 160 tokens     50% Probability Winning 10 tokens

6   60% Probability Winning 200 tokens     60% Probability Winning 385 tokens   -51
    40% Probability Winning 160 tokens     40% Probability Winning 10 tokens

7   70% Probability Winning 200 tokens     70% Probability Winning 385 tokens   -84.5
    30% Probability Winning 160 tokens     30% Probability Winning 10 tokens

8   80% Probability Winning 200 tokens     80% Probability Winning 385 tokens   -118
    20% Probability Winning 160 tokens     20% Probability Winning 10 tokens

9   90% Probability Winning 200 tokens     90% Probability Winning 385 tokens   -151.5
    10% Probability Winning 160 tokens     10% Probability Winning 10 tokens




                                                                                                     25
                                           Table 2: Eliciation of Loss Aversion
    Choice A (Low Loss Option)             Choice B (High Loss Option)             Differences in
                                                                                   Expected Payoff (A-B)
1   50% Probability Winning 60 tokens      50% Probability Winning 75 tokens       7.5
    50% Probability Losing 35 tokens       50% Probability Losing 65 tokens

2   50% Probability Winning 55 tokens      50% Probability Winning 75 tokens       5
    50% Probability Losing 35 tokens       50% Probability Losing 65 tokens

3   50% Probability Winning 50 tokens      50% Probability Winning 75 tokens       2.5
    50% Probability Losing 35 tokens       50% Probability Losing 65 tokens

4   50% Probability Winning 45 tokens      50% Probability Winning 75 tokens       0
    50% Probability Losing 35 tokens       50% Probability Losing 65 tokens

5   50% Probability Winning 40 tokens      50% Probability Winning 75 tokens       -10
    50% Probability Losing 35 tokens       50% Probability Losing 50 tokens

6   50% Probability Winning 40 tokens      50% Probability Winning 75 tokens       -12.5
    50% Probability Losing 35 tokens       50% Probability Losing 45 tokens

7   50% Probability Winning 35 tokens      50% Probability Winning 75 tokens       -17.5
    50% Probability Losing 35 tokens       50% Probability Losing 40 tokens




                                 Table 3: Choices for Convex Time Budget Task
            Game          Interest Rate (r )       Sooner Date (t)           Later Date (t+h)
            1             0.50%                    today                    4 weeks
            2             1%                       today                    4 weeks
            3             1.50%                    today                    4 weeks
            4             2%                       today                    4 weeks
            5             2.50%                    today                    4 weeks
            6             0.50%                    6 weeks                  10 weeks
            7             1%                       6 weeks                  10 weeks
            8             1.50%                    6 weeks                  10 weeks
            9             2%                       6 weeks                  10 weeks
            10            2.50%                    6 weeks                  10 weeks
            Note: Subjects decide how much (of the 300 tokens) to receive earlier rather than
            later for each of the 10 games. The amount allocated at the later date would earn
            interest at the corresponding interesting rate.




                                                                                                           26
                              Table 4: Subject Characteristics Stratified by Schools
                                                                                        National     P-value of
                                                                           Peking       Taiwan       Hypothesis
                                                                           University   University   Testing
Female                                                                     0.503        0.425        0.13
                                                                           (0.501)      (0.496)
Age                                                                        22.48        21.25        0.00
                                                                           (2.485)      (2.259)
Graduate Students                                                          0.503        0.290        0.00
                                                                           (0.501)      (0.455)
Majoring in Science or Engineering Related Fields (1= Yes; 2=No) a         0.436        0.297        0.00
                                                                           (0.497)      (0.458)
Conservative upbringing (1=certainly not.. 4 = certainly yes)              2.785        2.737        0.52
                                                                           (0.858)      (0.727)
Father's education levelb                                                  2.795        3.228        0.00
                                                                           (0.091)      (0.092)
Mother's education levelb                                                  2.443         2.892         0.00
                                                                           (0.089)       (0.082)
Observations                                                               185           195
Note: The means are reported for each question. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. The last
column reports the p-values of the two-way tests of the equality of the means between schools.
a. Graduate students would report their current field of study. We use the standard definition of Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields.
b. 1=below high school;2=high school;3=associate degree;4=bachelor degree;5=graduate degree




                                                                                                                  27
                                              Table 5: Randomization Check

                                       Panel A: National Taiwan University
                                              Graduate      Father's    Mother's Conservative
VARIABLES              Female        Age       Student     Education   Education  Upbringing          STEM Major


Confucius Prime         -0.033      0.402          0.109        -0.02          0.02       -0.153          -0.052
                        (0.058)     (0.814)        (0.139)      (0.195)       (0.175)    (0.120)          (0.083)
Constant              0.441***    21.04***       0.235***     3.238***       2.882***   2.804***        0.324***
                       (0.0397)     (0.450)       (0.0734)     (0.0863)       (0.114)    (0.0737)        (0.0468)

Observations             195         195            195          193           194         195             194
R-squared               0.001       0.008          0.014        0.000         0.000       0.011           0.003

                                               Panel B: Peking University
                                                 Graduate      Father's   Mother's Conservative
VARIABLES              Female        Age          Student     Education Education Upbringing          STEM Major


Confucius Prime         -0.038      0.115          0.027        -0.011        0.063       -0.230          -0.049
                        (0.059)     (0.467)        (0.115)      (0.232)       (0.167)    (0.130)          (0.041)
Constant              0.522***    22.42***       0.489***     2.800***       2.411***   2.900***        0.460***
                       (0.0236)     (0.263)       (0.0423)      (0.164)      (0.0714)    (0.0761)        (0.0726)

Observations             185         185            185          185           185         184             182
R-squared                  0.001      0.001        0.001         0.000          0.001        0.018           0.002
Note: Confucius Prime is a dummy for subjects receiving Confucian-salient primes. Randomization checks are
separated by schoool. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variables
are subjects' characteristics. Conservative upbringing is the answer to question "Did your parents emphasize
traditional values (such as Confucianism) at home? 1= certainly not, .. 4 = certainly yes." We use the standard
definition of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields.




                                                                                                                     28
                                  Table 6: The Priming Effects on Risk Preferences, Trust/Trustworthy and Time Preferences
                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)

                                                                                                      Share of    Average Share
                                   Number of                        Number of                         Tokens        of Tokens
                                       Safe      Coefficient of     Low loss                        Invested in    Returned in  Share of            Share of
                                   Choices in    Relative Risk        Choices      Coefficient of   Investment     Investment Token Invest        Token Invest
VARIABLES                         Lottery Task I  Aversion           in Task II   Loss Aversion        Game           Game      in Today            in 6 wks
Mean(Dep Variable)                     5.65            0.45            3.64            1.54            0.40            0.23            0.61           0.47
Standard Dev (Dep Variable)            [1.64]         [0.47]          [1.25]          [1.38]          [0.35]          [0.19]          [0.39]          [0.40]

Confucius Prime                      -0.259**        -0.074**         -0.115          -0.052           0.016          0.049*          0.025           0.006
                                      (0.115)         (0.033)         (0.117)         (0.145)         (0.038)        (0.023)         (0.040)         (0.042)
Constant                             6.630***        0.726**         5.130***        3.199**           0.459         -0.017         0.738***          0.288
                                      (1.123)         (0.310)         (0.829)         (1.267)         (0.319)        (0.263)         (0.276)         (0.271)
Individual Characteristics
 Included                               Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                            373             373            373             373              185            188            1,865           1,855
R-squared                                0.039           0.037          0.061          0.044           0.020           0.044           0.098          0.069
Note: Standard errors are clustered at the session level. Confucius Prime is a dummy for subjects receiving Confucian-salient primes. Variables indicating the
father's and mother's education level, a dummy variable indicating pku student, subject's age, a dummy variable indicating graduate student, a dummy
indicating science/engineering related major, an index for conservative upbringing, and a dummy variable for female are included.




                                                                                                                                                                 29
                    Table 7: Time Preference Parameters By Treatment Status
                                                         (1)                          (2)
                                             Delta (Discount Factor)       Beta (Present Bias)

Confucius Prime                              0.9914                        0.9359
                                             (0.0002)                      (0.0017)
Neutral Prime                                0.9932                        0.9270
                                             (0.0001)                      (0.0016)
P-Value for F-Test                           0.0000                        0.0001
 [Confucius-Prime=Neutral Prime]
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. These parameters are estimated using individual risk
aversion (imputed using subjects' choice made in ncentivized lottery choice described in Section
3.2) and assume the mean weekly expenditure level to be 1657 NTD, as calculated based on the
exit survey. Confucius Prime indicate subjects receiving Confucian-salient primes and neutral
prime indicate subjects receiving nuetral primes. Column 1 reports the estimation of discount
factor and column 2 reports the estimation for present bias. The p-value of the two-way tests of the
equality between treatment and control groups is reported.




                                                                                                       30
                                                     Table 8: Confucius Priming Effects by Schools
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)
                                                                                                                   Average
                                                                                                    Share of        Share of
                                   Number of                       Number of                        Tokens          Tokens
                                       Safe      Coefficient of    Low loss      Coefficient of   Invested in     Returned in      Share of     Share of
                                   Choices in    Relative Risk       Choices         Loss         Investment      Investment     Token Invest Token Invest
VARIABLES                         Lottery Task I  Aversion          in Task II    Aversion           Game            Game          in Today     in 6 wks
Mean(Dep Variable)                     5.65           0.45            3.64            1.54            0.40            0.23           0.61            0.47
Standard Dev(Dep Variable)            [1.64]          [0.47]         [1.25]          [1.38]          [0.35]          [0.19]          [0.39]         [0.40]


Confucius Prime ( γ0)                -0.332*        -0.094*         -0.219*          -0.258          0.039           0.033           0.035           -0.002
                                     (0.172)        (0.050)         (0.109)         (0.224)         (0.040)         (0.024)         (0.055)         (0.062)
Confucius Prime *NTU (γ1)             0.143          0.039           0.203           0.401           -0.045          0.031           -0.02           0.015
                                     (0.213)        (0.062)         (0.215)         (0.302)         (0.075)         (0.050)         (0.078)         (0.082)
NTU                                   -0.206         -0.052          0.155           -0.030          0.055           -0.017       -0.177***        -0.133**
                                     (0.200)        (0.056)         (0.134)         (0.223)         (0.051)         (0.040)         (0.056)         (0.058)
constant                            6.803***        0.769**        4.928***         3.136**          0.411           -0.012        0.920***          0.417
                                     (1.194)        (0.329)         (0.826)         (1.134)         (0.318)         (0.243)         (0.284)         (0.279)
Individual Characteristics
 Included                              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
P-value from F-test (γ0+γ1=0)         0.189           0.186          0.933           0.442           0.927           0.132          0.794           0.813
Observations                           373             373            373             373             185             188           1,865           1,855
R-squared                             0.040           0.037          0.062           0.049           0.021           0.046          0.098           0.069
Note: standard errors are clustered at the session level for Columns 1-6 and clustered at the individual level for Columns 7 and 8. Confucius Prime is a dummy
for subjects receiving Confucian-salient primes. NTU is a dummy for subjects from National Taiwan University. Variables indicating the father's and mother's
education level, subject's age, a dummy indicating science/engineering related major, an index for conservative upbringing, a dummy variable indicating
graduate student, and a dummy variable for female are included. The p-value from F-test (γ0+γ1=0) for each regression is also reported.




                                                                                                                                                                 31
                                         Table 9: Time Preference Parameters By Treatment Status By Schools
                                            PKU                          NTU                       PKU                          NTU
                                            Delta                        Delta                     Beta                         Beta
VARIABLES                                   (Discount Factor)            (Discount Factor)         (Present Bias)               (Present Bias)
                                            (1)                          (2)                       (3)                          (4)

Confucius Prime                             0.9913                       0.9914                    0.9450                       0.9290
                                            (0.0003)                     (0.0002)                  (0.0023)                     (0.0019)
Neutral Prime                               0.9945                       0.9919                    0.9420                       0.9180
                                            (0.0001)                     (0.0003)                  (0.0023)                     (0.0025)
P-value of F-Test for
 Differences in Parameter                    0.0000                        0.1078                    0.3575                       0.0005
Note: These parameters are estimated using individual risk aversion (imputed using subjects' choice made in ncentivized lottery choice described in
Section 3.2) and assuming mean expenditure level at 1746 for NTU students and 1539 for PKU studentsas calculated based on the exit surve. Confucius
Prime indicates subjects receiving Confucian-salient primes and neutral prime indicates subjects receiving nuetral primes. Columns 1 and 2 report the
estimation of discount factor and columns 3 and 4 reports the estimation for present bias. Confucius Prime is a dummy for subjects receiving Confucian-
salient primes. Neutral Prime is a dummy for subjects receiving Confucian-salient primes. NTU is a dummy for subjects from National Taiwan
University. The p-value of the two-way tests of the equality of between treatments and controls group for each column is reported.




                                                                                                                                                          32
                            Table 10: Validation Test of Priming Method
                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                        Ranking of        How much do you       Rank Confuciuanism
                                       Confucianism       agree with             as most important
                                     (1=best, 4= worst)   Confucianism(10 =
                                                          most agree)
VARIABLES


Confucius Prime ( γ0)                      0.384*               -0.603*               -0.620**
                                          (0.223)                (0.331)               (0.278)
Confucius Prime *NTU (γ1)                 -0.463*               0.753**                0.576*
                                          (0.257)                (0.381)               (0.323)
NTU                                       0.460**              -0.832***              -0.502**
                                          (0.188)                (0.274)               (0.223)


P-value from F-test (γ0+γ1=0)               0.52                  0.42                  0.78
Observations                                389                   386                    389
R-squared                                                        0.044
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Age and gender are included in all regressions. The
dependent variable in column 1 is the answer to, "Out of the 4 value systems (rationalism,
Confucianism, Eastern Religion and Western Religion), please rank from 1 (being most agree with) to
4 (least agree with)." Column 1 employs an ordered probit model. We also ask "How much do you
agree with Confucianism/Rationalism/Eastern Religion/Western Religion on the scale of 1 to 10?"
The dependent variable in column 2 is their rating on Confucian value minus their individual mean of
evaluation of all four systems. Column 2 uses an ordinary least squares model. Column 3 uses a
probit model where the dependent variable equals 1 if Confucianism is ranked as number 1.***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                       33
                                                References

Afridi, F., Li, S. X., & Ren, Y. (2012). Social Identity and Inequality: The Impact of China's Hukou
     System. IZA Discussion Paper No. 6417.

Alesina, A., Giuliano, P., & Nunn, N. (2013). On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
     Plough. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Andersen, S., Harrison, G. W., Lau, M. I., & Elisabet Rutström, E. (2008). Lost in State Space: Are
    Preferences Stable. International Economic Review, 49(3), 1091-1112.

Andreoni, J., & Sprenger, C. (2012). Estimating Time Preferences from Convex Budgets. American
    Economic Review, 102(7): 3333-56.

Andreoni, J., Kuhn, M. & Sprenger, C. (2013). On Measuring Time Preferences. Working Paper.

Barr, A., & Genicot, G. (2008). Risk Sharing, Commitment, and Information: An Experimental
     Analysis. Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(6), 1151-1185.

Bendix, R. (1960). Max Weber: An Intellectual Portrait. Taylor & Francis.

Benjamin, D. J., Choi, J. J., & Fisher, G. W. (2012). Religious Identity and Economic Behavior. National
    Bureau of Economic Research.

Benjamin, D. J., Choi, J. J., & Strickland, A. J. (2010). Social Identity and Preferences. American
    Economic Review, 100(4), 1913-1928.

Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., & McCabe, K. (1995). Trust, Reciprocity, and Social History. Games and
    Economic Behavior, 10(1), 122-142.

Brokaw, C. J. (1991). The Ledgers of Merit and Demerit: Social Change and Moral Order in Late
    Imperial China (p. 103). Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Buchan, N. R., Johnson, E. J., & Croson, R. T. (2006). Let's Get Personal: An International Examination
    of the Influence of Communication, Culture and Social Distance on Other Regarding
    Preferences. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 60(3), 373-398.

Carvalho, L. Prina, S., Sydnor J. (2013), The Effects of Savings on Risk-Taking and Intertemporal
    Choice Behavior: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment, Working Paper.

Chan, A. (1996). Confucianism and Development in East Asia. Journal of Contemporary Asia, 26(1), 28-
    45.

Chung, C., Shepard, J., & Dollinger, M. (1989). Max Weber Revisited: Some Lessons from East Asian
    Capitalistic Development. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 6(2), 307-321.

Dai, H. (Ed.). (1989). Confucianism and Economic Development: an Oriental Alternative?. Washington
     Institute Press.


                                                                                                       34
Dijksterhuis, A., & Bargh, J. A. (2001). "The Perception-behavior Expressway: Automatic Effects of
     Social Perception on Social Behavior." Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 1-40.

Elman, B. A. (1991). Political, social, and cultural reproduction via civil service examinations in late
    imperial China. Journal of Asian Studies, 50(1), 7-28.

Fernandez, R. (2011), Does Culture Matter?, In the Handbook of Social Economics, edited by Jess
    Benhabib, Matthew O. Jackson, and Alberto Bisin, pp. 481-510.

Frijters, P. , Kong, T & Liu, E. (2013). “Who is Coming to the Experiment? A Cautionary Tale from
      China”, Mimeo.

Gao, G. (1998). An Initial analysis of the Effects of Face and Concern for “Other” in Chinese
     Interpersonal Communication. International Journal of Intercultural Relation, 22, 467–482.

Giné, X., Goldberg, J. A., Silverman, D., & Yang, D. (2012). “Revising Commitments:
    Field Evidence on Adjustment of Prior Choices.” Unpublished.

Gorodnichenko, Y., & Roland, G. (2013), Culture, Institutions, and theWealth of Nations." Working
    Paper, University of California, Berkeley

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2006). Does culture affect economic outcomes?. Journal of
    Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 23-48.

Hofheinz, R., & Calder, K. E. (1982). The Eastasia Edge (pp. 41-67). New York: Basic Books.

Hofstede, G., & Bond, M. H. (1988). The Confucius Connection: From Cultural Roots to Economic
    Growth. Organizational Dynamics, 16(4), 4-21.

Hofstede, G., & Hofstede, G. J. (2005). Cultures and Organizations, Software of the Mind, Intercultural
    Cooperation and its Importance for Survival. Revised and expanded 2nd edition.

Holt, C. A., & Laury, S. K. (2002). Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects. American Economic
     Review, 92(5), 1644-1655.

Hong, Y.-Y., Chiu, C.-Y., & Kung, T. M. (1997). Bringing culture out in front: Effects of cultural
    meaning system activation on social cognition. In K. Leung, Y. Kashima, U. Kim, & S. Yamaguchi
    (Eds.), Progress in Asian social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 135-146). Singapore: Wiley

Hwang, K. (1987). Face and Favor: The Chinese Power Game. American Journal of Sociology, 944-974.

Inglehart, R., & Baker, W. E. (2000). Modernization, cultural change, and the persistence of traditional
     values. American sociological review, 19-51.

Ip, P. K. (2009). Is Confucianism Good for Business Ethics in China? Journal of Business Ethics, 88(3),
      463-476.

Kahn, H. (1979). World Economic Development: 1979 and Beyond. CO: Westview.



                                                                                                           35
Knack, S., & Keefer, P. (1997). Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A Cross-country
    Investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1251-1288.

Koehn, D. (2001). Confucian Trustworthiness and the Practice of Business in China. Business Ethics
    Quarterly, 11(3), 415-429.


Laibson, D. (1997). Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2),
443-478.

Lam, K. J. (2003). Confucian Business Ethics and the Economy. Journal of Business Ethics, 43(1/2,
    Business Ethics in the Global Knowledge Economy), 153-162.

Liang, M. (2010). Confucianism and the East Asian Miracle. American Economic Journal:
    Macroeconomics, 2(3), 206-234.

Liu, E. (2013). Time to Change What to Sow: Risk Preferences and Technology Adoption Decisions of
     Cotton Farmers in China, Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming,.

Legge, J. (1893). The Chinese Classics with a Translation, Critical and Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena,
    and Copious Indexes: Confucian Analects, the Great Learning, and the Doctrine of the Mean (Vol.
    1). Revised second edition (1893), Oxford: Clarendon Press,

Lu, X. (2004). Rhetoric of the Chinese Cultural Revolution: The Impact on Chinese Thought, Culture,
     and Communication. Univ of South Carolina Press.

Macrae, C. N., & Johnston, L. (1998). Help, I Need Somebody: Automatic Action and Inaction. Social
    Cognition, 16(4), 400-417.

Nunn, N., & Wantchekon, L. (2011). The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa. American
    Economic Review, 101, 3221-3252.

Mayer, J. D., Schmidt, H. M. (2004). Gendered political socialization in four contexts: political interest
   and values among junior high school students in China, Japan, Mexico, and the United States.
   Social Science Journal, 41(3), 393-407.

Morris, M. W., Nisbett, R. E., & Peng, K. (1995). Causal attribution across domains and cultures. In D.
    Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J. Premack (Eds.), Causal cognition: A multidisciplinary debate (pp.
    577-612). Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.

Ornatowski, G. K. (1996). Confucian Ethics and Economic Development: A Study of the Adaptation of
    Confucian Values to Modern Japanese Economic Ideology and Institutions. Journal of Socio-
    Economics, 25(5), 571-590.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1997). Trust in Large
    Organizations. American Economic Review, 87(2), 333-338.

Rozman, G. (1992). "The Confucian faces of capitalism." Pacific Century: The Emergence of Modern
    Pacific Asia, 308-316.

                                                                                                             36
Shaw, K. L. (1996). An Empirical Analysis of Risk Aversion and Income Growth. Journal of Labor
    Economics, , 626-653.

Tan, H. H., & Chee, D. (2005). Understanding Interpersonal Trust in a Confucian-influenced Society An
     Exploratory Study. International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, 5(2), 197-212.

Tanaka, T., C. F. Camerer, and Q. Nguyen. (2010). Risk and Time Preferences: Linking Experimental and
    Household Survey Data from Vietnam. American Economic Review, 100(1): 557-71.

Tse, D. K. (1996). Understanding Chinese People as Consumers: Past Findings and Future Propositions.
     In M. H. Bond (Ed.), The Handbook of Chinese psychology. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.

Turner, J. C. (1985). Social Categorization and the Self-concept: A Social Cognitive Theory of Group
    Behavior. Advances in Group Processes: Theory and Research, 2, 77-122.

Wheeler, S. C., & Berger, J. (2007). When the Same Prime Leads to Different Effects. Journal of
   Consumer Research, 34(3), 357-368.

Wheeler, S. C., Jarvis, W. B. G., & Petty, R. E. (2001). Think unto others: The self-destructive impact of
   negative racial stereotypes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 37(2), 173-180.

Yeh, Q., & Xu, X. (2010). The Effect of Confucian Work Ethics on Learning About Science and
     Technology Knowledge and Morality. Journal of Business Ethics, 95(1), 111-128.




                                                                                                        37
