                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        BETTING ON SECESSION:
QUANTIFYING POLITICAL EVENTS SURROUNDING SLAVERY AND THE CIVIL WAR

                                      Charles W. Calomiris
                                       Jonathan Pritchett

                                       Working Paper 19625
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19625


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2013




The authors acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation award SMA-1004569, and
the New Orleans Center for the Gulf South. They benefited from the helpful comments and suggestions
of Jenny Bourne, Stanley Engerman, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Gavin Wright, and conference participants
at the meetings of the Cliometrics Society on January 5, 2013, the NBER Development of the American
Economy Program Meeting on March 2, 2013, and the “Time on the Cross at 40” Conference at the
University of Chicago on October 5, 2013. Yibang Chen, Zachary Cohen, Kyle Falvey, Denise Fornoff,
Jessica Hayes, Benjamin Kim, Daniel Penaranda, Stephen Ragany, Kara Ramsey, Catherine Rath,
Mallorie Smith, and Emily Westermeier provided able research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Charles W. Calomiris and Jonathan Pritchett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Betting on Secession: Quantifying Political Events Surrounding Slavery and the Civil War
Charles W. Calomiris and Jonathan Pritchett
NBER Working Paper No. 19625
November 2013
JEL No. G18,N31,N41,P16

                                             ABSTRACT

Abraham Lincoln’s election produced Southern secession, Civil War, and abolition. Using a new database
of slave sales from New Orleans, we examine the connections between political news and the prices
of slaves for 1856-1861. We find that slave prices declined by roughly a third from their 1860 peak,
reflecting increased southern pessimism regarding the possibility of war and the war’s possible outcome.
The South’s decision to secede reflected the beliefs that the North would not invade to oppose secession,
and that emancipation of slaves without compensation was unlikely, both of which were subsequently
dashed by Lincoln’s actions.


Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Jonathan Pritchett
Department of Economics
206 Tilton Hall
Tulane University
New Orleans, Louisiana 701 18-5698
jprit@tulane.edu
                       "We are not enemies but friends. We must not be enemies."
                             Abraham Lincoln, Inaugural Address, March 4, 1861

I. Introduction


       The struggle between the Southern slave-based labor system and the Northern “free soil”

movement produced bitter and violent conflict throughout the 1850s, which culminated in 1861

with Southern secession and four years of Civil War. The Civil War remains a puzzling event to

historians, economists and political scientists. The Southern decision to secede is clearly

traceable, at least in large part, to a political push by Southern slave owners, especially in the

Deep South. There is no doubt that the key issue in the minds of the advocates of secession was

the future of slavery. Secessionists saw the risk that President Lincoln and the newly resurgent

Republican Party posed to maintaining slavery as a labor system in the existing South, and to

being able to expand the reach of slavery into the territories and possibly other areas including

Cuba. But if the goal of secession was preserving the slave system, what were slaveholders’

expectations regarding the cost of the war and its possible outcome? Did they anticipate that

Lincoln and the North would passively permit secession, or decide to fight? Once war began, did

they expect a short, painless war with a quick victory for the South (or at least northern

recognition of the Confederacy), or the long, bloody conflict that would ultimately result in the

destruction of the slave labor system? How did the probability weights attached to these

possibilities change in 1860 and 1861?1 In this paper, we investigate those questions by


1
  Wright (1978) reviews both of these categories of economic arguments relating to secession,
and considers the difficult economic calculations that are embedded within them. Wright shows
how challenging it is to demonstrate the connection between the decisions to secede and an
increase in the expected value of slaves. By leaving the Union, the South created a new Union,
from which it was excluded, with a united and powerful supermajority in favor of precisely the
policies it feared most. How would an isolated and hostile Confederacy be able to defend itself
against the much more populous North, and how would the South be able to successfully
                                                  1
examining the connections between political news related to slavery and the price of slaves

during the five-year period leading up to the Civil War and the first months of armed conflict.


       Our main contributions include the estimation of a model of slave prices using slave sales

data from New Orleans. We construct counterfactual scenarios of slave prices that predict

temporal price movement in the absence of political and military events. We show that prior to

1860, few political events seemed to affect slave prices, and even the Dred Scott decision had

only a small and temporary effect. After Lincoln’s nomination for the Presidency, slave prices

fell, and they continued to fall once the war commenced. The overall decline in slave prices was

large (more than a third from their 1860 peak) and occurred prior to any battle losses by the

South. We also find that this steep initial decline in slave prices was the same for all age and sex

cohorts of slaves sold. Thus, the early sharp decline in slave prices should not be interpreted as

reflecting the expectation of a likely emancipation of southern slaves without compensation to

their owners. Instead, the decrease in slave prices seems to have reflected rising concerns by

slaveholders regarding the consequences of Lincoln’s election. His apparent resolve to prevent

secession, and especially his actions in April 1861, were perceived by slaveholders as a severe

adverse shock in the market for slaves.




compete militarily and economically against the North to expand into the Western territories?
Furthermore, the permanent status of the territories of greatest obvious value for the potential
expansion of slavery had already been determined (or could have been predicted) by December
1860. Most importantly, Kansas was finally admitted to the Union as a free state in January
1861. The secession debates, however, make one thing absolutely clear: slavery was perceived as
being at risk, whether or not the South seceded. Both sides recognized that the consequences of
secession or remaining within the Union were highly uncertain, given Lincoln’s electoral victory.
There was no way to play it safe.

                                                  2
II. Slave Prices, Dred Scott, and the Civil War


       Why use slave prices to quantify the economic importance of political events? Slave

prices measure market perceptions of the discounted present value of future income and other

benefits that masters expected to gain from the labor of their slaves. In particular, the threat of

war and its expected costs had important implications for the market value of slaves. One

potential cost to slaveholders was expropriation – that is, emancipation without slaveholder

compensation. An increased fear of emancipation without compensation would have shortened

the expected economic lifetime of the slaves and consequently lowered their prices. Even if

emancipation without compensation was not a major concern to slaveholders, the threat of war

could have lowered slave prices, either because of anticipated higher taxes or anticipated

reductions in the productivity of slave labor. Furthermore, the desire to maximize the value of

slave wealth clearly was an important underlying cause for the South’s decision to secede from

the Union.2 Slave prices, therefore, are a natural measure of changing perceptions of the

outcome of the South’s bet on secession.



2
  We will not review here the literature establishing that secession was motivated by concern
related to slavery, which we regard as beyond reasonable doubt, based on the simple facts
surrounding the secession decisions (that is, the debates and conflicts that preceded and
coincided with secession). That does not mean, however, that secession reflected a large
expected gain in slave values, nor does it mean that secession was regarded as a low-risk
decision. Opponents of secession argued strongly for remaining in the Union as a better way to
preserve slave wealth. Proponents and opponents of secession engaged in protracted debates
about the probabilities of various political scenarios. They disagreed about the probabilities to
attach to prospective events, and those disagreements explain why the debates were so
protracted. Participants considered a wide array of forward-looking possibilities about the
economic consequences for slavery of secession, and both sides recognized substantial
probabilities of loss from secession as well as gain. The debates were extremely sophisticated
and balanced. Indeed, reading the speeches now, it is hard to come to the conclusion that there
was an obvious economic case either for or against secession. Georgia and Virginia were
particularly crucial cases in the sequence of seceding states, and in neither case could one say
that secession was obviously in the interest of slave owners. See Freehling and Simpson (1992,
                                                  3
       Slaves were valuable financial assets and represented a significant share of southern

wealth.3 Goldin (1973, p. 85), for example, estimates the market value of slaves at $2.7 billion

where Ransom and Sutch (1988, p.151) give a slightly higher figure of $3 billion (in 1860

dollars). Because slaves were mobile, the prices of slaves in New Orleans should reflect those of

other slaves deployed elsewhere in the South (Yanochik, Thornton, and Ewing, 2003). An

analysis of slave prices, therefore, should provide a good indication of price movements

throughout the South.


       The Civil War was the culmination of many different political events involving slavery.

Slave prices are forward looking opinion aggregators that can help sort out the relative

importance of these events and their perceived meaning, and therefore, can tell us whether news

was a positive or a negative for slaveholders and if so, how much. Absent the use of slave prices,

it can be difficult to interpret the economic significance of some of these events.


       We illustrate that point by analyzing accounts from contemporary newspapers and

journals to gauge the importance of the Dred Scott decision of March 6, 1857. As the discussion

shows, oftentimes political events had ambiguous effects on the institution of slavery. The Court

ruled that Dred Scott (a Southern slave residing on free soil) had to be returned to his Southern

master, but the Supreme Court’s decision went much further, arguing that federal actions to limit

the spread of slavery, beginning with the Missouri Compromise, were unconstitutional. The

implication was that all western territories in America were open to slavery. States could still



2010).For background on the struggle over slavery, from the perspectives of the North, the
South, and the West, see, for example, Stampp (1965), Fehrenbacher (1962), Dusinberre (1965),
Gaeddert (1974), Wright (1978, Chapter 5), Fogel (1989), Zarefsky (1990), Freehling and
Simpson (1992, 2010), and Basler (2001).
3
  Ransom and Sutch (1988, p. 139) estimate slave capital represented 44 percent of all wealth in
the cotton-growing states in 1859. See also Deyle (2009, p. 840).
                                                 4
decide to exclude slavery within their borders, but even then, they were obliged to respect the

property rights of slave-owners over slaves residing within their own borders.


       The initial reaction to the Dred Scott decision was jubilant in the South.4 On March 14,

1857, an article in New Orleans’ Daily Bee predicted that the decision “...will exert the most

powerful and salutary influence throughout the United States.” Similarly, on March 15, the

Louisiana Courier wrote that “[n]o judicial tribunal has ever rendered a more important decision

than that of the U.S. Supreme Court in the case of Scott vs. Sanford...It must be exceedingly

gratifying to the advocates of democracy, who have so long and so vigorously contended against

the odious Missouri restriction, to hear from the highest authority a confirmation of all they have

heretofore maintained, as to the unconstitutionality of that act.” New Orleans’ Daily Picayune,

optimistically predicted on March 20, 1857 that “the Union men of the country, of all sections,

who are for the constitution as it is, will be able, we trust, to put down effectively all forms of

incendiary agitation, and restore quiet and harmony to the country.”


       But as early as March 19, 1857, there was recognition of the fact that a political backlash

in the North could offset or even eliminate the gains from the decision. On that date, the

Louisiana Courier wrote about its concern that “Black Republican lamentations” might “succeed

in electing Ethiopian presidents...” In New Orleans’ Daily Bee, on March 21, 1857, similar fears

were voiced: “But he is a shallow observer of events and an unskilful judge of human nature,

who imagines that the verdict of the Supreme Court—though consonant with right and justice,

and consistent with the soundest interpretation of the federal compact—will, as if by magic,

4
  There were rumors about the decision prior to March. On January 1, 1857, New York Herald
reported the false rumour that the Court had decided to rule that the Missouri Compromise was
unconstitutional. In fact, we know from internal documents that the Court did not decide to
broaden the case until mid-February 1857, so any such rumours were wrong. Nonetheless, they
may have affected slave prices.
                                                   5
dissipate all preconceived opinions, dispel hostile views, and restore the era of fraternal harmony

and peace...The verdict of the Supreme Court breaks like an angry wave against the impregnable

rock of Northern fanaticism.” The April 1857 issue of De Bow’s Review expressed a similar

sentiment, predicting that the North “is about to change its position” and will “organize upon the

basis of this another party, which shall struggle again for the control, and as must be the result if

successful, the overthrow of the Republic...”


       It is interesting to note the level of sophistication of the discussion of Dred Scott’s

potential effects on slave prices, including the recognition of the possible harm to slave owners

(and benefit to the North) from reduced commodity prices. Consider this passage from De Bow’s

Review, April 1857: “Economically, the extension of slavery will injure the South and benefit the

North. It will cheapen the raw material and enhance the price of manufactured articles. It will

increase the trade and commerce of the North, multiply her customers, cheapen cotton, sugar,

molasses, rice, meats, wheat, and Indian corn, and thus injure the South whilst it benefits the

North. The extension of free society will have the exact opposite effect, and rear up rivals and

competitors, instead of customers, for the old free States. The South desires slavery extension

only as a means of defence against the inroads of abolition.” Clearly, as people thought about the

consequences of the Dred Scott decision, they saw complex implications for the institution of

slavery and the South.


       From today’s vantage point, the Dred Scott decision was a turning point in American

political and legal history. Politically, it marked the beginning of Abraham Lincoln’s prominence

as a politician; seeking to overturn the Dred Scott decision became the focal point of Lincoln’s

speeches and his famous debates with Senator Douglas. Although Lincoln was defeated by

Douglas in the race for Senate in 1858, Lincoln’s successful presidential election campaign in

                                                  6
1860 continued to focus specifically on his advocacy against the Dred Scott decision. With

respect to legal history, Dred Scott was the apogee of the Supreme Court’s defense of “states’

rights,” and the Taney Court was the high water mark of Southern influence; Lincoln’s election,

the Civil War and its aftermath changed the direction of the Court, and ushered in a new era of

Supreme Court acquiescence with the will of the national government under Northern control.


       The Dred Scott Decision had important economic consequences for both the North and

the South. Calomiris and Schweikart (1991) and Wahl (2012) argue that the Dred Scott decision

was an important adverse shock to Northern immigration and infrastructure expansion plans.

Along with other events that contributed to the conflict between free soil and slave interests,

especially in Kansas, it rendered politically impossible for the time being the construction of a

transcontinental railroad, which was disastrous for the speculation in western railroad securities

that was running very high in the mid-1850s. According to this view, the Dred Scott decision,

and the broader conflict over slavery, was instrumental in setting in motion the Panic of 1857.


       How was the South affected by the Dred Scott decision? The South’s banking sector was

largely unaffected by the Panic of 1857, owing to its stable branching structure and its lack of

direct exposure to speculative railroad securities. For the South, the most obvious potential

economic influence of the Dred Scott decision concerned the institution of slavery. Specifically,

by legitimizing the right of states to maintain slavery ad infinitum, by expanding slavery into

new territories, and by protecting the property rights of slaveholders, the Dred Scott decision

could have increased the wealth of southern slaveholders. But, as the above newspaper

quotations show, the political and economic implications of Dred Scott were not all obviously

positive for slaveholders. Some contemporary observers feared a political backlash (a fear that

was later confirmed by Lincoln’s election as President). Others worried that the territorial

                                                 7
expansion of slavery might reduce the prices of commodities produced by slaves, and thereby

reduce the value of slaves. Slave price reactions to political events provide a unique means of

aggregating and weighing conflicting opinions about the meaning of Dred Scott for slavery’s

future and the value of slaves.


       The Dred Scott decision was just one of many widely discussed events during the period

1857 to 1860 that had potentially significant, but often ambiguous, implications for the value of

slaves. Table 1 lists the principal political events related to the conflict over slavery from 1857

through mid-1861. Some of the salient events of this era include the end of the bloody political

struggle over whether Kansas would be admitted to the Union as a slave or free-soil state, which

was resolved in pieces over the period 1855-1860, the Dred Scott Decision by the Supreme Court

on March 6, 1857, Lincoln’s defeat in 1858, the attack by John Brown on Harpers Ferry in

October 1859, the nomination of Lincoln in May 1860, Lincoln’s election in November 1860,

the secession of the various Southern states that occurred in the aftermath of Lincoln’s election

(beginning with South Carolina’s decision to secede on December 20, 1860), the South’s attack

on Fort Sumter on April 12, 1861, and President Lincoln’s response, which took the form of a

massive troop mobilization, a blockade of southern ports, and various military campaigns into

the South in mid 1861. We gauge the importance of each of these events through our analysis of

their effects on the prices of slaves sold in New Orleans.


III. New Orleans Sales Data


       To track responses of slave prices to political events one needs a sufficient amount of

sales price data at sufficiently high frequency. Because individual slaves and slave transactions

were highly heterogeneous in several important respects, the construction of a comparable price


                                                  8
measure requires a sample with many observations of sales for each time period.5 The Fogel and

Engerman database on slave sales is useful for many purposes (see, for example, Calomiris and

Pritchett 2009), but it does not contain a sufficiently large number of observations for each

month to make it usable for our purpose.


       For our study, we develop a new database for all slaves sold in New Orleans, Louisiana

between 1856 and 1861. During this time, New Orleans was the largest city in the South and the

site of its largest slave market. Unlike states with a common law tradition, Louisiana treated

slaves like real estate, and slave sales had to be recorded and notarized in order to establish title

(Louisiana 1806, section 10). Today, the records of many of these slave sales may be found in

the New Orleans Notarial Archives and the New Orleans Conveyance Office. Because of the

availability of these records and the size of the market, New Orleans is the best source for data

on slave sales within the United States.


       Prior to the establishment of the Notarial Archives in 1867, a notary’s records (as well as

those of his predecessors) were stored and maintained in his office. In order to locate a legal

document, a researcher needed information on the date of sale, the name of the notary who

recorded the sale, and the name and location of the current notary who held the document.

Recognizing the difficulties facing researchers, the Louisiana legislature created the office of the

Register of Conveyances in 1827, whose duties were to register all acts of transfer of real estate


5
  Cross-sectional regression analysis typically accounts for less than 50 percent of the variation
in individual prices. For example, using Fogel and Engerman’s sample of New Orleans slave
sales, Kotlikoff (1979, p. 501) reports an R2 of 0.479. Much of the remaining price variation is
the result individual characteristics which were not recorded by the notary at the time of sale. In
this paper, we analyze the temporal variation in slave prices through the construction of an index
composed of the average monthly price residuals. The precision of our index is measured by a
small standard error of the mean which in turn requires a large number of observations for each
month.
                                                  9
or slaves. The Register was required to record the date and location of the act, a description of

the slaves “with all necessary details,” the price of the transfer, and whether the transaction was

for cash or credit. In addition, transfers passed “under private signature” were to be recorded in

toto. The Register maintained an index which allowed researchers to locate the sale date and the

notary who recorded the act of sale (Louisiana 1827, pp. 136-141).


       The Conveyance Records represent an alternative (and under used) source of information

on New Orleans slave prices. Although the Notarial Archives preserve the actual acts of sale,

and therefore provide a more complete description of the transaction, including more information

about the slave, the Conveyance Records do provide a brief summary of the sale, including the

names and ages of the slaves being sold. Information on occupations or maladies was often under

reported in the Conveyance Records (Pritchett and Hayes, 2013), but the Conveyance Records

include more transactions than the Notarial Records, for two reasons. First, although few in

number, sales passed under private signature (typically a parish judge) were not recorded by the

notaries (but were recorded by the Conveyance Office). Second, some notarial records were

destroyed by office fires and others are simply missing due to the passage of time. In contrast,

none of the Conveyance Records appear to be missing. Thus, the Conveyance Records provide a

better database for tracking slave sales at high frequency, and therefore, are a superior data

source for our purposes.


       The Conveyance Records are handwritten in either English or French. For the period

October 1856-August 1861, we have collected data for all slave transactions in New Orleans

from the Conveyance Records (representing the sales of more than 16,000 slaves). A large

number of slaves were sold each year, averaging approximately 3600 slaves for the first four



                                                 10
years of the sample period.6 As indicated by the frequency distribution presented in Figure 1,

New Orleans slave sales were highly seasonal – monthly sales were approximately three times

greater in the winter than in the summer. In part, this reflects the well-known health hazards

related to contagious disease in New Orleans during the summer months. In addition, slave sales

decreased sharply following the political turmoil that began in late 1860. Variation in the

volume of sales by interregional slave traders contributed to both of these effects. Although our

focus is on price variation, the changes in trading volume also are noteworthy as indicators of the

politically driven upheaval in the slave market in 1860-1861, and therefore, a brief digression on

the changing volume of transactions and the data regarding slave traders’ behavior is warranted.


Traders and the supply of imported slaves


       Most interregional slave traders were transients, purchasing slaves in the exporting areas

during the summer and early fall, and reselling them in New Orleans during the late fall and

winter. Slaves from the local area were sold year round whereas most imported slaves were sold

during the winter months. The changing demographic structure of the slaves sold in New

Orleans provides indirect evidence of the seasonal presence of interregional traders. Most

imported slaves sold by traders were higher value, prime-aged males (Fogel and Engerman,

1974; Tadman, 1989; Pritchett and Chamberlain, 1993). The relative number of prime-aged

males (aged 18 to 30 years) is positively correlated with total sales (r=0.58, n=59), which is

consistent with the seasonality of slave sales observed in Figure 1 and the presence of

interregional traders during the fall and winter months.



6
  The number of sales in the late 1850s is not large by historic standards. Pritchett and Smith
(2013) estimate, for example, that more than 6200 slaves were sold in New Orleans during the
1830 calendar year.
                                                11
        Interregional traders not only acted as speculators, but also as inter-regional arbitragers,

by facilitating exchange between slaveholders in the exporting areas and buyers in Louisiana.7

Traders tended to be better informed, and possibly were more sensitive to changing market

conditions, than local sellers of slaves. They also appear to have been very concerned about

Lincoln’s candidacy and its possible effect on the market for slaves. Beginning in September

1860, the Richmond auctioneers of Betts and Gregory advised their clients to sell their slaves

now. Although prices were currently high, “[t]he Chances are they will be lower.” Should their

clients wish to purchase slaves, “we would advise you [to] not buy nothing but good negroes and

buy them at prices to sell immediately.” This market uncertainty was directly linked to the fall

election. According to Betts and Gregory, “The Presidents election is having a considerable

effect on the market[.] how it will go no man can tell.”


        Things got progressively worse for traders with Lincoln’s election in November.

Dickinson and Hill advised their clients that the “financial crisis still rages and is not likely to

abate for some months. We have no hope for any political change which will give peace and

confidence in commercial matters.” Such pessimism was pervasive across the South. In

February 1861, Memphis slave trader G.W. Chrisp wrote that the current political crisis “will

have a very bad affict on the negro market [.] what we are coming two the lord onely noes [.]

We think our state might to be in Hell” [underlining and spelling are from the original

document]. The same month, slave trader A. J. Rux reported falling prices and fewer sales in

Mobile. Traders were “Selling some in Orleans but a long ways under cost. . . . I am in hopes

7
 Traders bore the risk of a possible price decline between the date of purchase in the exporting
areas and the date of sale in New Orleans. Using data from 1830, Freudenberger and Pritchett
(1991, p. 468) estimate that interregional traders held their slaves an average of 106 days
between purchase and resale, with a modal value of two months. Traders borrowed funds to
finance their purchases and because they were highly leveraged, any unanticipated price decrease
could threaten them with financial ruin.
                                                  12
times will get better before long but I don’t much think there will be any market this winter to do

any good."


Slave Price Index


       Not all records in our database can be used for the construction of our price index.

Transactions with missing values for age, gender, date of sale, or sales price are excluded from

the sample. Also excluded are the sales of partial ownerships, transactions bundled with real

estate or other property, self purchases, donations, and exchanges. Finally, the records of slaves

sold in groups without individual price information are removed from the sample. After making

these exclusions, the working sample includes the sales records of 10,177 slaves.


       Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for usable sales data. The variables reported in Table

2 are those that have been identified by prior research (Fogel and Engerman (1974), Kotlikoff

(1979, 1992) and Calomiris and Pritchett (2009)) as slave and transaction characteristics that are

relevant for modeling slave transaction prices. Prices for credit sales may have been inflated due

to the opportunity cost of the borrowed funds. Consequently, we substitute the present value of

the payment stream, discounted at an 8 percent annual rate, for the recorded market price. 8

Following previous practice, we express slave prices as logarithms.


       Transaction prices reflect characteristics that are observable in our dataset as well as

those that are unobservable to us, but observable to market participants. The latter category of

characteristics affects market prices in ways that our model cannot capture, and thus produce

“residuals” from the perspective of our model. Because our goal is the construction of monthly

averages of residuals there is an inherent tradeoff involved in screening data for outliers. In
8
  For most credit sales, notaries did not record an interest rate. For those sales with recorded
interest rates, the most common rate was 8 percent.
                                                 13
general, including more observations improves the accuracy of the measurement of an average

price, but extreme outliers can bias the measured average. To omit outliers, we first ran a basic

hedonic regression using a functional form from previous studies. Most of the outliers are

negative, indicating that we overestimate the prices of a very small number of observations. In

most of these cases, idiosyncratic factors can account for the low market values of the outliers. 9

After removing 14 observations with residuals less than -2, we reran the regression and presented

the results in Table 2, regression 1. None of the findings reported below is sensitive to the

omission of these 14 observations.


        We follow Kotlikoff (1979, 1992) and others in modeling the age profile of slave prices

using a sixth-degree polynomial. In Figure 2, the price-age profile shows the familiar pattern of a

hump-shaped relationship between price and age, which peaks around age 22. Our model

includes measures of slave characteristics (sex, age, etc.) as well as measures of transaction

characteristics. Transactions that offered guarantees to buyers commanded higher prices, as did

transactions that offered credit to buyers. Calomiris and Pritchett (2009) show that other

attributes of transactions included here (whether they are part of family or group sales, and the

origin of the buyer) mattered for transactions through a variety of potential channels, including

selectivity bias.


        Figure 3 plots the monthly average of residuals estimated from Regression 1 of Table 2.

For comparison, Figure 3 also plots the monthly average price for males aged 18 to 30 years


9
  Two of the slaves were runaways (one of whom was contemporaneously absent at the time of
sale). Two slaves were blind (in both eyes), one was crippled, and two were guaranteed in title
only. Two slaves sold at very low prices ($5 each) with a condition that they be emancipated.
Although we include covariates for slaves who were sold without warranty, or with a condition
of emancipation, it appears that these instruments are a bit too blunt to capture the price variation
for these lower-valued slaves.
                                                 14
without recorded occupation or defect (Engerman’s definition). Although both indices follow

similar temporal patterns, we believe that the monthly average of the regression residuals

provides a better indication of the movement of slave prices.10 The regression residuals control

for seasonality and price variation between ages 18 and 30. The monthly average of the

residuals includes all 10,177 observations in the working sample which, other things equal,

increases the precision of our estimates. (There are only 2,814 prime-aged males in the sample.)

Finally, relatively few prime-aged males were sold during the summer months, rendering price

estimates that rely only on prime-aged males especially problematic during those months.

Consequently, we use hedonic price indices constructed from regression residuals for the

following analysis.


          As summarized in Table 3, slave price residuals increased 10.7 log points (or

approximately 11 percent) between October 1856 and March of 1857 (presumably reflecting the

influence of Dred Scott). Prices then declined 13 log points by November 1857 (presumably

reflecting the economic contraction of that time, related in part to the causes and consequences of

the Panic of 1857). During the next two years, slave price residuals increased 33 log points (or

approximately 39 percent, a rapid increase noted by many contemporary and current scholars).

Although the turning point is uncertain, nominal residual prices appear to peak in summer 1860

(possibly coinciding with Lincoln's nomination) and begin to decline during the fall presidential

campaign. Compared with residual prices in May 1860, we find that residual slave prices fell 16

log points, or approximately 17 percent, by November 1860. Interestingly, slave prices appeared

to stabilize between November 1860 and April 1861, decreasing by only 1.2 log points. The

political turmoil caused by the secession crisis and the formation of the Confederacy was


10
     On the construction of hedonic price indices for slaves, see Levendis (2007).
                                                  15
accompanied by relatively little change in the average monthly residuals. This is not surprising.

Given that the decision to secede was made in large part to protect the value of slaves, and given

that the vote to secede was very close in some key states, it is likely that secession, per se, was

not perceived either as obviously bad or good news about slave prices. 11


       Slave prices declined steadily following the firing on Fort Sumter and Lincoln’s decision

to mobilize federal troops in April. The decline continued into the summer. Compared with April

1861, we find that the regression residuals declined 22 log points, or approximately 24 percent

by August 1861. Slave prices declined despite the Confederate victory at Manassas, the first

major battle of the war.

       Lincoln’s response to the attack on Fort Sumter (by requesting a massive troop

mobilization) was a major disappointment to the South. Indeed, Lincoln provided an ambiguous

message during his March 4 inauguration speech, which he delivered months after the secession

of the first southern states. Lincoln reiterated his pledge not to interfere with slavery in the

South, and quoted the Republican election platform: "Resolved, That the maintenance inviolate

11
   The fact that all the states in which large numbers of slaves resided ended up voting for
secession does not indicate that secession was a predictable outcome.Georgia’s vote in favor of
secession, which many regard as a pivotal event – was quite close (on January 19, 1861, the
Georgia Convention voted to secede by 166 to 130 – see Freehling and Simpson 1992, p. xxi.)
Virginia (which contained more slaves than any other state in 1861) was deeply divided over
secession. Its decision to secede made it the front line of the Civil War, and put it at risk of losing
its western areas, which were pro-free soil. In the event, Virginia lost West Virginia almost
immediately as the result of its decision to secede, and became the central battleground of the
Civil War. Virginia’s vote to secede happened very late and as a consequence of events
overtaking its deliberations; secession was supported only after troops from both sides had
already been mobilized. Virginians voted for secession after they had troops fighting in the field.
Indeed, it is possible to argue that if secession had been voted on by the South as a whole, Union
rather than secession would have carried the day. In fact, South Carolina and other states of the
Deep South moved quickly to secede knowing that their actions would bring pressure on the
states of the Upper South to secede. Virginia and other states of the Upper South ended up facing
the choice between remaining in a Union without the Deep South, in which they would be a
powerless minority, or seceding alongside the Deep South.

                                                  16
of the rights of the States, and especially the right of each State to order and control its own

domestic institutions according to its own judgment exclusively, is essential to that balance of

power on which the perfection and endurance of our political fabric depend; and we denounce

the lawless invasion by armed force of the soil of any State or Territory, no matter what pretext,

as among the gravest of crimes." He went on to say that “the property, peace and security of no

section are to be in any wise endangered by the now incoming Administration. I add too, that all

the protection which, consistently with the Constitution and the laws, can be given, will be

cheerfully given to all the States when lawfully demanded, for whatever cause -- as cheerfully to

one section as to another.”

       Although Lincoln pledged to uphold the Constitution and to preserve the Union, he also

said that “In doing this there needs to be no bloodshed or violence; and there shall be none,

unless it be forced upon the national authority. The power confided to me will be used to hold,

occupy, and possess the property and places belonging to the government, and to collect the

duties and imposts; but beyond what may be necessary for these objects, there will be no

invasion -- no using of force against or among the people anywhere. Where hostility to the

United States in any interior locality, shall be so great and so universal, as to prevent competent

resident citizens from holding the Federal offices, there will be no attempt to force obnoxious

strangers among the people for that object. While the strict legal right may exist in the

government to enforce the exercise of these offices, the attempt to do so would be so irritating,

and so nearly impracticable with all, that I deem it better to forego, for the time, the uses of such

offices.”

       Attributing the initial decline in slave prices to the perceived threat of Lincoln's

nomination and election, and the subsequent declines to the increased perceived threat of an



                                                 17
invasion, is problematic. After all, prices might have declined because of changing market

fundamentals rather than the political events leading up to the war. To control for those

influences, one must construct a counterfactual model that accounts for changes in fundamental

variables that affected slave prices over time.


IV. Constructing a Slave Price Counterfactual


       Measuring the effect of political events requires the construction of a credible

counterfactual measure of slave prices – that is, what slave prices would have been absent the

political events – by properly taking into account other, non-political influences and their effects

on slave prices. The most important observable factor influencing the expected cash flows from

slave labor is the price of cotton. The link between cotton and slave prices has been a central

theme of the empirical literature on slavery from its inception. As Phillips (1918) noted, cotton

cultivation was among the most profitable uses of slaves: “The cotton belt and the sugar bowl

accordingly made a market to attract labor by offering prices higher than rice or tobacco earnings

would warrant. The younger staples thus, on different schedule of buoyancy, were the main

factor determining slave prices in every corner of the South. Cotton by reason of its immense

area and volume of production, reduced even sugar to a secondary role” (p. 176). As Phillips

recognized, “The slaves themselves were ‘securities’ – investments made with a view to future

income. … The price of a slave was affected by the price of cotton for the same reason that

copper shares are influenced by the current price of copper metal.” (p. 179).


       Gray (1933) – who referenced Phillips’ work – also commented on the connections

between slave and cotton prices: “Slave prices were strongly influenced by the rise and fall in




                                                  18
cotton prices. In the earlier years of the nineteenth century there was a belief that slaves should

rise $100 for each increase of 1 cent in price of cotton above cost of production.” (p. 664).


       Nevertheless, the connection between cotton prices and slave prices is not

straightforward. As Phillips and Gray both recognized, the relationship between the long-term

price trends of slave prices and cotton prices seems to have changed in the 1850s. Phillips noted

that: “After five years of western bankruptcy a new climb was begun, roughly parallel to the

cotton curve until 1857, when cotton went down but slaves continued upward. In this

concluding decade there was again a notable spread between the two pairs of markets.” (p. 178)

Gray noted that the diverging trends of cotton and slave prices produced big changes in their

ratios over time: “In this last speculative movement [of the late 1850s], as Phillips has shown, the

prices of slaves advanced much higher in relation to the prices of cotton than in earlier periods of

peak prices. Thus, in terms of cents of cotton to hundreds of dollars in average slave prices in

New Orleans, the ratio was nearly 4 to 1 in 1805, a little over 1 to 1 in 1819, 1 to 1 in 1837, but

only about 0.6 to 1 in 1860.” (p. 667)


       Phillips saw the divergence between cotton and slave prices as an indication of

unsustainable speculation. As Fogel and Engerman (1974) put it: “To [Phillips] the ratio of

cotton to slave prices was as crucial in evaluating the wisdom of an investment in slaves as the

price-to-earnings ratio was for evaluating the wisdom of an investment in corporate stocks….

The data assembled by Phillips showed that the ratio of slave to cotton prices rose by over six

fold between 1805 and 1860. A change of this magnitude clearly indicated to Phillips that, by

the last decade of the antebellum era, slaves were overvalued – that is, priced too high to permit

an investor to earn a normal rate of profit….The rise, Phillips concluded was primarily the

consequence of speculation. The supply of slave had been ‘cornered’ as a consequence of the

                                                 19
closing of the slave trade. Hence ‘it was unavoidable that the price should be bid up to the point

of overvaluation.’” (pp. 61ff).


       Expectations of future conflict and the disruption of the slave trade may have also

affected the connection between slave and cotton prices. According to Walter Johnson (2013, p.

374f), by the “late 1850s, the price of slaves seemed to cut loose from all other prices in a cycle

of speculation that observers termed ‘the Negro fever.’ … The combination of relatively high

cotton prices and fears about the future of the institution (particularly in the Upper South)

combined to convince Deep-South planters that they needed to get their hands on as many slaves

as they could in order to insulate themselves from whatever political misfortunes might befall the

institution as a whole.”


       Contrary to Phillips and Johnson, Fogel and Engerman (1974, pp. 91-93) argued that the

rising ratio of slave prices to cotton prices reflected a legitimate market perception of increased

productivity in cotton cultivation rather than a speculative price bubble. “Among the

developments which made cotton farming increasingly more efficient were the improvements in

the varieties of cotton seeds, the introduction of the cotton gin, the reduction in transportation

and other marketing costs, and the relocation of cotton production in the more fertile land of the

New South.” Like Fogel and Engerman, Gray concluded that the effect on revenues of the

production expansion had more than offset its effects on cotton prices: “In the last five years of

the period cotton sold at prices that were highly remunerative, especially considering the fact that

the average annual product of the five years was much larger than it had ever been before. In the

Cotton Belt, therefore, as in other parts of the South, the Civil War brought to a close a period of

exceptional prosperity.” (p. 700).



                                                 20
       The changing relationship between cotton and slave prices – something about which all

of these researchers agree – raises potential problems for our counterfactual estimation. It is

important to recognize that there is no theoretical presumption that the relationship between the

two should be positive or that it should be constant over time. If cotton price variation were

driven entirely by transitory shocks to supply and demand (that is, shocks viewed as transitory by

slave market participants) then there should be no observed relationship between slave and

cotton prices. If the persistent shocks affecting the price of cotton (that is, those that slave market

participants expected to persist) were exclusively demand-side shocks, then the relationship

between cotton and slave prices should be positive. If the persistent shocks were exclusively

supply-side shocks, then the relationship between cotton prices and slave prices could be either

positive or negative, depending on the elasticities of supply and demand in the cotton market

(which would determine the relationship between supply shocks and revenue changes).

Obviously, the mix between persistent supply and demand shocks can change over time,

implying variation over time in the co-variation of cotton and slave prices.


       To arrive at a better understanding of the relationship between cotton and slave prices, we

first perform a simple analysis of the co-variation of the percentage change in cotton prices with

the annual percentage change in the quantity of cotton produced. Figure 4 illustrates a striking

fact: the correlation between the quantity and price of cotton is positive (0.319) from 1815 to

1850, but is negative (-0.217) from 1851 to 1861. From this admittedly simple analysis, it

appears that demand shocks dominated the cotton market prior to 1850, but that supply shocks

(related to changes in productivity) dominated the market after 1850.


       Because slaves were valued as financial assets, supply shocks need not imply a negative

correlation between slave prices and cotton prices. One would expect such a relationship only if

                                                  21
market participants anticipated that supply shocks would persist. Unfortunately, there is no

independent measure of which we are aware to identify persistent supply and demand shocks in

the cotton market. The only way to measure market participants’ views of the changes in the

nature of persisting shocks is to look at the connection between cotton prices and slave prices.


        In light of the previous discussion, we estimate a counterfactual model of slave prices

which includes covariates for the price of cotton and the price of the British consol.12 (The

consol is a long-term asset, and its price variation is likely to be largely but not entirely

exogenous to political news coming from the United States.) The results for this model are

presented in Table 2, regression 2.13 The estimated regression coefficient for the logarithm of

cotton prices is negative and statistically different from zero, suggesting that persistent supply-

side shocks dominated the cotton market during this time period. Because higher consol prices

imply lower discount rates, we predict a positive correlation between log of slave prices and the

log of consol prices. The estimated regression coefficient is positive although it is not

statistically different from zero.


        The monthly average residuals for regression 2 are plotted in Figure 5. It is notable that

the qualitative results derived regressions 1 and 2 are quite similar. In particular, we find that

12
   We employ de-seasonalized cotton prices, so that cotton price changes better reflect news.
Changes due to seasonal factors would have been predictable.
13
   Our results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications, which we explored in earlier
drafts of this paper. Those included other variables, such as railroad stock price indexes, which
we constructed using Smith and Cole (1935). The problem with including these indexes is that,
as Calomiris and Schweikart (1991) show, railroad stocks were themselves affected by political
news having to do with the future of slavery. Thus, including them likely would bias our
construction of a slave price residual intended to capture political news. We also included the
New York commercial paper rate in some specifications. It did not display a large or statistically
significant effect on slave prices. We also experimented with estimating the monthly seasonal
adjustment for slave prices using Fogel and Engerman’s (1974) database rather than our own.
None of these alternative specifications affected the conclusions we draw from the results we
report below.
                                                  22
slave prices decreased by 10 to 20 percent during the fall of 1860 and that they continued to

decline during the early stages of the War. Of course, none of these approaches is perfect as a

means of removing the influence of demand and supply shocks in the cotton market on slave

prices. If some years – 1860, in particular – saw a mix of both persistent supply and demand

shocks (which is consistent with the view of Wright 1978), then a counterfactual model that

imposes a stable relationship between cotton prices and slave prices would understate the effect

of the cotton market on slave price increases in 1860. This possible counterfactual

misspecification could lead one to overstate the extent of the decline in slave prices from their

1860 peak. We return to this issue in our discussion of slave price changes below.


       Surprisingly, when consol and cotton prices are included in the regression, seasonal

changes for slave prices in the winter months are negative compared to the omitted month, which

is August. This result is contrary to earlier studies of the New Orleans slave market and to the

results in Regression 1. For this reason, in our discussion below, although we report findings

from both sets of regressions, we place greater weight on those derived from Regression 1.


V. Political and Economic Events Seen through the Lens of Regression Residuals


       Are there clear connections between the historical narratives of the political struggle over

slavery and the various residual plots that are implied by our counterfactual models? Figure 5,

which is based on the regression model that includes cotton and consol prices, displays rises and

falls in slave price residuals that coincide in plausible ways with the major political events of the

time. A broadly similar pattern of change in residuals is apparent when using either Regression 1

or Regression 2 specifications (as Table 3 shows), but as discussed above, when calculating

changes at high frequency (where seasonal adjustments are relatively important) we rely on


                                                 23
Regression 1. Table 4 summarizes the slave price changes around key political events using the

Regression 1 specification.


         In an unreported regression, we include indicator variables that capture changes in the

prices for slave sales made six weeks prior and six weeks following each political event. The

differences in the regression coefficients for these indicator variables on either side of the

political event being considered estimates the impact of each of these political events. Table 4

summarizes the statistical tests associated with these indicator variables.


         Slave prices rose by less than five percent following the Dred Scott decision, and the

effect is not statistically significant. Slave prices also rose less than five percent after the

rejection of a slave constitution (the Lecompton Constitution) for Kansas. Although one might

have expected a negative effect of Congress’s rejection of the Lecompton Constitution, it is

possible that the outcome was not surprising. Nor was it clear that the rejection of Lecompton

would lead to a free-soil constitution for Kansas at that time.14 Slave prices rose by about one

percent in the six weeks following the raid on Harpers Ferry, suggesting that market participants

discounted the importance of this event. Slave prices rose by more than five percent in the six

weeks after Lincoln’s nomination in May 1860, and the effect is statistically significant at the 5%

level. This is a somewhat puzzling result, unless one interprets it to mean that observers initially

believed that Lincoln’s nomination would reduce the chance of Republican victory.


         Secession was not associated with any significant change in slave prices (a statistically

insignificant rise of two percent). The firing on Fort Sumter was associated with a small

immediate decline in slave prices, but that decline grew over time (as shown in Figure 5 and


14
     See Gaeddert (1974).
                                                   24
Table 3). The Confederate victory at Manassas was associated with significantly lower slave

prices. Despite the southern victory, this northern attack demonstrated that Lincoln intended to

invade the South to preserve the Union which caused slave prices to decline markedly by nearly

17 percent. The negative reactions of slave prices to events from mid-1860 through the summer

of 1861, shown in the last row of Table 3, resulted in a cumulative price decline of roughly a

third. We observe a similar pattern for railroad stocks in both the North and South during this

same time frame. Over the period May 1860 to August 1861, the Smith and Cole index declines

15 percent. We also collected prices for southern railroad stocks quoted in New Orleans and

constructed an equally weighted index of these stocks. From May 1860 to April 1861, this index

declines by 23 percent.15


VI. War Expectations and the Relative Prices of Slaves


       The decrease in slave prices during and after the summer of 1860 is consistent with

increased pessimism regarding the future cash flows associated with owning slaves. Because

slaveholders valued slaves as financial assets, slave prices should have equaled the discounted

present value of their expected future earnings. To the extent that political news led buyers of

slaves to think that they might lose ownership of their slaves at some future date as the result of

emancipation without compensation (for slaveholders) that would have reduced the price they

were willing to pay for slaves. On the other hand, it is not clear that the political news of 1860

and 1861 should be seen primarily as affecting the probability of emancipation without

compensation. After all, emancipation without compensation would have been unprecedented.

Given the legality of slavery in the rebel states and elsewhere, as of 1860 or 1861 it likely would

15
  The New Orleans index was calculated for the Carrollton, Pontchartrain, Opelousas, and
Jackson railroads as reported in the New Orleans Price Current. New Orleans equity prices were
not reported after April 1861.
                                                 25
have been seen as an illegal taking. As late as April 1862, emancipation of slaves in the District

of Columbia was enacted with compensation for slaveholders.

       An increase in the probability of emancipation without compensation is not the only

possible explanation for the decrease in slave prices during 1860 and 1861. For example, the

increased probability of regional conflict likely would have lowered expectations for the

southern economy’s ability to sell its produce on international markets, which would have

reduced expected slave labor productivity and slaveholder income and, in turn, would have also

reduced the prices of slaves. Furthermore, because slaves constituted a large part of southern

wealth, any taxation to pay for the South’s war efforts would have fallen largely on slaveholders.

Whether taxes were expected to be levied on income or wealth, the effect would have been the

same: even if the war was expected to end in a stalemate or a southern victory, a large and costly

Civil War would have hurt slaveholders and reduced the market value of their slaves.

       Was the decline in slave prices primarily due to fears of emancipation without

compensation or some other expected consequence of the struggle over slavery? Unlike an

expected decline in labor productivity, or expected government taxation of slave wealth to pay

for the war effort, changing expectations regarding possible emancipation without compensation

should have affected the prices of some slaves more than others. In particular, in response to

news that increased the perceived likelihood of emancipation without compensation, the prices

of children (and women of childbearing age) should have fallen by great percentages than those

of other slaves. The earnings of young children, net of maintenance costs, were negative (Fogel

and Engerman, 1974). They sold for positive market prices only because buyers anticipated

increased future earnings from young slaves as they matured. Because emancipation without

compensation would eliminate that source of future income for the slaveholder, political news



                                                26
that increased the likelihood of emancipation without compensation should have reduced the

prices of children relative to those of adults. Similarly, increased expectations of future

emancipation without compensation should have reduced the market value of the childbearing

capacity of a young adult female slave, thus decreasing her price relative to those of other slaves.

        These considerations give rise to two testable implications about the “emancipation

without compensation” hypothesis: if the probability of emancipation without compensation is

rising over time, then (1) the age-price profile should change over time to reflect the declining

relative value of children and young women, and (2) for a time invariant age-price profile, the

regression residuals for children and childbearing women should decline more than those for

other slaves.


         Age-price profiles have been estimated by different researchers using a variety of

different data sources (Fogel and Engerman 1974; Kotlikoff 1979; Levendis 2007; Choo and Eid

2008; Chenny, St-Amour and Vencatachellum 2003; Fraginals, Klein, and Engerman 1983;

Margo and Steckel 1982; Newland and Segundo 1996; Calomiris and Pritchett 2009). Although

the exact regression specification varies, most authors use a high order (6th degree) polynomial to

estimate this relationship (Fogel and Engerman 1974). The shapes of these age-price profiles are

remarkably similar. The estimated price of a newborn infant is positive but relatively low –

recall the debate between Fogel and Engerman (1974) and Gutman and Sutch (1976, pp. 158-

161) regarding the value of a so-called ”birthright”. Prices rise with age and, for female slaves,

reach a peak in their late teens or early twenties. The prices for males peak in their lower to mid

twenties. For older slaves, prices decrease with age yet remain positive even for slaves in their

fifties and early sixties.




                                                 27
       Rising expectations of emancipation without compensation should affect the shape of the

age-price profile in a predictable fashion. As argued by de Mello (1992), the prices of prime-

aged slaves (those in their twenties) should fall relative to those of older slaves because of the

reduced length of their working life under slavery. Indeed, de Mello finds precisely this

empirical result for Brazilian slaves immediately prior to emancipation in that country. And as

we point out above, the prices of children also should have fallen relative to those of adults. In

unreported regressions, we estimate the age-price profiles that plot the relationship between a

slave’s age and his/her price for sale prior and post Lincoln’s election and plot the estimated age-

price profiles in Figure 6. Both profiles exhibit the same basic shape: Children command

positive prices for all of the time periods, prices reach a maximum for slaves in their early

twenties, and older slaves sold at discount relative to slaves aged twenty years. Note that we do

not observe a flattening of the age-price profile over time, as predicted by de Mello (1992) if

buyers increasingly expected slaves to be emancipated in the near future. The similarity of these

profiles suggests that slave price declines were not the result of slaveholders reassessing the

probability of the future emancipation of their slaves.16


       A closely related test of the emancipation without compensation hypothesis focuses on

the residuals of various subgroups in a model that does not allow the age-price profile to vary

over time. Using regression 1 from Table 2, which assumes a time-invariant age-price profile, we

plot the residuals for different subgroups of slaves. If the assumption of a constant age-price


16
  We perform a simple F-test for the equality of the age-price profiles by estimating separate
polynomials for the time periods before and after Lincoln’s election (November 1860). Not
surprisingly, we reject the null hypothesis that the estimated regression coefficients of the
polynomials are the same (as indicated in Figure 6, the post-November 1860 polynomial lies
beneath the pre-November 1860 polynomial). We fail to reject the null, however, if we allow
for different intercept terms before and after November 1860. In other words, the age-price
profiles appear to be the same with the exception of their predicted heights.
                                                 28
profile were incorrect, then the residuals for the subgroups that include children (aged 0 to 12

years) and young women (aged 16 to 28 years) should decline faster than the other residuals. As

seen in Figure 7, the residuals for both children and young women decrease at approximately the

same rate as those for all slaves in the sample. (Note that the residuals for children appear to be

more volatile than those for other slaves because relatively few children were sold separately.)

The uniform decline in prices confirms the view that a rising expectation of emancipation

without compensation was not the cause of the observed decrease in slave prices from the

summer of 1860 to the summer of 1861.

VII. Conclusion

          The Civil War remains a puzzling event in American political and economic history.

Clearly, those who most pushed for secession – slave owners in the Deep South – were also the

ones most harmed ultimately by the outcome of the Civil War. A close examination of slave

prices from October 1856 through August 1861 shows that these prices can be a useful tool for

gauging how slave market participants viewed the consequences of political events for the risks

that attended slave ownership.


          Identifying linkages between slave prices and political events requires the construction of

a counterfactual model of economic fundamentals to serve as a benchmark against which

movements in actual slave prices related to political events can be gauged. Our model combines

the attributes of individual slaves sold with data on cotton prices and consol prices to estimate

slave price residuals, which reflected the role of other shocks on slave prices, including political

events.


          The slave price residuals reported in Table 3 and Figure 5 display patterns that coincide

reasonably with some of the dominant political events of the time. Not all of the important

                                                  29
political events, however, had large effects on slave prices. The Dred Scott decision was

associated with only a small and statistically insignificant increase in slave prices. The election

of Lincoln was associated with a negative changes in slave prices, but the largest negative

movements in the value of slaves came in the late spring and summer of 1861, after Lincoln took

office and demonstrated a resolve to blockade and invade the South, which apparently was an

unpleasant surprise to slaveholders.


       The slave price decrease in 1860-1861 seems not to have been driven primarily by fears

of emancipation without compensation for slaveholders. Rather, the price decrease was more

generally the result of rising fear of war and its economic consequences for slaveholders—

something that slave-owning advocates of secession had bet against.




                                                 30
                                          References


Basler, Roy P. (2001). Abraham Lincoln: His Speeches and Writings. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Da Capo Press.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Jonathan Pritchett (2009). “Preserving Slave Families for Profit:
Traders Incentives and Pricing in the New Orleans Slave Market,” Journal of Economic History,
69, December 2009, 986-1011.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Larry Schweikart (1991). "The Panic of 1857: Origins,
Transmission, and Containment," Journal of Economic History, December 1991, 807-34.
Chenny, Shirley & St-Amour, Pascal & Vencatachellum, Desire, 2003. "Slave prices from
succession and bankruptcy sales in Mauritius, 1825-1827," Explorations in Economic History,
Elsevier, vol. 40(4), pages 419-442, October.
Choo, Eugene and Jean Eid. “Interregional Price Difference in the New Orleans Auctions Market
for Slaves.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26, no. 4 (2008): 486-509.
de Mello, Pedro C., “Expectation of Abolition and Sanguinity of Coffee Planters in Brazil, 1871-
1881,” in Fogel and Engerman, Without Consent or Contract: Conditions of Slave Life and the
Transition to Freedom, vol 2 (Norton, 1992).

Deyle, Stephen (2009). “An ‘Abominable’ New Trade: The Closing of the African Slave Trade
and the Changing Patterns of U.S. Political Power, 1808-1860.” William and Mary Quarterly, 66
(Oct., 2009), pp. 833-850.
Dusinberre, William (1965). Civil War Issues in Philadelphia, 1856-1865. London: Oxford.
Fehrenbacher, Don E. (1962). Prelude to Greatness: Lincoln in the 1850s. Stanford: Stanford.
Fraginals, Manuel Moreno, Herbert S. Klein and Stanley L. Engerman, “The Level and Structure
of Slave Prices on Cuban Plantations in the Mid-Nineteenth Century: Some Comparative
Perspectives.” American Historical Review, Vol. 88, No. 5 (Dec., 1983), pp. 1201-1218.
Freehling, William W., and Craig M. Simpson (1992). Secession Debated: Georgia’s Showdown
in 1860. New York: Oxford.
Freehling, William W., and Craig M. Simpson (2010). Showdown in Virginia: The 1861
Convention and the Fate of the Union. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
Fogel, Robert W. (1989). Without Consent or Contract: The Rise and Fall of American Slavery.
New York: Norton.
Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Engerman (1974). Time on the Cross: The Economics of
American Negro Slavery. Boston: Little Brown.
Gaeddert, G. Raymond (1974). The Birth of Kansas. Philadelphia: Porcupine Press.

                                               31
Goldin, Claudia (1973). “The Economics of Emancipation,” Journal of Economic History, vol.
33, no 1, (March), pp. 66-85.
Gray, Lewis C. (1933). History of Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860.
Washington: Carnegie Institution.
Kotlikoff, Laurence (1979). “The Structure of Slave Prices in New Orleans, 1804 to 1862.”
Economic Inquiry, 17, pp. 496-517.

Kotlikoff, Laurence (1992). “Quantitative Description of the New Orleans Slave Market, 1804
to 1862,” in Without Consent or Contract: Markets and Production, Technical Papers, 1, Robert
W. Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman (eds.), New York: W. W. Norton. pp. 31-53.

Levendis, John. “Qualities and Effective-Quantities of Slaves in New Orleans.” Southwestern
Economic Review 34, no. 1 (2007): 161-177.

Louisiana, Acts, 1st Leg., (New Orleans, 1806).

Louisiana, Acts, 1st Leg., (New Orleans: John Gibson, State Printer, 1827).

Margo, Robert A., and Richard H. Steckel, “The Heights of American Slaves: New Evidence on Slave
Nutrition and Health,” Social Science History, Vol. 6, No. 4, (Autumn, 1982), pp. 516-538.

Newland, Carlos and María Jesús San Segundo, “Human Capital and Other Determinants of the
Price Life Cycle of a Slave: Peru and La Plata in the Eighteenth Century” Journal of Economic
History, Vol. 56, No. 3 (Sep., 1996), pp. 694-701.
Phillips, Ulrich B. (1918). American Negro Slavery. New York: D. Appleton.
Jonathan Pritchett and Mallorie Smith, “Sequential Sales as a Test of Adverse Selection in the
Market for Slaves,” Journal of Economic History, 73 (June 2013), pp. 479-499.
Jonathan Pritchett and Jessica Hayes, “The Occupations of Slaves Sold in New Orleans: Missing
values, cheap talk, or informative advertising?” Tulane University (2013), pp. 1-30.Ransom,
Roger, and Richard Sutch (1988). “Capitalists Without Capital: The Burden of Slaver and the
Impact of Emancipation.” Agricultural History 62, no. 3, pp. 133-160.
Smith, Walter, and Arthur Cole (1935). Fluctuations in American Business. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Stampp, Kenneth (1965). The Causes of the Civil War. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-
Hall.
Sutch, Richard and Herbert G. Gutman, “Victorians All? The Sexual Mores and Conduct of
Slaves and Their Masters,” in David, et. al., Reckoning With Slavery. Oxford, 1976.
Wahl, Jenny Bourne (2012), “Dred, Panic, War: How a Slave Case Triggered Financial Crisis
and Civil Disunion,” in Paul Finkelman, Donald R. Kennon. Congress and the Crisis of the
1850s. Athens Ohio University Press, 2012, pp 211-259.

                                                  32
Wright, Gavin (1978). The Political Economy of the Cotton South: Households, Markets, and
Wealth in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Norton.
Zarefsky, David (1990). Lincoln, Douglas, and Slavery: In the Crucible of Public Debate.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Yanochik, Mark, Brad Ewing, and Mark Thornton (2001). “A New Perspective on Antebellum
Slavery: Public Policy and Slave Prices. Atlantic Economic Journal 29, no. 3 (Sept.), pp. 330-
40.




                                              33
Table 1: Significant Political Events Related to the Civil War, 1857-July 1861


March 6, 1857             Supreme Court’s Dred Scott decision is announced.
October 1857              Banking Panic of 1857
April 1, 1858             US House of Representatives rejects Kansas statehood under the Lecompton constitution
November 2, 1858          Stephen Douglas defeats Abraham Lincoln for US Senate. Douglas advocates so-called
                          “Freeport Doctrine,” a de facto rejection of the Dred Scott decision.
June 7, 1859              Kansas election of delegates to Wyandotte Constitutional Convention (in which
                          Republicans elected 35 delegates against the Democrats’ 17.
July 5, 1859              Wyandotte Constitutional Convention meets
October 4, 1859           Ratification (by popular vote) of Wyandotte Constitution, despite Democratic opposition
October 16, 1859          John Brown’s Raid on Harpers Ferry
December 2, 1859          John Brown is executed
April 23-May 3, 1860      National Convention in Charleston splits the Democratic Party, helps to ensure
                          Republican victory.
May 8, 1860               Abraham Lincoln nominated as US Republican Presidential Candidate
November 6, 1860          Lincoln wins the Presidential election
December 18, 1860         Crittenden Compromise proposed in US Congress to preserve slavery in South
December 20, 1860         South Carolina secedes
January 9, 1861           Mississippi secedes
January 10, 1861          Florida secedes
January 11, 1861          Alabama secedes
January 18, 1861          Georgia secedes
January 21, 1861          Louisiana secedes
January 29, 1861          Kansas becomes admitted as a state
February 1, 1861          Texas secedes
February 4, 1861          Confederate States of America are formed
February 1861             Attempted Peace Conference
March 2, 1861             Corwin Amendment Passed by US Congress
March 4, 1861             Abraham Lincoln is inaugurated
March 11, 1861            Confederate States Constitution adopted
April 12, 1861            Confederacy fires on Fort Sumter
April 15, 1861            Lincoln mobilizes federal troops
April 17, 1861            Virginia secedes
May 6, 1861               Arkansas secedes
May 7, 1861               Tennessee secedes
May 13, 1861              Queen Victoria recognizes the Confederacy as having “belligerent rights,” signaling
                          possible British intervention on their behalf.
May 20, 1860              North Carolina Secedes
May 23, 1861              West Virginia secedes from Virginia
July 21, 1861             First Battle of Manassas, Confederate victory
July 25, 1861             Crittenden-Johnson Resolution to preserve the Union



                                                        34
                                                     Table 2

                       Regression Results: New Orleans Conveyance Office Slave Sale Records
                                                                                                Descriptive
                               Regression 1         Regression 2           Regression 3
                                                                                                 Statistics


                           estimated             estimated                                                Std.
                                         Std.                  Std.     estimated    Std.     Mean
Covariate                  coefficient   error   coefficient   error   coefficient   error               dev.

Dependent variable:
Logarithm of slave’s
                                                                                              6.907      0.502
price

Logarithm of monthly
cotton price --
                                                  -0.624*      0.040    -0.624*      0.141    0.272      0.083
deseasonalized

Logarithm of British
consol price                                       1.622*      0.151    1.622*       0.630    4.548      0.021

Male
                             0.326*      0.031     0.318*      0.031    0.318*       0.073    0.468      0.499
(1=yes, 0=no)

Light-colored female
                             0.029*      0.010     0.030*      0.010    0.030*       0.011    0.147      0.354
(1=yes, 0=no)

Light-colored male
                             -0.018      0.012     -0.020      0.012     -0.020      0.012    0.090      0.287
(1=yes, 0=no)

Male sold with
guarantee (1=yes, 0=no)      0.115*      0.023     0.144*      0.022    0.144*       0.050    0.446      0.497

Female sold with
guarantee (1=yes, 0=no)      0.314*      0.022     0.334*      0.022    0.334*       0.048    0.510      0.500

Number of children,
ages 1-2, sold with
                             0.033       0.019     0.026       0.018     0.026       0.017    0.057      0.245
mother

Number of children,
                             0.174*      0.019     0.167*      0.019    0.167*       0.016    0.038      0.204
ages 3-5, sold with


                                                        35
                                                      Table 2

                        Regression Results: New Orleans Conveyance Office Slave Sale Records
                                                                                                 Descriptive
                                Regression 1         Regression 2           Regression 3
                                                                                                  Statistics


                            estimated             estimated                                                Std.
                                          Std.                  Std.     estimated    Std.     Mean
Covariate                   coefficient   error   coefficient   error   coefficient   error               dev.

mother

Number of children,
ages 6-9, sold with
                              0.344*      0.018     0.339*      0.018    0.339*       0.017    0.039      0.217
mother

Sold on credit
                              0.064*      0.008     0.065*      0.008    0.065*       0.007    0.242      0.428
(1=yes, 0=no)

Skilled worker
                              0.295*      0.072     0.266*      0.071     0.266       0.150    0.002      0.045
(1=yes, 0=no)

Female with household
occupation (1=yes,
                              0.173       0.116     0.172       0.114     0.172       0.095    0.001      0.028
0=no)

Male with household
occupation (1=yes,
                              0.346       0.190     0.262*      0.186    0.262*       0.123    0.000      0.017
0=no)

Unskilled worker
                              -0.049      0.189     -0.054      0.186     -0.054      0.090    0.000      0.017
(1=yes, 0=no)

Sold with family
member (1=yes, 0=no)         -0.051*      0.021     -0.037      0.020     -0.037      0.020    0.104      0.305

Buyer from New
                             -0.069*      0.008    -0.065*      0.008    -0.065*      0.011    0.659      0.474
Orleans (1=yes, 0=no)
Sold at estate sale
                             -0.067*      0.020    -0.065*      0.019     -0.065      0.035    0.029      0.168
(1=yes, 0=no)

Emancipation or self
purchase (1=yes, 0=no)       -0.169*      0.036    -0.172*      0.035    -0.172*      0.061    0.009      0.092


                                                         36
                                                         Table 2

                          Regression Results: New Orleans Conveyance Office Slave Sale Records
                                                                                                      Descriptive
                                  Regression 1          Regression 2            Regression 3
                                                                                                       Statistics


                              estimated              estimated                                                  Std.
                                            Std.                   Std.      estimated    Std.      Mean
Covariate                     coefficient   error    coefficient   error    coefficient   error                dev.

Sold in group of 2 to 5
slaves (1=yes, 0=no)            0.127*      0.011     0.118*       0.010     0.118*       0.012     0.226      0.419

Sold in group of 6+
slaves (1=yes, 0=no)            0.140*      0.011     0.126*       0.011     0.126*       0.015     0.139      0.346

Age in years
                                0.322*      0.018     0.327*       0.018     0.327*       0.025    25.452     10.827
Age ∙ 10
    2      -2
                               -1.551*      0.193     -1.594*      0.189     -1.594*      0.266     7.650      6.732
Age3 ∙ 10-3
                                0.373*      0.096     0.391*       0.094     0.391*       0.139    26.556     36.908
Age4 ∙ 10-4
                               -0.053*      0.024     -0.057*      0.024      -0.057      0.036    103.848   204.588
Age ∙ 10
    5      -5
                                0.004       0.003      0.005       0.003      0.005       0.005    446.368   1183.410
Age ∙ 10
    6      -6
                               -0.0001      0.0001    -0.0002      0.0001    -0.0002      0.0002   2067.32   7180.360
January (1=yes, 0=no)
                                0.017       0.020      -0.038      0.020      -0.038      0.054     0.114      0.318
February (1=yes, 0=no)
                                0.021       0.020      -0.005      0.020      -0.005      0.051     0.125      0.331
March (1=yes, 0=no)
                                0.013       0.020      0.004       0.019      0.004       0.052     0.141      0.348
April (1=yes, 0=no)
                                0.048*      0.020      0.034       0.020      0.034       0.048     0.109      0.311
May (1=yes, 0=no)
                                0.042*      0.021      0.018       0.020      0.018       0.053     0.091      0.288
June (1=yes, 0=no)
                                0.013       0.021      -0.002      0.021      -0.002      0.060     0.076      0.265
July (1=yes, 0=no)
                                -0.014      0.023      -0.028      0.022      -0.028      0.043     0.051      0.220
September (1=yes,
0=no)                           0.051*      0.025      0.046       0.024      0.046       0.052     0.034      0.182

October (1=yes, 0=no)
                                0.024       0.023      -0.015      0.022      -0.015      0.059     0.054      0.226
November (1=yes,                0.039       0.022      -0.002      0.021      -0.002      0.072     0.067      0.250


                                                            37
                                                        Table 2

                       Regression Results: New Orleans Conveyance Office Slave Sale Records
                                                                                                       Descriptive
                                Regression 1           Regression 2           Regression 3
                                                                                                          Statistics


                            estimated               estimated                                                      Std.
                                           Std.                   Std.     estimated     Std.      Mean
Covariate                   coefficient    error    coefficient   error   coefficient    error                    dev.

0=no)

December (1=yes,
0=no)                         0.002       0.020       -0.029      0.020     -0.029       0.052      0.103         0.304

Intercept
                              4.206*      0.071       -3.020      0.689     -3.020       2.869        1



Number of observations
                              10177                   10177                 10177                  10177
F-statistic
                            361.860*                388.680*               387.450*
R2
                              0.576                   0.593                  0.593
Root MSE
                              0.328                   0.321                  0.321
        Source: Slave sale data: New Orleans Conveyance records. Cotton prices: L. C. Gray, History of
        Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860 2 (Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington,
        1933), p. 1027. The British consol price is the end-of-month closing price on 3% consols.
        Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of the slave’s price. The omitted variable refers to an
        unguaranteed dark-colored female, sold singly for cash to an out-of-town buyer in August. For
        Regression 3, standard errors are clustered by month of sale.
        * indicates the regression coefficient is statistically different from zero at the 5 percent level.




                                                           38
                                 Table 3
                        Price Trends, 1856 -- 1861
                                 Change Over Time in Average Monthly Residuals

Time Period                         Regression 1              Regression 2
Oct. 1856 – Mar. 1857                   0.107                    0.176
Mar. 1857 – Nov. 1857                   -0.130                   -0.101
Nov. 1857 – May 1860                    0.326                    0.154
May 1860 – Nov. 1860                    -0.155                   -0.091
Nov. 1860 – Apr. 1861                   -0.012                   0.048
Apr. 1861 – Aug. 1861                   -0.219                   -0.278
May 1860 – Aug. 1861                    -0.386                   -0.321
Source: Table 2.




                                   39
                                           Table 4
                                       Event Analysis
          Estimated percentage price change six weeks prior and six weeks post event
Date                      Event                                       Estimated Price Change
March 6, 1857              Dred Scott                                             0.048
                           Congress rejects Kansas statehood under
April 1, 1858                                                                     0.046
                           Lecompton constitution
October 16, 1859           John Brown’s raid on Harpers Ferry                     0.012
May 8, 1860                Lincoln nominated for U.S. President                  0.057*
November 6, 1860           Lincoln elected U.S. President                        -0.132*
December 20, 1860          South Carolina secedes from U.S.                       0.020
April 12, 1861             Confederacy fires on Ft. Sumter                        -0.045
                            First Battle of Manassas,
July 21, 1861                                                                        -0.168*
                            Confederate victory
Source: New Orleans Conveyance records. The changes are the differences between indicator
variables that are added to a regression otherwise identical to the first regression in Table 2.




                                                40
Figure 1 -- Frequency of New Orleans slave sales, 1856 – 1861, Conveyance records




                                           41
Figure 2 -- Predicted Age-Price Profile from Regression 1, Table 2.




                                            42
Figure 3 – Plot of monthly means of residuals from Regression 1, Table 2.




                                            43
Figure 4 -- Annual Cotton Prices and Production




                                          44
Figure 5 - Index of slave prices, Oct. 1856 - Aug. 1861
Source: regression 2, Table 2.




                                               45
Figure 6 -- Predicted Age-Price Profiles for Unskilled Males sold with Warranties




                                            46
Figure 7 - Plot of monthly mean of residuals for Regression 2, Table 2.




                                             47
