                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE CONSEQUENCES OF TEENAGE CHILDBEARING BEFORE ROE V WADE

                                             Kevin Lang
                                           Russell Weinstein

                                         Working Paper 19627
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19627


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2013




We are grateful to John Bound for a very helpful and encouraging conversation and to Sandy Korenman
and Bob Margo for helpful comments and suggestions. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kevin Lang and Russell Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing Before Roe v Wade
Kevin Lang and Russell Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 19627
November 2013
JEL No. I31,J12,J13

                                             ABSTRACT

Using data from three cycles of the National Survey of Family Growth, we investigate whether there
were adverse consequences of teenage childbearing in the 1950s and 1960s, when most abortions were
illegal, and access to the pill was limited. We find negative effects of teen motherhood on the likelihood
of obtaining at least 12 years of education and on the number of marriages. We find positive effects
of teen motherhood on family income, and, unsurprisingly, on the number of children. These effects
are heterogeneous by predicted education. For those with high levels of predicted education, giving
birth does not affect educational attainment but increases the probability of being divorced. For those
predicted to be on the margin of high school completion, giving birth has strong negative effects on
12th grade completion and age at first marriage, while increasing the probability of never having married.
In general, for less advantaged teens, motherhood appears to have increased expected family income
but also the risk of not graduating from high school and never marrying. We find surprisingly little
evidence that births affected teens conceiving pre- and post-marriage differently.


Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
lang@bu.edu

Russell Weinstein
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd
Boston, MA 02215
weinst@bu.edu
1       Introduction

There is a growing consensus among economists that while women who give birth as teens
have worse adult outcomes than those who do not, the causal e¤ect of teen motherhood on the
mothers is small and possibly zero. But the supporting evidence comes almost entirely from
a period when abortion was legal and e¤ective contraception readily available. Teens who
anticipate that motherhood would have signi…cant adverse consequences can avoid pregnancy
even if they engage in sex, and, if they become pregnant, can terminate the pregnancy. It
would not be surprising if the teens who give birth are those who anticipate that motherhood
will not adversely a¤ect their lives.
    Little is known about the consequences of teen motherhood in periods when abortion
and contraception are less available, for example before Roe v Wade in the United States or
similar periods elsewhere.1 In these periods, it is possible that some of the teens giving birth
would make, or be forced to make, di¤erent investment decisions as a result of motherhood.
The popular view is that an out-of-wedlock birth was a social and economic disaster, and
the alternative for a pregnant teen was a premature marriage. In their discussion of the
decline of shotgun marriages, Akerlof, Yellen and Katz (1996) suggest that the consequences
for the mother and the e¤ect on the reputation of the father were su¢ ciently severe that the
shotgun was rarely necessary.
    Even if conception occurs after marriage, currently we generally view early marriages as
undesirable, especially if they give rise to an early pregnancy and motherhood. We believe
that it is important that girls …nish high school before becoming mothers, and most girls
marrying and conceiving before turning 18 will not have done so. Moreover, today we are
inclined to believe that sixteen and seventeen year olds are too young to decide whether to
marry. But did today’s perspective apply in the 1950s and 60s? While rare today, it was not
all that uncommon in the 1950s and 1960s for a girl to marry before her 18th birthday even
though she was not pregnant. This suggests that many people viewed such early marriages
as reasonable, and perhaps they were right. On the other hand, those marrying in the 1950s
and, to a lesser extent, the early 1960s would face signi…cant social and legal barriers to
divorce. Women marrying when very young might …nd themselves stuck in bad matches.
Even when divorce became more readily available, their remarriage prospects may have been
reduced by the presence of one or more children. And we now know that within one or two
decades, social and economic change would greatly increase the labor force participation of
married women. It is plausible that women who had married and had children early and
    1
    Bailey (2013) examines changes in individuals’legal and …nancial access to contraception (though not
abortion), and …nds suggestive evidence of long-run consequences for the individuals’children.


                                                   1
therefore not completed high school would face serious disadvantages.
    In this paper we draw on three waves of the National Survey of Family Growth (1982,
1988 and 1995) to study adult outcomes among women who conceived as teenagers (less
than 18) between 1951 and 1969. In this period, neither legal abortion nor highly e¤ective
contraception were available to teens. These are the earliest data of which we are aware on
pregnancy outcomes for a representative sample of teens.
    In 1972, the Supreme Court decision Eisenstadt v. Baird guaranteed unmarried adults
legal access to contraception. Its 1977 Carey v. Population Services International decision
struck down a New York State law prohibiting the sale or distribution of contraceptives
to individuals less than sixteen years old and permitting the sale of contraceptives only by
pharmacists. A detailed review of parental noti…cation laws is beyond the scope of this
paper,2 but it is safe to say that teenagers have had legal access to e¤ective contraception
either over the counter or by prescription since the 1970s. For those who did not use e¤ective
contraception or for whom it failed, the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision guaranteed legal access
to abortion, although admittedly funding restrictions, parental noti…cation laws and other
restrictions especially since the 1990s have reduced access.
    We focus on conceptions before 1969. While other forms of contraception, notably con-
doms, were widely available, before 1969 only 10 states allowed unmarried, childless women
under the age of 21 to obtain the pill legally without parental consent. Such laws were fol-
lowed closely because the pill required a prescription from a licensed physician and sale by
a licensed pharmacist, and violation of the laws was subject to signi…cant penalties (Bailey,
2006). In addition, before 1969 legal abortions were extremely rare in all states.
    We follow a standard approach in the recent literature, limiting our sample to women
who …rst conceived as teens and compare those whose …rst conception ended in a live birth
with those for whom it ended in a miscarriage.3 This approach relies on the assumption
that in the absence of abortions, miscarriage is random, an assumption supported by our
data. We provide evidence that abortion was rare for our sample and show that the bias from
abortions is therefore small. Consequently, comparing women who gave birth and miscarried
as teens provides us with (nearly) unbiased estimates of the e¤ects of teen motherhood on
adult outcomes.
    Our results are strikingly di¤erent from those obtained using more recent data (e.g.
Ashcraft, Fernandez-Val and Lang, 2013). We …nd a very large adverse e¤ect on high school
completion, particularly among those whom we predict would otherwise complete twelve
   2
    See Maradiegue (2003) for more detail.
   3
    We use nontechnical language. We refer to spontaneous abortions as miscarriages and induced abortions
as abortions.



                                                   2
years of schooling. This group marries earlier and is also more likely never to have married.
Among those with higher levels of predicted schooling, those giving birth are more likely to be
divorced or separated. The e¤ects of motherhood for the most disadvantaged teens are less
clear. For this group, we …nd large adverse e¤ects of motherhood on high school completion,
and a higher probability both of entering into early marriage and never having married in
one speci…cation but much more modest e¤ects that are not statistically signi…cant in a
second.
    These …ndings suggest that, except for a higher rate of divorce, the more advantaged
were largely able to o¤set the adverse e¤ects of teen motherhood. But a broad middle group
(and perhaps also those least advantaged) did enter into early marriage or never married
and failed to complete high school. However, this group also tends to have higher family
incomes, suggesting that while there were risks associated with teen motherhood, there was
also a positive expected payo¤. We …nd surprisingly little evidence that births a¤ected teens
conceiving pre- and post-marriage di¤erently. The adverse e¤ect on high school graduation
is clearer among those conceiving out-of-wedlock and the bene…cial e¤ect on family income
is clearer for those conceiving after marriage but in neither case is the di¤erence between the
two groups statistically signi…cant.
    Finally, we note that the proportion of pregnancies that were out-of-wedlock conceptions
trended upward during our period and the proportion of those ending in marriage prior to
the birth trended downward. Nevertheless, we …nd little or no evidence of trends in the
teens’outcomes.


2    Miscarriage and Teen Births
There have been a variety of approaches to measuring the e¤ect of teen motherhood on
the mothers. Early work largely ignored the potential endogeneity of teen motherhood
and compared outcomes controlling for only a modest number of possible confounding fac-
tors. However, there is an important strand of the literature, beginning with Geronimus
and Korenman (1992), that relies on matching estimators including comparisons of sisters.
Holmlund (2005) compares sisters and controls for educational performance before preg-
nancy. She …nds a modest adverse e¤ect on educational attainment. Sanders, Smith and
Zhang (2007) use propensity score matching and also …nd adverse e¤ects on educational
attainment while Levine and Painter (2003) match women within schools using the National
Education Longitudinal Survey and …nd adverse e¤ects on both education and earnings.
    In contrast, instrumental variables approaches frequently …nd little or no e¤ect, but
here too, we …nd variation in the results. One common approach has been to use age at

                                              3
menarche as an instrument (often in combination with other instruments). Ribar (1994)
estimates insigni…cant or bene…cial e¤ects of early childbearing on educational attainment
while Chevalier and Viitanen (2003) and Klepinger, Lundberg and Plotnick (1999) document
more adverse e¤ects. Walker and Zhu (2009) who use exogenous variation in school-leaving
age …nd no e¤ects on employment.
    Our focus is on miscarriage. Relying on the fact that miscarriage is largely medically
exogenous, Hotz, McElroy and Sanders (1998, 2005) use miscarriage as an instrument. They
…nd that teen motherhood has only a small e¤ect on completed fertility and modest adverse
impacts on education and labor market outcomes. Goodman, Kaplan and Walker (2004)
and Ermisch and Pevalin (2003) also use miscarriage as an instrument and …nd only small,
generally insigni…cant results.
    However, Ashcraft and Lang (2006), while accepting the argument that miscarriage is
largely medically random, point out that it is not socially random. Potential miscarriages
are often preempted by an abortion. In the standard approach, miscarriage is used as an
instrument for not giving birth. Implicitly (or explicitly in the reduced form), women who
miscarried as teens are compared with those who either gave birth or had an abortion. But
teenagers who would otherwise abort their pregnancy are underrepresented among those who
miscarry because early abortions preclude a miscarriage. Building on this insight, Fletcher
and Wolfe (2009) show that miscarriage is nonrandom and can be predicted by the frequency
of abortion in the individual’s neighborhood. Ashcraft and Lang show pregnant teenagers
who have abortions tend to be drawn from more favoured backgrounds than those who do
not. Consequently, girls who miscarry are not a random sample of pregnant teenagers, and
are drawn disproportionately from disadvantaged backgrounds. The IV estimator therefore
underestimates the true costs of teenage childbearing. Using miscarriage as an instrument
biased the …ndings towards a benign view of teenage childbearing.
    Ashcraft and Lang analyze a second approach: ordinary least squares (OLS) on miscar-
riages and births only. Since some miscarriages preempt abortions, the set of teens who
miscarry is more favorably selected than those who give birth. Consequently OLS is biased
toward a more adverse view of teen motherhood. Ashcraft, Fernandez-Val and Lang (2013)
present two approaches to consistent estimation. The …rst is to derive a consistent estimate
as a weighted average of the OLS and IV estimates. The second involves estimating the
number of abortion types included in the miscarriages and purging the miscarriage group
of their expected outcomes. This yields a consistent estimate of the miscarriage outcome
among those who would otherwise have given birth. Both approaches show modest, generally
statistically insigni…cant e¤ects on adult outcomes.
    From our perspective, the important point is that the bias from estimating the e¤ect


                                             4
of teen motherhood by comparing those who gave birth and those who miscarried comes
from the fact that a nontrivial fraction of the teens who miscarry would otherwise have had
abortions. We argue below that for the period we study, this fraction is likely to be small.


3       Induced Abortion
While Roe v. Wade legalized abortion throughout the United States in 1973, even before
this decision states had begun liberalizing their abortion laws. Before 1967, abortion was
a crime in all states except to save the life (in some states also to preserve the health) of
the mother.4 In 1967 and 1968, two states made abortion legal if it was performed by a
licensed physician, and the physical or mental health of the mother or child was endangered,
or if the pregnancy was the result of rape or incest. Seven states passed similar laws in
1969 and three more did so in 1970. One state adopted similar legislation in 1969, but
added that in addition to the mother’s physical or mental health, account could be taken
of her total environment, actual or reasonably foreseeable. Four states completely repealed
their legislation banning abortion in 1970, but required that the abortion be done early in
the pregnancy and by a licensed physician. In the remaining 33 states abortion remained
generally illegal with the exceptions noted above. Thus, before 1969, legal abortion was only
available in two states and then only under fairly restrictive conditions. It started to become
more widely available in 1969, and by 1970 was plausibly su¢ ciently available as to be a
signi…cant factor in understanding teen births. According to data compiled by Johnston
(2013), reported abortions grew from 1,028 in 1966 to 2,061 in 1967, to 6,211 in 1968 to
27,512 in 1969 and 193,491 in 1970.5
    While legal abortion was not widely available pre-1969, some women did have abortions
through illegal means. By its nature, the incidence of illegal abortion is di¢ cult to estimate.
In 1959, it was estimated that somewhere between 200,000 and 1.2 million illegal abortions
were obtained per year in the United States (Calderone 1960).6 Estimates at the upper
end of this range imply that legal abortions simply replaced illegal ones. The number of
legal abortions in the United States did not reach 1.2 million until 1976 (Johnston 2013).
    4
     This history comes from Roemer (1971).
    5
     Before Roe v. Wade, “therapeutic abortions”were generally performed if psychiatrists believed that the
mother would commit suicide if the abortion was not performed. Interpretation of this law was inconsistently
applied, with the legal therapeutic abortion rate higher on private services than on ward services (Calderone
1960). Calderone quotes a participant at a conference of the American Public Health Association as saying
that the di¤erence between an illegal abortion and a legal therapeutic abortion was “$300 and knowing the
right person” (Calderone 1960).
   6
     Some women, likely only a small fraction, went abroad to have abortions in countries where it was legal,
for example Japan, Mexico, England, Scandinavia, and Puerto Rico (Greenhouse and Siegel 2012).



                                                     5
Our data imply that roughly 2 percent of …rst teen pregnancies before 1969 ended in an
induced abortion. Ashcraft, Fernandez-Val and Lang (2013) estimate that roughly 75%
of legal abortions are reported in a closely related data set. Even an abortion rate of 3
percent would imply noticeably fewer illegal abortions than even the lower range of the expert
guestimates (In 1959 there were approximately 4.2 million live births in the United States (US
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare 1959)). Either the illegal abortion rate was
lower for teens than for adults, higher for subsequent pregnancies, the experts guessed too
high or the underreporting of abortions is much more serious for this group. It is impossible
to establish the relative importance of these factors conclusively. However, there is little
reason to expect that underreporting of abortions would be particularly problematic for this
sample. We use recall data from 1982, 1988 and 1995 when the laws making those abortions
illegal had long since been voided. Moreover, the frequency with which pre-1970 pregnancies
are reported as having ended in an abortion is unrelated to the survey year.
    In our data, described below, the miscarriage rate is about 7 percent. This is lower than
currently estimated, but as Lang and Nuevo (2012) show, miscarriage rates have been rising,
probably because home pregnancy tests have increased awareness of pregnancy. Let us be
conservative and assume that 10 percent of teens miscarry su¢ ciently late in pregnancy to
be symptomatic and that 3 percent of teens would have abortions if they were aware of
being pregnant. Given that miscarriage is medically random, this means that 0.3 percent of
teens are both miscarriage and abortion types. Roughly speaking, from Ashcraft, Fernandez-
Val and Lang, half of these will miscarry and half will have abortions. So the fraction of
abortion types among teens who miscarry is about 1.5 percent. The bias from including
these abortion types is approximately .015 times the di¤erence in outcomes between women
who have abortions and those who would choose to give birth but miscarry. Any bias is very
small and is mitigated by our ability to control for di¤erences in observables.


4    Data
We use cycles III (1982), IV (1988) and V (1995) of the National Survey of Family Growth
(NSFG), a survey of non-institutionalized women aged 15-44, administered by the National
Center for Health Statistics, an agency of the United States Department of Health and
Human Services. Personal interviews were conducted with the respondents to collect data
on pregnancy history, family planning, as well as many social, economic, and demographic
characteristics. The 1982 survey contains a sample of 7,969 women, the 1988 survey 8,450,
and the 1995 survey 10,847 women. Following Ashcraft, Fernandez-Val and Lang (2013), we
de…ne teen pregnancies as …rst conceptions that occur before age 18.

                                              6
    As we include pregnancies in later years, we risk both more bias due to a growing number
of abortions and including years where the growing availability of abortion and the pill
changed who gave birth as a teen. This must be weighed against the loss of power as we set
an earlier cuto¤. In order to enlarge the sample size, we had originally planned to present
primary results restricting the sample to women who …rst conceived before 1970 and to
show results excluding those who conceived in 1969 as a robustness check. However, we
have reversed the priority for two reasons. Firstly, because the results are stronger when
excluding conceptions in 1969. Secondly, and more importantly, because of the dramatic
increase in the availability of abortion in 1969, as seen in our analysis of state abortion laws
and abortion rates in the previous section. The reader should be aware that there is some
element of “data-mining”in this decision.
    Note that by 1995, only the oldest women in the sample could have become pregnant as
a teen before 1970. Therefore, most of our sample comes from cycles III and IV. We de…ne
all pregnancies reported to have resulted in a miscarriage or a stillbirth within the …rst 22
weeks or …ve months of pregnancy as “miscarriages.”Thus we exclude outcomes reported as
miscarriages if the pregnancy lasted more than …ve months and include the one pregnancy
reported to end in a stillbirth at 5 months.7 Twenty weeks is a more standard cuto¤ for
distinguishing between miscarriages and other forms of fetal death, but the duration of
pregnancy is often reported in months in our data. Moreover, as the Supreme Court noted
in Roe v. Wade, at that time viability before 28 weeks was rare and the Court felt it was
safe to declare that a fetus was not viable before 24 weeks. Extending the de…nition of
miscarriages to the four stillbirths reported at six months might be problematic since a live
birth is also reported at six months.8
    Our principal sample of those conceiving as teens before 1969 consists of 1058 …rst preg-
nancies that result in birth, 79 in miscarriage, and 20 that end in an abortion.9 When we
   7
     Following Lang and Nuevo (2012), we exclude ectopic pregnancies since respondents were only explicitly
asked about this outcome in 1995. Including ectopic pregnancies may introduce bias from the changing
treatment of this outcome over the cycles. Women who do not remember the number of weeks at which the
miscarriage or stillbirth occurred are asked for the month or trimester in which this outcome occurred. We
treat miscarriages or stillbirths reported to have occurred in the …rst and second trimesters as “miscarriages.”
None of the women with teen pregnancies before 1969 report that their …rst pregnancy ended in a miscarriage
after 22 weeks. Thus, assuming that reported second trimester miscarriages occur in the …rst 22 weeks is
reasonable.
   8
     In contrast with “miscarriage,” late fetal death is predicted in our data by socioeconomic factors which
makes it important to restrict the sample in this way.
   9
     We note that there are eight observations who report a live birth after less than 4 weeks of pregnancy,
when asked for pregnancy duration in weeks. However, when asked for the duration in months they report
either 8 or 9 months. We thus continue to include these observations. There is one observation who reports
a live birth, but does not report the duration. Since we are interested in the e¤ect of motherhood, the
duration of the pregnancy for a live birth is not important, and so we include this observation.



                                                       7
include conceptions in 1969, the sample consists of 1,231 …rst pregnancies that resulted in
birth and 99 in miscarriage. There are also 34 respondents (2.5%) who report a pregnancy
ending in an abortion. This re‡ects a much higher abortion rate in 1969 than in the previous
years.
    There is some concern that miscarriages are underreported. Many miscarriages occur
very early in pregnancy and are often asymptomatic (Pandya et al. 1996). Moreover, since
this paper uses recall data, it is possible that women forget miscarriages that happened
long ago. Lang and Nuevo (2012) …nd no evidence that the reported miscarriage rate in a
given year is higher in more recent cycles of the NSFG, for either all miscarriages or just
for early miscarriages. We con…rm that in our data the miscarriage rate for a given year is
independent of the survey year. This mitigates our concern that recall bias is an issue for
our analysis.
    Nonreporting of miscarriages, because the woman was never aware of being pregnant,
has forgotten the miscarriage or simply chooses not to report it, will be problematic only if
the tendency to recognize and report a miscarriage is related to future outcomes. Below we
will con…rm that reported miscarriage is unrelated to measured background characteristics
in our data.
    We focus on 9 outcome variables. The …rst two are measures of education: years of educa-
tional attainment, and an indicator for whether the individual obtained at least twelve years
of education. The next variables are related to marital history: age at …rst marriage, total
number of marriages, whether currently married, whether currently divorced or separated
and whether the respondent was never married. We also consider family income.10 However,
the income data are somewhat problematic because they are reported in 17 intervals in each
year, and we impute income using these intervals.11 Finally, we look at the number of live
births. Observations are weighted by the sampling weights of the survey, normalized so that
the weighted sample size for each survey equals the actual sample size for that survey.
    Table 1 presents weighted means and standard deviations for the variables in the em-
  10
     Early work also examined whether the woman was working at the time of the survey, but the standard
errors were too large to exclude either very large positive or very large negative e¤ects.
  11
     In 1982 and 1988, there are 17 intervals which we impute as follows: less than $2,500 ($1,250),
$2,500-$4,999 ($3,750), $5,000-$5,999 ($5,500), $6,000-$6,999 ($6,500), $7,000-$7,999 ($7,500), $8,000-$8,999
($8,500), $9,000-$9,999 ($9,500), $10,000-$10,999 ($10,500), $11,000-$11,999 ($11,500), $12,000-$12,999
($12,500), $13,000-$14,999 ($13,999), $15,000-$16,999 ($15,999), $17,000-$19,999 ($17,999), $20,000-$24,999
($22,499), $25,000-$34,999 ($29,999), $35,000-$49,999 ($42,499), $50,000 and more ($74,499).
  In 1995, there are 18 intervals which we impute as follows: less than $7,000 ($3,500), $7,000-$8,499
($7,750), $8,500-$9,999 ($9,250), $10,000-$11,999 ($10,999), $12,000-$13,999 ($12,999), $14,000-$15,999
($14,999), $16,000-$17,999 ($16,999), $18,000-$19,999 ($18,999), $20,000-$24,999 ($22,499), $25,000-$29,999
($27,499), $30,000-$39,999 ($34,499), $40,000-$49,999 ($44,499), $50,000-$59,999 ($54,499), $60,000-$69,999
($64,499), $70,000-$79,999 ($74,499), $80,000-$89,999 ($84,499), $90,000-$99,999 ($94,499), $100,000 and up
($124,499).


                                                     8
pirical speci…cation, by birth outcome. The outcome variables are listed …rst. With a few
exceptions, there are only minor, and statistically insigni…cant di¤erences in these outcome
variables between teens who miscarry and those who give birth. However, teens who give
birth are 10 percentage points less likely to obtain at least twelve years of education, although
this falls short of statistical signi…cance at conventional levels. They have had almost .5 fewer
marriages and about .6 more live births (statistically signi…cant at the .01 level). Their fam-
ily income is higher by about $5000, though this di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant.
Teens who give birth are approximately eight percentage points more likely to be black,
signi…cant at the .05 level. Those giving birth are 11 percentage points less likely to be
Protestant, and 10 percentage points more likely to be Catholic, both signi…cant at the .05
level. It is not surprising that a few of the 14 explanatory variables would be signi…cantly
di¤erent at the .05 level. Using the Bonferroni adjustment for 14 tests, and adjusting for
the average correlation between the 14 variables, none of the di¤erences in the explanatory
variables are signi…cant at the .1 level. The similarity in these explanatory variables across
pregnancy outcome provides evidence that miscarriages in this period are biologically and
socially random. We examine this in greater detail below.
    The third column of Table 1 shows that the few individuals who have abortions are
positively selected. Relative to those giving birth, they are less likely to have conceived
before the age of 15 and less likely to be Hispanic; their mothers have more education,
and their own predicted education levels are higher.12 They also have better outcomes:
they obtain more education, their family income is higher, and they are less likely to be
currently divorced. The table additionally shows that they are older at their …rst marriage.
As discussed in the previous section, because so few teens have abortions during this period,
the positive selection into abortion will result in only very minimal bias.


5      Empirical Strategy
If reported miscarriages are random, there are no abortions, and miscarriage does not directly
a¤ect adult outcomes, then simply comparing mean outcomes for women who gave birth with
those who miscarried provides an unbiased estimate of the causal e¤ect of teen motherhood
on adult outcomes, for women like those who become pregnant as teens. We have argued that
the frequency of abortion during the period we study is su¢ ciently low to be inconsequential.
We will provide additional evidence that miscarriage is random. Thus, we need go no further
than table 1. And if contrary to our implicit assumption, miscarriage a¤ects adult outcomes
  12
    These statistics mitigate the concern that Hispanics may have had more access to abortion services if
they regularly traveled to countries where abortion was legal (for example Mexico and Puerto Rico).


                                                   9
directly, at least we measure the e¤ect of a pregnancy ending in a birth relative to a pregnancy
ending in miscarriage.
    However, the standard errors of the estimates in that table are frequently quite high. Even
though our point estimate is that teen motherhood reduces the probability of completing at
least twelve years of schooling by 10 percentage points, we cannot reject the null hypothesis
of no e¤ect. If we can control for other factors that a¤ect adult outcomes, we can increase
the precision of our estimates. Moreover, if reported miscarriages are not random, these
additional controls can reduce bias. Therefore, we use a straightforward ordinary least
squares regression:

                                      y=     +X +         1 Birth   +"                                   (1)

to measure the e¤ect of teen motherhood for 9 separate dependent variables, y:
     The variables in X include the respondent’s current age, age at …rst conception and a
dummy if this age was less than 15, respondent’s mother’s education, two indicators for the
cycle of the survey, Hispanic, black, white, Protestant, Catholic, whether during most of
the respondent’s childhood her mother worked (either full- or part-time), and whether the
respondent lived with both parents at age 14.13 Birth is an indicator equal to one if the …rst
pregnancy resulted in a birth, and equal to zero if it resulted in a miscarriage. We limit the
sample to women whose …rst teen pregnancy ended in either a birth or a miscarriage.
     One explanation for the absence of adverse e¤ects of teen motherhood is that more
advantaged teens can readily avoid motherhood and choose to do so because of its large
cost. More advantaged teens in the 1950s and 1960s could reduce or eliminate the risk of
pregnancy by using less e¤ective methods of birth control or practicing abstinence. However,
it is plausible that during this period teens for whom giving birth would be costly were more
likely to give birth than they are now. Alternatively, disadvantaged teens might have had
fewer options for mitigating the e¤ects of a birth than they have currently. For example,
it is now more common for high schools to permit and even support attendance by teens
with babies. This suggests that we should interact Birth with measures of socioeconomic
advantage.
     Because our sample of miscarriages is relatively small, it is not feasible to interact Birth
with each of the background measures. Instead, we use the individuals in the three cycles
of the NSFG who were born before 1951 and who …rst conceived at age 18 or older. For
  13
    The indicator for whether the respondent lived with both parents at the age of 14 is not available in the
1995 survey. We set the variable equal to zero in 1995, and include indicators for the year of the survey
in the regressions. Since the education of the respondent’s mother, and whether the respondent’s mother
is working, are missing for some of the respondents, we include indicators for whether these variables are
missing and set the variables to zero for those for whom it is missing.


                                                     10
these individuals, we regress education on the explanatory variables in X above, excluding
age at …rst conception and the indicator for age at conception less than 15. We use the
coe¢ cients from this regression to create a predicted education index for each individual in
our teen pregnancy sample of pre-1969 conceptions.14 Predicted education for our sample
ranges from about eight to seventeen years. The 90/10 range is roughly 11 to 14. For
ease of interpretation, we have rescaled predicted education to (predicted education -12). In
the regressions below, the coe¢ cient on Birth should be interpreted as the e¤ect of teen
motherhood for someone with 12 years of predicted education.
   Using these predicted education levels, we then estimate:

                            y=      +X +        1 Birth   +   2 Birth
                                                                        c +"
                                                                        Ed                               (2)
       c is the predicted education level of the respondent minus 12. We are not able to
where Ed
            c in the regressions above, since we include all of the variables that are used to
control for Ed
         c
predict Ed:
    To allow for nonlinearities in the e¤ect of predicted education, we also estimate the
following:


            y=      +X +          c2
                                1 Ed   +   2 Birth   +    3 Birth
                                                                    c+
                                                                    Ed     4 Birth
                                                                                     c 2 + ":
                                                                                     Ed                  (3)


6      Results
6.1     Are reported miscarriages random?
Ashcraft, Fernandez-Val and Lang (2013) review the medical literature on miscarriage and
conclude that the medical evidence for large behavioral e¤ects on miscarriage is relatively
weak. Ashcraft and Lang (2006), however, point out that since the decision to have an
abortion is nonrandom, miscarriages are as well. And Lang and Nuevo (2012) show that
reported miscarriages are drawn from a more advantaged population, presumably because
of greater awareness of pregnancy.
    In table 1, we report the relation between birth outcome and predicted education, a sum-
mary measure of socioeconomic advantage. The di¤erence in predicted education between
  14
     We note that if teens who expect to get less education are more likely to become pregnant, this is not
a consistent estimate of each teen’s expected education in the absence of a teen birth. Indeed, we …nd that
teens who miscarry get almost two years less education than “predicted.” However, their actual education
is strongly increasing in their predicted education. We cannot reject at the .05 level that the slope is one,
but this re‡ects small sample size rather than a point estimate close to one.



                                                     11
those giving birth and those miscarrying is .01 years, suggesting that the two groups come
from similar backgrounds.
    In table 2 we report the result of a linear probability model in which we regress the
pregnancy outcome on our controls. Only two of the t-statistics exceed 1 and neither of
these approaches statistical signi…cance at conventional levels. The F-statistic is 1 and the
R-squared is .02. In sum, there is no evidence that reported miscarriages are nonrandom.
Because the probability of miscarriage is only about 7% in this sample, there is a risk
that di¤erent distributional assumptions would give di¤erent results. The second and third
columns of table 2 show probit and logit estimates. The individual estimated coe¢ cients
remain far from statistically signi…cant. The coe¢ cients are not jointly signi…cant; however,
in the logit estimation they approach statistical signi…cance, with p = :12.
    We note that if either nonreporting of miscarriages were nonrandom or the abortion rate
were much higher than we report, miscarriages would be predictable. Our inability to predict
miscarriage supports the view that unreported, previously illegal, abortions are not a major
factor.


6.2    Adult outcomes
Table 3 presents the results from speci…cation (1). Each column represents a separate regres-
sion, with the dependent variables listed across the …rst row. Our point estimate ( 0:20)
of the e¤ect of teen motherhood on average education is small and statistically insigni…cant
although we cannot rule out modest adverse e¤ects. However, we …nd that those who give
birth are 14 percentage points less likely to obtain at least 12 years of education than those
who miscarry, signi…cant at the .05 level.
    The point estimates suggest that those giving birth as teens get married about a half year
earlier, are slightly more likely to be currently married, slightly more likely to be currently
divorced or separated, and slightly more likely never to have married, but these e¤ects fall
well short of statistical signi…cance at conventional levels. Interestingly, they have had .3
fewer marriages (signi…cant at the .05 level). This is driven by their much greater tendency
to be married only once. They are 20 percentage points more likely to have been married
exactly once with no controls and 17 percentage points more likely if we control for other
factors (neither result shown). Teen mothers appear to be both substantially less likely to
divorce following their …rst marriage and less likely to remarry if they do.
    Unsurprisingly, those giving birth as teens have more children. We note that this need
not be causal. Women with a history of miscarriage are more likely to miscarry during
subsequent pregnancies.


                                              12
    Family income is substantially higher for those giving birth than for those who miscarry
and is signi…cant at the .05 level, although we feel the need for caution since this is the one
variable with substantial missing data and has been converted from a categorical variable.
Nevertheless, assuming the result is real, it may re‡ect that those giving birth are somewhat
more likely to be married, and also perhaps more likely to be receiving alimony since they
are more likely to be divorced with children.
    We do not discuss the remaining explanatory variables except to note that they generally
enter in the expected way. Table 3 suggests that teen motherhood has an e¤ect on education
and marital outcomes; these e¤ects will be further explored in the following tables.

6.2.1   Heterogeneity by Predicted Education

Table 3 imposes that a teen birth had similar e¤ects regardless of the teen’s family back-
ground and future prospects. Studies based on more recent data …nd little e¤ect of teen
motherhood, largely because teen mothers are drawn from groups whose education and job
prospects are already poor. We might therefore expect that in the earlier period we study,
adverse e¤ects would be more prominent among the more advantaged teens who give birth.
On the other hand, very advantaged teens may be more able to overcome any adverse e¤ects.
    Therefore, in table 4 we present the results from speci…cations (2) and (3). Each column
represents a separate regression. The explanatory variables for each of these regressions are
the same as in table 3, but in the top panel we include predicted education, rescaled to
predicted education minus 12, interacted with birth. Predicted education is not included by
itself because all of the variables that enter the predicted education calculation are included
independently in the speci…cation. This speci…cation allows the e¤ect of a teen birth to
increase or decrease with this summary measure of background. In the lower panel we add
predicted education squared and its interaction with a teen birth to allow for a somewhat
more complex relation between family background and the e¤ect of a teen birth.
    In both speci…cations, the coe¢ cient on Birth can be interpreted as the e¤ect of teen
motherhood for someone with 12 years of predicted education. In both panels the top rows
present the coe¢ cients on the birth variables. Below these coe¢ cients, we show the p-value
for the hypothesis that the two or three birth coe¢ cients are jointly 0. The last two rows
show the estimated e¤ects of a birth for individuals with predicted education of 10 and
14 years (rescaled to -2 and +2). It will be apparent that in no case does the interaction
with the squared term approach statistical signi…cance. However, the Bayesian Information
Criterion is larger in the quadratic speci…cation for each outcome variable. The Akaike
Information Criterion is larger in the quadratic speci…cation for 7 out of the 9 outcome
variables. Therefore, since in some cases its inclusion changes the interpretation of the

                                              13
results, we use the lower panel to temper some of our conclusions.
    We continue to …nd no strong evidence of an e¤ect on average education. The increase in
total parity is independent of predicted education. However, the remaining outcomes show
some interesting patterns.
    In table 3, we found a large and marginally signi…cant adverse e¤ect of teen motherhood
on the probability of completing 12th grade. When we include the linear interaction term,
the e¤ect on those whose predicted education was 12 years becomes very large (20 percentage
points) and signi…cant at the .05 level. The estimated e¤ect on those with low predicted
education is even larger and statistically signi…cant at the .1 level. However, when we allow
for a quadratic interaction term, the e¤ect on the low predicted education group declines
and becomes statistically insigni…cant although it remains numerically large. In contrast,
the e¤ect on those predicted to get 12 years of education becomes even larger (22 percentage
points) and remains statistically signi…cant at the .05 level.
    We see a similar pattern when we examine age at …rst marriage. In table 3, the estimated
e¤ect of a teen birth was to lower the age at …rst marriage by .6 years, but the estimate
fell short of statistical signi…cance. When we allow a linear interaction term, the e¤ect
on those predicted to have 12 years of education rises in absolute value to .9 years and
reaches signi…cance at the .1 level, and the estimated e¤ect on those predicted to have low
education is even larger and also marginally statistically signi…cant. Finally, when we allow
for a quadratic interaction, the e¤ect at 12 predicted years rises in absolute value to -1.09
and remains marginally signi…cant. In contrast the e¤ect at 10 predicted years becomes less
negative and is no longer statistically signi…cant.
    The estimated e¤ects of teen motherhood on current marital status are quite di¤erent
once we allow for the predicted education interactions. With a linear interaction, teen
motherhood increases the probability of having never married for those with 12 years of
predicted education, and for those with low levels of predicted education, but this e¤ect
disappears at higher levels of predicted education. The results are similar with a quadratic
interaction but lose statistical signi…cance for the low predicted education group. In contrast,
once we allow for a linear interaction between a teen birth and predicted education, we see
that advantaged teens who give birth are much more likely to be divorced or separated, a
result that is replicated with the quadratic interaction.
    In none of the speci…cations is there a signi…cant e¤ect on being currently married.
However, both speci…cations with interactions show that a teen birth reduces the number of
marriages among more advantaged teens.
    Finally, and with a reminder about the caveat regarding the family income data, we
continue to …nd a positive e¤ect of teen births on family income but one that is concentrated


                                              14
among the more disadvantaged teens. At high levels of predicted education, there is no e¤ect
on family income. In contrast at 12 years of predicted education, and at lower levels the
e¤ect is large, and statistically signi…cant.


6.3      Robustness Checks

Conceptions in our sample range from 1951 to 1968, a period of dramatic social change in
the United States. We consider whether the e¤ect of teen motherhood was di¤erent for
conceptions earlier in the period relative to later. In the earlier part of the period, abortion
was not legal in any state and the pill, even after being approved by the Food and Drug
Administration, was only available in four states to unmarried, childless women under the age
of 21 without parental consent (Bailey, 2006). Therefore, we experimented with interacting
birth with a time trend. We also experimented with an interaction between a dummy for
1964 or later and birth.15
    Although some of the results are suggestive, none of the interactions between birth and
the time trend and almost none of the di¤erences between the estimated e¤ects pre-1964 and
later were statistically signi…cant. The positive e¤ect on family income is noticeably larger
pre-1964 and is statistically signi…cant only for this period. In contrast, the adverse e¤ect
on education is statistically signi…cant only in the later period, but the di¤erence in point
estimates is small. The main conclusion is that the sample is too small for this exercise.
We do not consider interactions with predicted education since this would produce results
driven by very small numbers of observations. There is one exception to the absence of
di¤erences. In the pre-1964 sample, women who gave birth were more likely than those who
miscarried to report being married. This is driven by a high rate of widowhood among those
who miscarried pre-1964. We have no explanation for this …nding.
    The suggestive di¤erences between the earlier and later period suggest that adding 1969
to our sample is likely to reduce the magnitude of the results. Since it noticeably increases
our sample size, as a robustness check we examine the e¤ect of teen motherhood including
these conceptions albeit, as noted above, at the risk of increased bias from latent abortions
among those who miscarried. The top panel of table 5 contains the results when we do not
allow for heterogeneity by predicted education. These results are very similar to those in
table 3. Those giving birth are less likely to complete high school, they have fewer marriages,
more live births, and larger family income. However, the magnitudes of these e¤ects are more
modest than in table 3 (with the exception of number of live births).
 15
      We estimate the following regressions: y = + X +   1 Birth +   2 Birth   pre1964 +   3 pre1964 + ":   and
y=     + X + 1 Birth + 2 Birth trend + 3 trend + ":


                                                 15
    The lower panels of table 5 contain the results when we allow for heterogeneity by pre-
dicted education. The point estimates in panel B, in which predicted education only enters
linearly in the interaction term, generally tell a similar story to those in table 4, although
again the point estimates are more modest and their statistical signi…cance falls. In addi-
tion, the birth variables are no longer jointly signi…cant when the outcome is high school
completion or never married. The results in panel C also tell a similar story to those in
table 4; however, as in panel B, the point estimates are smaller in magnitude and the statis-
tical signi…cance falls. The smaller e¤ects on high school completion are expected if fewer
teens for whom motherhood would be costly give birth when abortion and contraception
are more available. If availability of abortion and contraception reduces the prevalence of
shot-gun marriages, this would explain the smaller e¤ects on age at …rst marriage and family
income. The smaller magnitude of the e¤ect on never having married perhaps suggests that
for the teens who get pregnant when abortion and contraception are more available, teen
motherhood was less of an obstacle to future marriage.
    Finally, as a further check that the results are not biased by immigrants who had access to
abortion in their teens, we perform the estimation but excluding Hispanics. Interpretation of
the results is generally unchanged (not shown), although there are more adverse consequences
of teen birth on educational attainment, for those predicted to obtain low levels of education.
The negative e¤ect of teen birth on age at …rst marriage is also stronger for those less
advantaged when Hispanics are excluded.


6.4    Shotgun Weddings
In 2007 93% of births to 15-17 year old mothers and 82% of births to 18 and 19 year old
mothers were out-of wedlock (Ventura, 2009) as were, by extension, the overwhelming ma-
jority of conceptions among these age groups. In contrast, 32% of the (weighted) conceptions
in our sample occurred after marriage. Of those pre-marital conceptions ending in a birth,
55% resulted in a pre-birth marriage. We cannot tell whether these marriages were to the
putative fathers or how frequently the father married the mother after she gave birth. We
do know, however, that only 22% of the women whose …rst birth had been out-of-wedlock
had never been married by the time they were interviewed.
    There is reason to be cautious about these estimates. Holding only the date of conception
constant, compared with those surveyed in 1995, women were about 10 percentage points
more likely to report being married prior to conception if they were surveyed in 1982 and
5 percentage more likely if they were surveyed in 1988. The former di¤erence is signi…cant
at the .1 level. The results are similar if we control for other di¤erences. This suggests that


                                              16
premarital conceptions may be underestimated.
    There are clear trends in these patterns. If we regress whether the teen was married
when she became pregnant along with our usual controls,16 the probability of being married
prior to conception declines by 1.4 percentage points per year (signi…cant at the .01 level).
Conditional on a premarital conception, the probability of a shotgun marriage declines by
1.0 percentage point per year (signi…cant at the .1 level). And conditional on having given
birth out-of-wedlock, the probability of never having married increases by 2.3 percentage
points per year as we move from conceptions in the early 1950s to the late 1960s.
    We further look to see if the e¤ect of giving birth was di¤erent for teens conceiving pre-
marriage relative to post-marriage. With one exception, the interaction term fell short of
statistical signi…cance at conventional levels although this was related as much to the im-
precision of the estimates rather than to a clear absence of di¤erences. The point estimates
suggest that the adverse e¤ect on high school completion is driven by out-of-wedlock con-
ceptions while the bene…cial e¤ect on family income is primarily a result of births following
post-marital conceptions.
    It is reassuring that the one exception to the absence of di¤erence is age at …rst marriage.
If miscarriage is truly random, then it cannot a¤ect the age at …rst marriage among those
who are already married. While giving birth lowers the age at …rst marriage by about a
year among those conceiving premaritally, the estimated e¤ect on those who were already
married is a relatively precise zero.
    Were shotgun marriages good or bad for the pregnant teens? We cannot answer this
question quasi-experimentally since we have no arguably exogenous source of variation in
whether the mother marries between conception and birth. Instead we limit the sample
to women who report that their …rst conception was premarital and ended in a birth and
compare outcomes for those who report that they married prior to the birth and those who
do not. The …rst column of table 6 shows the coe¢ cient on shotgun marriage when we control
only for the survey year and the date of conception. The second column adds the rest of our
standard controls except that as noted in footnote 16 we cannot control for current age due
to multicollinearity.
    The results suggest that shotgun marriage had a positive e¤ect on the teen’s educational
attainment although the 6-7 percentage point e¤ect on high school completion falls well
short of statistical signi…cance at conventional levels. If they married, teens who gave birth
out-of-wedlock married close to four years later than those who had a shotgun marriage. Not
  16
    We cannot control for age because survey year - year of conception + age at conception = age. We are
able to control for these variables when we are not focused on the e¤ect of year of conception because minor
di¤erences make these variables less than perfectly collinear.



                                                    17
surprisingly, shotgun marriages lead to a greater likelihood both of being married and being
divorced, at least when we use controls, but only the latter achieves statistical signi…cance.
While their are large and statistically signi…cant di¤erences in the number of marriages
(shotgun .4 higher), parity (shotgun .5 lower) and family income (shotgun 31% higher),
these di¤erences are largely eliminated by the controls.
   In short, while it appears to have been somewhat better for unwed pregnant teens to
marry prior to giving birth, the e¤ects do not seem to have been large. These e¤ects do
not change over the sample period, with the exception that the positive e¤ect of a shot-gun
marriage on high school completion dissipates over time (signi…cant with p = :057).


7     Conclusion
Recent literature has found only modest adverse consequences of teen motherhood. One
explanation for this …nding is that teens who wish to be sexually active now have access to
e¤ective contraception and if they fail to use contraception e¤ectively, can often gain access
to abortion services. Therefore, the argument continues, teens who would su¤er signi…cant
adverse consequences if they gave birth avoid doing so. The teens who give birth are the
ones for whom the consequences are at most modest.
    This paper investigates whether the adverse consequences of teen motherhood were
stronger before Roe v Wade, when access to abortion and contraception were much more
limited. During this period, teenage girls who wished to be sexually active had to choose
between abstinence and risking pregnancy. As long as some of those for whom a teen birth
would be costly chose the latter option, it is possible that the cost of teen motherhood was
higher in the 1950s and 1960s than it is currently. Of course, it is also possible that the threat
of pregnancy was su¢ cient to deter girls for whom teen motherhood would be costly from
engaging in sexual intercourse or that early marriage either before or after conception alle-
viated the potential costs. Therefore even in this period it is possible that teen motherhood
was not costly for those who became pregnant.
    Taken together the results suggest a pattern whereby disadvantaged teens who gave birth
were more likely never to get married but if they did marry were less likely to divorce. On
the contrary, more advantaged teens who gave birth were not less likely to get married but
were more likely to divorce and not to remarry. We can only speculate both because our
estimates are imprecise and because we do not know how many of the teens married the
putative or actual father of their child. However, it appears that for disadvantaged teens,
teen motherhood was a signi…cant obstacle to marriage to someone other than the father
but if they did marry, the marriages were more likely to persist which yielded higher family

                                               18
incomes. In contrast, advantaged teens who became pregnant were su¢ ciently likely to
marry that, if anything, their marriage rate increased, but such marriages were much less
likely to persist.
    For those who, in the absence of a child, were predicted to just graduate high school, teen
motherhood made it substantially less likely that they would graduate. But this should be
viewed not through the prism of 2013 when women who have not graduated high school are
unlikely to marry and have poor employment prospects. Rather it appears that in the 1950s
and 1960s, there were signi…cant risks associated with teen motherhood, but there was a
positive expected payo¤ for all but the most advantaged. And the risk/return trade-o¤ may
have been better for the least advantaged. They increased the probability that in the 1980s
they would …nd themselves with little education and never having been married. But they
also increased the probability that they would be on their …rst marriage and have a higher
family income.




                                              19
8    Bibliography

References
 [1] Akerlof, G., J. Yellen, and M. Katz. "An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing in
     the United States." Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 111(2). 1996.

 [2] Ashcraft, A., I. Fernandez-Val, and K. Lang. “The Consequences of Teenage Childbear-
     ing: Consistent Estimates when Abortion Makes Miscarriage Nonrandom.” Economic
     Journal. Vol. 123(571). 2013.

 [3] Ashcraft, A. and Lang, K. (2006). `The Consequences of teenage childbearing’, National
     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12485.

 [4] Bailey, M.J. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women’s
     Life Cycle Labor Supply.”Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 121(1). 2006.

 [5] Bailey, M.J. "Fifty Years of Family Planning: New Evidence on the Long-Run E¤ects
     of Increasing Access." NBER Working Paper 19493. 2013.

 [6] Calderone, M. S. “Illegal Abortion as Public Health Problem.” American Journal of
     Public Health. Vol. 50(7). 1960.

 [7] Chevalier, A. and Viitanen, T.K. (2003). `The long-run labour market consequences of
     teenage motherhood in Britain’, Journal of Population Economics, 16(2), pp.323-343.

 [8] Ermisch, J. and Pevalin, D.J. (2003). `Does a ‘teen-birth’have longer-term impacts on
     the mother? evidence from the 1970 British Cohort Study’, Institute for Social and
     Economic Research Working Paper 2003-28.

 [9] Fletcher, J.B. and Wolfe, B.L. (2009). `Education and labor market consequences of
     teenage childbearing: evidence using the timing of outcomes and community …xed ef-
     fects’, Journal of Human Resources, 44(2), pp.303-25.

[10] Geronimus, Arline T. and Sanders Korenman, “The Socioeconomic Consequences of
     Teen Childbearing Reconsidered,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4) (November
     1992): 1187-1214.

[11] Goodman, A., Kaplan, G. and Walker, I. (2004). `Understanding the e¤ects of early
     motherhood in Britain: the e¤ects on mothers’, IZA Discussion Paper No. 1131.



                                            20
[12] Greenhouse, L. and R. Siegel. Before Roe v. Wade: Voices that Shaped the Abortion
     Debate Before the Supreme Court’s Ruling. 2nd Edition. Yale Law School. 2012.

[13] Holmlund, H. (2005). `Estimating long-term consequences of teenage childbearing’,
     Journal of Human Resources, 40(3), pp.716-43.

[14] Hotz, V.J., McElroy, S.W. and Sanders, S.G. (1998). `The impacts of teenage child-
     bearing on the mothers and the consequences of those impacts for government’, in (R.
     Maynard, ed.), Kids Having Kids: Economic Costs and Social Consequences of Teen
     Pregnancy, pp. 55-94, Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

[15] Hotz, V.J., McElroy, S.W. and Sanders, S.G. (2005). `Teenage childbearing and its life
     cycle consequences’, Journal of Human Resources, 40(Summer), pp.683-715.

[16] Johnston,     W. Robert,     “Historical abortion statistics,     United         States,”
     http://www.johnstonsarchive.net/policy/abortion/ab-unitedstates.html,            accessed
     July 1, 2013.

[17] Klepinger, D., Lundberg, S. and Plotnick, R. (1999). `How Does Adolescent Fertility
     A¤ect the Human Capital and Wages of Young Women?’Journal of Human Resources,
     34(3), pp.421-448.

[18] Lang, K. and A. Nuevo Chiquero. “Trends in Self-Reported Spontaneous Abortions:
     1970-2000.”Demography. Vol. 49(3).

[19] Levine, D.I. and Painter, G. (2003). `The schooling costs of teenage out-of-wedlock child-
     bearing: analysis with a within-school propensity-score-matching estimator’, Review of
     Economics and Statistics, 85(4), pp.884-900.

[20] Maradiegue, Ann, “Minor’s Rights Versus Parental Rights: Review of Legal Issues in
     Adolescent Health Care,” Journal of Midwifery & Women’s Health, 48:3 (May-June
     2003): 170–177.

[21] Pandya, P.P., Snijders, J.M., Psara, N. and Hilbert, L. (1996). `The prevalence of non-
     viable pregnancy at 10-13 weeks of gestation.’Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology
     7(1), pp. 1-4.

[22] Reagan, L. J. When Abortion was a Crime: Women, Medicine, and Law in the United
     States, 1867-1973. University of California Press. 1997.

[23] Ribar, D.C. (1994). `Teenage fertility and high school completion’, Review of Economics
     and Statistics, 76(3), pp.413-24.

                                              21
[24] Roemer, R. “Abortion Law Reform and Repeal: Legislative and Judicial Developments.”
     American Journal of Public Health. Vol. 61(3).(March 1971):500-9.

[25] Sanders, S., Smith, J. and Zhang, Y. (2007). `Teenage childbearing and maternal school-
     ing outcomes: evidence from matching’, working paper, University of Maryland.

[26] United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. “Table 27. Live Births
     by State of Occurrence Distributed According to State of Residence: United States and
     Each State, 1959.”Vital Statistics of the United States.Vol. 1. 1959.

[27] Ventura, Stephanie J., “Changing Patterns of Nonmarital Childbearing in the United
     States,”NCHS Data Brief, No. 18, Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statis-
     tics. 2009.

[28] Walker, I. and Zhu, Y. (2009). `The causal e¤ect of teen motherhood on worklessness’,
     University of Kent School of Economics Discussion Paper 0917.




                                            22
Table 1: Summary Statistics by Birth Outcome
                                                  Birth         Miscarriage Abortion
Education                                       10.78              10.81     13.83***
                                                [2.51]             [2.31]       [2.2]
Education>=12                                     0.45              0.55      0.97***
                                                   [.5]              [.5]       [.16]
Age at First Marriage                           17.68              17.93     22.07***
                                                [3.11]             [3.46]      [4.81]
Number of Marriages                               1.47            1.91***       1.42
                                                  [.99]            [1.09]       [.67]
Currently Married                                  0.6              0.63        0.69
                                                  [.49]             [.48]       [.48]
Currently Divorced/Separated                       0.3              0.23       0.14**
                                                  [.46]             [.42]       [.35]
Never Married                                     0.07              0.05        0.04
                                                  [.25]             [.21]        [.2]
Number of Live Births                             3.22            2.59***     2.09***
                                                [1.58]             [1.49]      [1.06]
Currently Working                                 0.63              0.63        0.72
                                                  [.48]             [.48]       [.46]
Family Income                                   28,286            23,613    48,393.12**
                                               [22,376]          [18,551]    [27,538]
Current Age                                      38.53             38.47       38.64
                                                  [4.2]            [4.06]      [4.01]
Age at First Conception                          16.43             16.16       16.79
                                                 [1.14]            [1.45]      [1.05]
Age at First Conception<15                        0.13              0.16      0.02***
                                                  [.33]             [.37]       [.15]
Hispanic                                          0.11              0.07      0.02***
                                                  [.31]             [.26]       [.16]
Black                                             0.26            0.18**        0.33
                                                  [.44]             [.38]       [.48]
White                                             0.71              0.78        0.67
                                                  [.46]             [.42]       [.48]
Protestant                                        0.71            0.82**        0.54
                                                  [.45]             [.39]       [.51]
Catholic                                          0.21            0.11**         0.2
                                                  [.41]             [.32]       [.41]
Working Mother                                    0.53              0.53        0.58
                                                  [.50]             [.50]       [.51]
Mother's Education                                9.54              9.44     12.31***
                                                 [3.52]            [3.45]      [3.32]
Lived with both parents at 14                     0.67              0.64        0.73
                                                  [.47]             [.48]       [.46]
Predicted Education                             12.79               12.8     14.01***
                                                [1.37]             [1.23]      [1.32]
Survey1982                                        0.54              0.46        0.52
                                                   [.5]              [.5]       [.51]
Survey1988                                        0.35               0.4        0.32
                                                  [.48]             [.49]       [.48]
Number of Observations                          1058                 79          20
Note: Observations are weighted using the sampling weights of the survey. Standard
Deviations are in parentheses. The means for "Lived with both parents at 14" are just
calculated over the 1982 and 1988 surveys, as the variable is not available in the 1995 survey.
The means for working mother and mother's education are calculated over the non-missing
values. Stars in the second column denote statistically significant differences between
columns 1 and 2. Stars in the third column denote statistically significant differences between
columns 1 and 3.
Table 2: Predictors of Miscarriage
Dependent Variable: Birth           OLS        Probit         Logit
Age                                    0.002     0.017         0.034
                                     (0.003)   (0.020)       (0.042)
Age at First Conception                0.017     0.117         0.237
                                     (0.016)   (0.099)       (0.219)
Age at First Conception<15             0.029     0.210         0.411
                                     (0.048)   (0.302)       (0.633)
Hispanic                               0.025     0.199         0.379
                                     (0.045)   (0.367)       (0.866)
Black                                  0.061     0.429         0.941
                                     (0.069)   (0.398)       (0.804)
White                                  0.007     0.034         0.098
                                     (0.066)   (0.378)       (0.748)
Protestant                            -0.021    -0.160        -0.333
                                     (0.033)   (0.259)       (0.554)
Catholic                               0.020     0.185         0.406
                                     (0.036)   (0.313)       (0.706)
Working Mother                        -0.001     0.009       0.00007
                                     (0.022)   (0.152)       (0.331)
Mother's Education                     0.001     0.006         0.017
                                     (0.003)   (0.021)       (0.045)
Lived with Both parents at 14          0.009     0.088         0.149
                                     (0.024)   (0.164)       (0.351)
Survey1982                             0.041     0.297         0.638
                                     (0.040)   (0.276)       (0.592)
Survey1988                             0.010     0.037         0.132
                                     (0.039)   (0.251)       (0.516)
Observations                           1137      1137          1137
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Probit and Logit
coefficients, not marginal effects, are reported. Dependent
variable is an indicator for first pregnancy resulted in a birth, and is
zero if first pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage. Working Mother
refers to whether the respondent's mother worked either full- or
part-time while the respondent was growing up. Mother's
education refers to the education of the respondent's mother.
Indicators for whether each of these two variables is not missing
are also included in the regressions.
Table 3: Effects of Teenage Motherhood, Conceptions before 1969
                                              Education    Age at First            Divorced/       Never       # of   # Live Ln(Family
                                 Education                                Married
                                                 >12        Marriage              Separated      Married    Marriage Births   Income)
Birth                               -0.20      -0.14**        -0.58         0.02      0.03         0.003     -0.34**  0.56***  0.28**
                                    [0.30]      [0.07]        [0.39]       [0.07]    [0.06]        [0.02]     [0.15]   [0.16]   [0.14]
Age                                 0.001       0.001         -0.01       -0.0008     0.01       -0.01***     0.02*  0.12***   -0.002
                                    [0.02]      [0.01]        [0.02]       [0.01]    [0.01]       [0.002]     [0.01]   [0.02]   [0.01]
Age at First Conception            0.34***     0.07***       0.65***       0.002      0.02          -0.01     -0.06   -0.12*    -0.04
                                    [0.11]      [0.02]        [0.13]       [0.02]    [0.02]        [0.01]     [0.05]   [0.06]   [0.04]
Age at First Conception<15          -0.49        0.06         -0.14        -0.04     0.13*         -0.06*     -0.10     0.38   -0.26*
                                    [0.36]      [0.08]        [0.40]       [0.08]    [0.07]        [0.03]     [0.17]   [0.23]   [0.14]
Hispanic                           -1.08**      -0.09          0.52        -0.08      0.01           0.06     -0.14   0.61**    -0.23
                                    [0.43]      [0.08]        [0.38]       [0.09]    [0.08]        [0.04]     [0.20]   [0.27]   [0.15]
Black                               1.63**      0.20*        2.89***      -0.58*** 0.36***        0.20***   -0.56***    0.31  -0.64***
                                    [0.77]      [0.11]        [0.37]       [0.08]    [0.07]        [0.04]     [0.16]   [0.26]   [0.16]
White                                0.86        0.11         -0.07       -0.21*** 0.22***       -0.0008       0.19    -0.26    -0.19
                                    [0.77]      [0.11]        [0.27]       [0.08]    [0.06]        [0.03]     [0.16]   [0.25]   [0.16]
Protestant                           0.28        0.11         -0.20         0.09     -0.04          -0.04     -0.19    -0.02     0.12
                                    [0.34]      [0.08]        [0.26]       [0.07]    [0.07]        [0.03]     [0.21]   [0.21]   [0.14]
Catholic                             0.35       0.19**        -0.23        -0.11      0.10          -0.01     -0.38    -0.08     0.08
                                    [0.42]      [0.09]        [0.30]       [0.08]    [0.08]        [0.03]     [0.25]   [0.24]   [0.17]
Working Mother                       0.14       -0.01          0.04        -0.04      0.04        -0.004       0.14   0.0003     0.03
                                    [0.18]      [0.04]        [0.18]       [0.04]    [0.04]        [0.01]     [0.09]   [0.11]   [0.07]
Mother's Education                 0.20***     0.04***       0.06**        -0.01    0.01**        -0.003       0.01  -0.06***  0.04***
                                    [0.03]      [0.01]        [0.03]       [0.01]    [0.01]       [0.003]     [0.01]   [0.02]   [0.01]
Lived with Both Parents at 14        0.24        0.07         -0.15         0.06     -0.04          -0.02     -0.06    -0.20   0.17**
                                    [0.18]      [0.04]        [0.20]       [0.04]    [0.04]        [0.02]     [0.10]   [0.13]   [0.08]
Survey1982                          -0.35       -0.02         -0.28        -0.01      0.06         -0.05*     -0.12   1.38*** -0.68***
                                    [0.33]      [0.07]        [0.41]       [0.07]    [0.07]        [0.03]     [0.15]   [0.23]   [0.13]
Survey1988                          -0.16      -0.001          0.24         0.01     0.001          -0.01     -0.04   0.89*** -0.40***
                                    [0.30]      [0.06]        [0.40]       [0.06]    [0.06]        [0.03]     [0.13]   [0.19]   [0.12]
Observations                        1,137       1,137         1,021        1,137     1,137         1,137      1,137    1,137     986
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Birth is an indicator for first pregnancy resulted in a birth, and is zero if first pregnancy
resulted in a miscarriage. Working Mother refers to whether the respondent's mother worked either full- or part-time while the
respondent was growing up. Mother's education refers to the education of the respondent's mother. Indicators for whether each of
these two variables is not missing are also included in the regressions.
Table 4: Effects of Teenage Motherhood, Allowing for Heterogeneity by Predicted Education
                           Education Age at First         Divorced/ Never      # of   # Live Ln(Family
                 Education                        Married
                              ≥12     Marriage            Separated Married Marriages Births Income)
Panel A: Linear Interaction Only
Birth             -0.40     -0.20**    -0.87*       0.10    -0.06    0.04*    -0.24   0.56***  0.43**
                  [0.43]     [0.09]    [0.47]      [0.10]   [0.09]   [0.02]  [0.16]    [0.22]  [0.18]
Birth*PredEd          0.24        0.07          0.38     -0.10    0.11**    -0.04*     -0.12    0.0005     -0.17
                     [0.25]      [0.06]        [0.26]    [0.06]   [0.06]    [0.02]     [0.11]    [0.14]    [0.11]
p-value for joint significance of Birth variables
                      0.60         0.10         0.15     0.26     0.06       0.08      0.09      0.004      0.05
Effect by Predicted Education
10 years             -0.87       -0.34*        -1.64*    0.29     -0.28     0.13**    -0.003     0.56      0.78**
                      [.86]       [.19]         [.87]    [.21]     [.19]     [.06]     [.31]     [.45]      [.37]
14 years              0.08        -0.05          -0.1    -0.1     0.17**    -0.05     -0.49**   0.56**      0.09
                      [.37]        [.09]        [.47]    [.08]     [.07]     [.05]     [.23]     [.22]      [.17]
Panel B: Quadratic Interaction
Birth                -0.47      -0.22**        -1.09*     0.15    -0.07     0.04*      -0.31    0.56**     0.47**
                     [0.51]      [0.11]        [0.60]    [0.11]   [0.10]    [0.03]     [0.20]   [0.25]     [0.20]
Birth*PredEd          0.16        0.05          0.24     -0.07     0.11    -0.04**     -0.19     0.04      -0.16
                     [0.35]      [0.08]        [0.40]    [0.11]   [0.10]    [0.02]     [0.14]   [0.25]     [0.13]
Birth*PredEd2         0.07        0.02          0.16     -0.03     0.01     -0.01       0.06    -0.02      -0.01
                     [0.19]      [0.04]        [0.21]    [0.05]   [0.05]    [0.02]     [0.08]   [0.11]     [0.08]
p-value for joint significance of Birth variables
                      0.79         0.22         0.26     0.29     0.16       0.12      0.15      0.01       0.08
Effect by Predicted Education
10 years             -0.51        -0.23         -0.93    0.16     -0.26       0.1       0.3      0.38       0.74
                      [1.3]        [.29]       [1.42]    [.42]     [.39]     [.07]     [.49]     [.95]      [.51]
14 years              0.11        -0.04          0.03    -0.12    0.17**    -0.05     -0.45*    0.56***     0.08
                      [.37]        [.09]          [.4]    [.09]    [.08]     [.05]     [.23]     [.22]      [.18]
Observations         1,137       1,137         1,021     1,137    1,137     1,137     1,137      1,137      986

Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors in brackets. Birth is an indicator for first pregnancy resulted in a birth, and
is zero if first pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage. The sample is limited to conceptions before 1969. PredEd
denotes the predicted education of the respondent, calculation explained in the paper. This variable is rescaled
to be PredEd-12. The values of PredEd for 10 and 14 years are thus actually -2 and +2. Explanatory variables
include predicted education squared (only in panel B), current age, age at first conception, respondent's mother's
education, and an indicator for this variable non-missing, and indicators for age at first conception less than 15,
Hispanic, Black, White, Protestant, Catholic, respondent's mother worked while growing up, an indicator for this
variable non-missing, respondent lived with both parents at the age of 14, and indicators for the survey year.
Table 5: Effects of Teenage Motherhood, Conceptions Before 1970

                         Education Age at First          Divorced/ Never      # of   # Live Ln(Family
                Education                       Married
                            ≥12      Marriage            Separated Married Marriages Births Income)
Panel A: Without Heterogeneity by Predicted Education
Birth            -0.16     -0.11*      -0.50      0.04      0.03     -0.02  -0.28** 0.59*** 0.27**
                 [0.28]    [0.06]     [0.35]     [0.06]    [0.05]    [0.03]  [0.14]   [0.15]  [0.12]
Panel B: Heterogeneity by Predicted Education, Linear Interaction Only
Birth            -0.28     -0.15*      -0.74      0.11     -0.05      0.01   -0.15   0.56*** 0.42**
                 [0.37]    [0.08]      [0.46]    [0.09]    [0.08]    [0.04]  [0.15]   [0.22]  [0.17]
Birth*PredEd          0.14         0.05         0.29      -0.08      0.09*         -0.04      -0.15      0.04  -0.15
                     [0.23]       [0.05]       [0.26]     [0.06]     [0.05]        [0.02]     [0.10]    [0.14] [0.11]
p-value for joint significance of Birth variables
                      0.75         0.18         0.27       0.35       0.09          0.26       0.07    0.0002   0.04
Effect by Predicted Education
10 years             -0.56        -0.25        -1.32       0.28      -0.24          0.08       0.16      0.48  0.73*
                      [.77]        [.17]        [.89]       [.2]      [.17]         [.07]      [.29]     [.47]  [.37]
14 years              0.01        -0.06        -0.16      -0.06      0.13**        -0.06     -0.45** 0.64***    0.12
                      [.35]        [.08]        [.44]      [.07]      [.06]         [.04]       [.2]      [.2]  [.16]
Panel C: Heterogeneity by Predicted Education, Quadratic Interaction
Birth                -0.29        -0.16        -0.77      0.17*      -0.07          0.01      -0.18    0.56**  0.45**
                     [0.46]       [0.10]       [0.56]     [0.10]     [0.09]        [0.05]     [0.20]    [0.23] [0.19]
Birth*PredEd          0.11         0.03         0.26      -0.05       0.08         -0.03      -0.19      0.09  -0.15
                     [0.31]       [0.07]       [0.43]     [0.10]     [0.08]        [0.02]     [0.12]    [0.28] [0.14]
Birth*PredEd2         0.02         0.01         0.03      -0.04       0.01        -0.004       0.04     -0.03  -0.01
                     [0.17]       [0.04]       [0.21]     [0.05]     [0.04]        [0.02]     [0.07]    [0.12] [0.08]
p-value for joint significance of Birth variables
                      0.92         0.38         0.53       0.25       0.20          0.32       0.13     0.001   0.09
Effect by Predicted Education
10 years             -0.44        -0.18        -1.16       0.13      -0.19          0.06       0.36      0.25    0.7
                     [1.15]        [.25]       [1.58]      [.38]      [.31]         [.08]      [.44]    [1.06]  [.55]
14 years              0.02        -0.05        -0.11      -0.09      0.14**        -0.07     -0.42** 0.62***    0.11
                      [.35]        [.08]        [.37]      [.08]      [.07]         [.05]      [.21]     [.19]  [.17]
Observations         1,330        1,330        1,187      1,330      1,330         1,330      1,330     1,330  1,150
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets in panel A. Bootstrapped standard errors in brackets in panels B and
C. Birth is an indicator for first pregnancy resulted in a birth, and is zero if first pregnancy resulted in a
miscarriage. PredEd denotes the predicted education of the respondent, calculation explained in the paper. This
variable is rescaled to be PredEd-12. The values of PredEd for 10 and 14 years of education are thus actually -2
and +2. Explanatory variables include predicted education squared (only in panel B), current age, age at first
conception, respondent's mother's education, and an indicator for this variable non-missing, and indicators for
age at first conception less than 15, Hispanic, Black, White, Protestant, Catholic, respondent's mother worked
while growing up, an indicator for this variable non-missing, respondent lived with both parents at the age of 14,
and indicators for the survey year.
          Table 6: Effects of Teenage Motherhood: Shot-Gun Marriages
                       Relative to Out-of-Wedlock Births

                Outcome                                (1)                            (2)
Education                                           0.45**                        0.54**
                                                     [0.23]                        [0.25]
Education >12                                         0.07                           0.06
                                                     [0.05]                        [0.05]
Age at First Marriage                              -3.76***                      -3.63***
                                                     [0.28]                        [0.34]
Married                                            0.24***                           0.07
                                                     [0.04]                        [0.05]
Divorced/Separated                                    0.01                        0.09**
                                                     [0.04]                        [0.04]
# of Marriages                                     0.37***                           0.05
                                                     [0.11]                        [0.11]
# Live Births                                      -0.51***                         -0.07
                                                     [0.13]                        [0.13]
Ln(Family Income)                                  0.31***                           0.08
                                                     [0.09]                        [0.10]
Controls for Survey Year, Date of
Conception                                            Yes                           Yes
Standard Controls                                     No                            Yes
Notes: Each row presents the coefficient, from separate regressions, on an indicator for shot-gun
marriage, on the sample of teens giving birth who conceived before marriage. Robust standard
errors in brackets. The explanatory variables in column 1 are the date of conception, and
indicators for survey year. Column 2 additionally includes the explanatory variables listed in table
5, excluding Age because of multicollinearity. Observations are weighted by the sampling
weights of the survey. Sample Size is 825 for all outcome variables, except for Age at First
Marriage (715) and Family Income (723).
