                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MULTIPLE DIMENSIONS OF PRIVATE INFORMATION IN LIFE INSURANCE
                                MARKETS

                                                Xi Wu
                                                Li Gan

                                        Working Paper 19629
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19629


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2013




Authors would like to thank seminar participants at Columbia University, University of California,
Davis and Miami University for their help comments. All the remaining errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Xi Wu and Li Gan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Multiple Dimensions of Private Information in Life Insurance Markets
Xi Wu and Li Gan
NBER Working Paper No. 19629
November 2013
JEL No. D82,G22,I13

                                            ABSTRACT

Conventional theory for private information of adverse selection predicts a positive correlation between
insurance coverage and ex post risk. This paper shows the opposite in the life insurance market despite
the clear evidence of private information on mortality risk. The reason for this contradictory result
is the existence of multiple dimensions of private information. The paper discusses how the private
information on insurance preference offsets the effect of the private information on mortality risk.
A mixture density model is applied to disentangle these two effects.


Xi Wu
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-4228
xwu@econ.tamu.edu

Li Gan
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-4228
and NBER
gan@econmail.tamu.edu
I. Introduction

    Much literature has argued that adverse selection or moral hazard induced by the
private information may lead to an under-provision or lack of trade in insurance,
causing a substantial consumer welfare loss. However, this paper shows that people
who have lower mortality risk are more likely to have life insurance, despite the clear
evidence of private information on mortality risk. The reason for this contradictory
result is the existence of multiple dimensions of private information. The paper
discusses how the private information on insurance preference offsets the effect of the
private information on mortality risk and applies a mixture density model to
disentangle these two effects.
    As one of the most widely held financial products, by the end of 2009, total life
insurance coverage in the United States had achieved $18.1 trillion (American Council
of Life Insurance, 2010). In light of its large size, it is important to understand the
influence of the private information in this market.
    Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) argue that individuals may still have residual
information about their own eventual risk in a competitive market after conditional on
all observables to insurers. Those who believe they have higher risk would purchase
more insurance than those lower-risk individuals. Therefore, one standard test for
detecting asymmetric information used in most literature is to test for a positive
correlation between the amount of insurance coverage and ex post occurrence of
insured risk (Chiappori and Salanié 1997, 2000; Chiappori, Julian, Salanié, and
Salanié, 2006).
    Existing empirical literature on asymmetric information in life insurance markets,
however, is mixed. Cawley and Philipson (1999) found a neutral or even negative
relationship between life insurance ownership and subsequent mortality using 1992-
1994 Health and Retirement Study (HRS) data. We find similar results using HRS data
during the period between 2000 and 2008. In Table 1, 20.6% of people in the sample
passed away during the period of 2000 and 2008. However, the mortality rates are
quite different by life insurance. Among 69.5% of people who have life insurance in
year 2000, 18.4% of them passed away. Meanwhile, 25.6% of people who do not have
life insurance died.
                                             2
    Various explanations for this interesting phenomenon are offered in the literature.
Pauly et al (2003) explain the absence of private information with individuals’
sufficiently low risk elasticity. They argue that even if individuals indeed know more
than insurers, serious adverse selection will not occur if those individuals are sluggish
in their willingness to respond to that information. He (2009), however, attributes the
absence to a sample selection problem: Even if high-risk individuals are more likely to
purchase life insurance, they are also more likely to die early and thus less likely to be
found in a cross-sectional sample.
    Recent theoretical research suggests that a positive correlation between insurance
purchases and risk occurrence is neither necessary nor sufficient for the presence of
asymmetric information about risk type when multiple dimensions of private
information, such as risk type or insurance preferences, coexist (Smart, 2000; De
Meza and Webb, 2001; Jullien, Salanié, and Salanié , 2007; Chiappori and Salanié,
2013). To illustrate, consider the following thought experiment. There are five
individuals each in groups I and II, which are a high-insurance-preference (h) group
and low-insurance-preference (l) group, respectively. The l group is more likely to die
and has a weaker preferences in insurance; while, the h group has a lower probability
to experience the risky event but has a stronger preferences for insurance. As shown in
Table 2, the probability to die for individuals 1 to 5 in group I is 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60
percent, respectively; and the corresponding amount of insurance purchases for this
group is 1, 1, 2, 3, and 4. For individuals A to E in group II, their mortality risks are 10,
20, 30, 40, and 50, respectively; and the amount of insurance purchased by this group
is 1, 2, 2, 3, and 4. If we combine these two groups as a whole, a researcher examining
this sample may conclude that the asymmetric information is absent: When the
probability of mortality is increased from 50 to 60 percent, the amount of insurance
purchased, on the contrary, decreases from 7 to 4. However, a positive correlation
between individual insurance purchases and the probability of ex post risk can be
found, conditional on each category of individuals’ insurance preferences.
    Empirically, Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) demonstrate the existence of these
multiple dimensions of private information on risk type and on individual insurance
preferences in long-term care insurance markets. They confirm that these two

                                              3
dimensions of private information operate in offsetting directions, leading to a neutral
or negative relationship between insurance coverage and the occurrence of risky events,
even if the market is known to have asymmetric information on ex post risk. However,
despite direct evidence of private information on risk type, they still fail to detect it
using the “positive correlation” test by controlling proxy variables for individuals’
preferences in insurance.
    Intuitively, when a full set of proxy variables for insurance preferences is available,
controlling these variables enables us to fully exclude the effect of heterogeneous
insurance preferences on the relationship between insurance purchase and subsequent
mortality. However, under most circumstances, the accessibility of only a partial set of
proxy variables related to insurance preferences would lead to the error term still
consisting of these two kinds of private information, resulting in failures of the
standard test for private information. (See Gan, Huang, and Mayer (2011) for a more
formal discussion on this point.)
    This paper makes three contributions to the literature. First, contrary to the
conclusions drawn in Cawley and Philipson (1999), this paper provides direct evidence
of private information in life insurance markets. In particular, after conditioning on a
set of variables used by insurance companies for the determination of risk
classifications, individuals’ subjective responses on their own mortality risks that are
available in HRS (but not typically available to insurance companies) have additional
predictive power to their actual mortality risks. Nevertheless, the traditional positive
correlation test fails to detect this asymmetric information.
   Second, we find a series of socioeconomic factors, which are correlated with the
second type of private information (i.e., heterogeneity in insurance preferences), and
show that this type of private information has an opposite effect on insurance purchase
and subsequent mortality. Similar results are reported by Finkelstein and McGarry
(2006) and Cutler, Finkelstein, and McGarry (2008). Specifically, individuals who
have stock, houses, and loans, as well as those who have employment are more likely to
buy life insurance but less likely to experience insured event. Similarly pattern applies
to individuals who have more years of education, more annual income, lower risk
tolerance and stronger bequest motives. However, with the effort of excluding

                                              4
individuals’ heterogeneity in insurance preferences through controlling these variables,
we still fail to find a positive correlation between life insurance purchases and
subsequent mortality.
   Third, this paper applies the mixture density model, in which we separate
individuals into two unobserved types based on their different preferences in life
insurance. Under this framework, we successfully obtain a significant and positive
correlation between life insurance purchases and subsequent mortality conditional on
each type. It is worth pointing out that, due to the specificity of life insurance markets,
a positive correlation between life insurance ownership and subsequent mortality
signifies the existence of adverse selection, in light of the small possibility of moral
hazard in this market. Our result also implies that, different from long-term care
insurance markets shown by Finkelstein and McGarry (2006), such heterogeneity in
preferences of life insurance is driven by a variety of socioeconomic factors, not solely
the risk attitude.
   The remainder of this paper proceeds as followings. In section II, we illustrate the
identification strategy used to detect the private information in life insurance market
and describe our data. Section III presents the results and specification test. The final
section concludes.

II. Empirical Approach

    Our empirical strategy proceeds in three steps. First, we demonstrate that
individuals have residual private information about their mortality risk; and this
residual information is also negatively correlated with insurance coverage. However,
the standard positive correlation test does not provide any evidence for the existence of
this private information. Second, we empirically identify a set of socioeconomic factors
which are related to the second type of private information, (i.e., the heterogeneity in
insurance preferences) and show that they can offset the effect of the private
information on mortality risk on the correlation between insurance coverage and risk
exposure in life insurance markets. In the final step of our analysis, we apply the
mixture density model and present that a positive correlation between insurance
coverage and insured event can be obtained only if individuals’ insurance preferences

                                              5
is conditioned by distinguishing people into two groups based on the series of factors
we mentioned above.


 A. Econometric Model

    We characterize the market for life insurance with the following two equations.
The first equation relates the individual characteristics to the probability of mortality.
The second relates the same characteristics to the decision to purchase life insurance.

                       Die  1(c  X  X  H  H  SS  SS  u  0)
                                                                       , (1)
                       LFI  1(c  X  X  H  H  SS SS  v  0)

where Die is an indicator variable for whether the individual died during the period
2000-2008. LFI is a binary variable for whether the individual had life insurance in
year 2000. We chose year 2000 as the starting period because the 2000 wave is the
first year that includes all the variables we need in our analysis. We use X to denote the
individual characteristics that are public information– information that is available for
both individuals and insurers. SS is individuals’ subjective survival probability for the
next 10 to 15 years, so that βSS is expected to be less than zero. Also, everything equal,
individuals with higher expectation on their longevity are less likely to purchase life
insurance, thus δSS is also expected to be less than zero.
   The variable H in (1) represents the unobserved individual preferences for life
insurance. Without losing generality, we assume δH > 0, i.e., a higher H implies a
higher possibility to purchase life insurance. Meanwhile, as shown by De Meza and
Webb (2001) and Fang, Keane, and Silverman (2008), a higher H may also be
associated with a lower probability of the occurrence of an insured event, i.e.,  H <0.
   The first step of our analysis is to examine the effect of individuals’ subjective
survival probabilities (SS) on actual mortality and on life insurance purchase,
respectively, after conditioning on risk classifications by the insurance company (X).
Previous literature (Hurd and McGarry, 2002; Gan, Hurd, and McFadden, 2005) has
shown that this “first-type” private information has additional predictive power but



                                               6
suffers serious focal response error. We estimate the following bivariate probit models.
The key interest is on the coefficient of SS:
                          Die  1(c  X  X  SS  SS  u*  0)
                                                                   ,   (2)
                          LFI  1(c  X  X  SS SS  v*  0)

where, u*  H  H  u and v*  H  H  v .
   We next implement the positive correlation test for private information in the
absence of private subjective survival information. The key interest is in the correlation
coefficient of the two error terms. In particular, the model to be estimated is:
                           Die  1(c  X  X  u**  0)
                                                           ,           (3)
                           LFI  1(c  X  X  v**  0)

where, u**  H  H  Z  Z  u and v**  H H  Z Z  v . Clearly, error terms in equation (3)
include not only private information on risk type but also private information on
insurance preferences. Thus, the correlation between u ** and v** would reflect a
combined effect of these two types of private information, resulting in an ambiguous
sign of ρ. Note the problem discussed here is the familiar omitted variable problem.
   According to Chiappori and Salanié (1997, 2000), a positive correlation can serve as
a test for the presence of adverse selection when heterogeneous insurance preference
(H) is absent. Chiappori et al. (2006) as well as Chiappori and Salanié (2013) further
show that the test can actually be extended to a more general setup: In the case of
competitive markets, the correlation between insurance coverage and insured events
can only be positive or zero even in the presence of the private heterogeneous
insurance preference, H.
  However, under the imperfect competition, if insurance preference is public, the
positive correlation property still holds; while, the correlation between the insurance
coverage and ex post risk can take any sign when individuals’ insurance preference is
private information. Similar analyses are also provided in Jullien, Salanié, and Salanié
(2007). Gan, Huang, and Mayer (2011) also show that the positive correlation test may
fail to detect the private information on risk when individuals have heterogeneous
insurance preferences.
                                                7
  The structure of life insurance markets exhibit more like an imperfect competition
instead of an perfect competition. According to American Council of Life Insurers
(2010), by total direct life insurance premiums, the first largest life insurer in U.S. is
4.15 times that of the 10th largest one; and 7.88 times that of the 20th. Similar findings
are also documented at an industry website http://InvestmentNews.com , which
shows that, for 2008, the market share calculated based on direct premiums for the
first largest life insurance company is 18.08%; sharply decreases to 2.56% for the 10th
largest; and for the 20th largest company, it is only 1.12%. In fact, Chiappori and
Salanié (2013) also point out that perfect competition does not well approximate
insurance markets due to differentiation on fixed cost, product characteristics and
switching cost.
  We also apply the other approach, which estimates a probit model 0f mortality as a
function of insurance coverage controlling for risk classification, as proposed by
Finkelstein and Poterba (2002):
                     Pr(Die = 1) = Φ (Xβx + θ LFI)       (4)
  The positive correlation predicts θ > 0. One potential issue with this approach is that
the endogeneity of LFI due to the omitted private information on the mortality, a
biased estimate of θ may be obtained.
  In the second step of our analysis, we try to control the effect of individuals’
heterogeneous insurance preferences, H, on the relationship between insurance
purchases and insured events.
  Although we cannot observe H, a series of proxy variables, W, which are related to H
is able to be obtained. In the classic models about life insurance such as Yaari (1965)
and Hakansson (1969), the demand for life insurance is attributed to a person’s desire
to bequeath funds to dependents and provide income for retirement. Later models
such as that of Lewis (1989) extend this framework by incorporating the preferences of
the beneficiaries into the model, which shows that the probability of owning life
insurance increases with the primary wage earners’ death, the present value of the
beneficiaries’ consumption, and the degree of risk aversion; simultaneously, this
probability decreases with the household’s net wealth. Walliser and Winter (1998)
report that tax advantages and bequest motives indeed are the two important factors

                                              8
determining life insurance demand in Germany. Cutler, Finkelstein, and McGarry
(2008) find that individuals who engage in more risky behavior (i.e., smoking,
drinking) or less risk reducing behavior (i.e., use preventative care, always wear
seatbelt) are systematically less likely to have term life insurance; and not surprisingly,
riskier behaviors are associated with higher mortality after controlling individuals’ risk
classification. Browne and Kim (1993) present evidence on life insurance demand
across 45 countries. They find that the main determinants of cross-country variations
in the demand for life insurance include the dependency ratio (i.e., the number of
dependents per potential life insurance consumer), education and income. In Beck and
Webb (2003), economic indicators, religious and institutional indicators are the robust
predictors of life insurance.
   Following the literature discussed above, we suggest W includes: (i) Bequest
motives, which is represented by 100 or more hours spent (or not) in last two years
taking care of grandchildren if they have; and religious preference, if any. (ii) Risk
aversion, which is represented by decision to practice preventative health activities
such as getting a flu shot or blood test for cholesterol. (iii) Education, represented by
the number of years of education—a proxy variable for knowledge about life insurance;
(iv) Employment status — the individual who has employment usually has a lower
transaction cost for obtaining life insurance; more importantly, employed people are
more likely to use life insurance, especially the whole life insurance, as an investment
for retirement considering they have more uncertainties about future income than
those who are already retired; (v) Financial situation, including income of the insured
– as suggested in the literature, and whether the individual has loan, stock, and
house—people with a loan usually prefer term life insurance, which helps meet the
responsibility for an ensured repayment in case of any possibility of mortality during
an anticipated period, while holding stock or owning a house is a reflection of
investment attitudes.
   We, therefore, plug these proxy variables into the following bivariate probit model
to examine whether they have an opposite effect on Die and LFI:




                                             9
                           Die  1(c  X  X  W W  u***  0)
                                                                       (5)
                           LFI  1(c  X  X  W W  v***  0)

  Again, if we assume W can fully characterize H such that H can be written as H = W
+ δ where δ is the error term that is independent on W, u*** and v***. Given this, the
correlation between the two error terms in equation (5) can be used to test for the
presence of private information.
  However, more commonly, the set W is composed of two subsets, W =(Wo, Wu),
where we only observe Wo but not Wu. Further, Wo and Wu are often correlated, i.e.,
corr(Wo, Wu) ≠ 0. In this case, the unobserved Wu is omitted from the model. The
same omitted variable problem discussed earlier remains. Thus, it is necessary to
propose a method that can fully exclude the effect of heterogeneity in insurance
preferences to uncover the private information on mortality risk.
  One method to fully exclude the insurance preferences is to assume that all
individuals are to be categorized into one of these K types: H  ( H1 , H 2 ,......, H K ) , based
on their different life insurance preferences. Without loss of generality, we assume that
Hk < Hk+1. A greater value of H indicates a stronger preference on life insurance. For
individuals belong to the k-th type (H = Hk ):
                           Die  1(c  X  X  SS  SS  H k k  uk  0)

                                   1(ck  X  X  SS SS  uk  0)

                                   1(ck  X  X  uk*  0)

                           LFI  1(c  X  X  SS SS  H k k  vk  0)        (6)

                                  1(ck  X  X  SS SS  vk  0)

                                  1(ck  X  X  vk*  0)
   By assuming H to be categorical, the effect of insurance preference is absorbed into
the constant terms ck and ck . The correlations between uk* and vk* , therefore, only

reflect the presence of private information SS in k-th type. By construction, constant
terms are different for different types to reflect the effect of insurance preferences on
subsequent mortality and life insurance purchase, respectively.

                                                  10
    Implication 1. With everything equal, for any 1  m  n  K , where K is the total
number of types, the nth -type individual would be more likely to buy life insurance but
less likely to experience mortality than the mth -type individual, i.e., cn  cm and cn  cm .

     Based on above analysis, the empirical model we used to estimate is written as
follows:




for i, j = 0, 1;                                                                              (7)

 B. Identification of finite mixture density model
    The model in equation (7) is a standard mixture density model, whose
identification issue has been well studied in the literature (Hu, 2008; Lewbel, 2007;
Chen, Hu, and Lewbel, 2008, 2009; Mahajan, 2006; Gan and Henandez, 2013; Henry,
Kitamura and Salanié, 2013). In particular, Henry, Kitamura, and Salanié (2013), HKS
for short, show that under the following assumptions, the mixture density model with
unobserved heterogeneity in equation (7) is non-parametrically identified.
    Assumption 1 (Dependency condition). The probability of being a certain type does
depend on the value of W. That is, the type variable H must be correlated with W. This
assumption holds since W is regarded as proxies for H.
    Assumption 2 (Exclusive restriction). The set of variables W no longer affects the
outcome once conditional on a certain type. That is,
                           and                          , for any k {1, 2,......, K} . (8)
Note that Assumption 2 can be equivalently represented by:
  Pr(Die = i, LFI = j | X, H = Hk) = Pr(Die = i, LFI = j | X, H = Hk, W) (8’)
for i, j = 0, 1. In particular, equation (8) implies:
                           and                        for any k {1, 2,......, K}   (9)
    Such property of W in equation (9) is quite similar to the requirement of
instrumental variable (IV) in the two-stage least square (2SLS) estimation, in which
the instrumental variable is supposed to be correlated with the unobserved H variable
but not correlated with the error term.


                                                11
    It is worth noting that Assumption 2 in HKS implies that life insurance preferences
can be fully controlled by only using a partial set of proxy variables W .2
    HKS also suggests that a violation of Assumption 2 will result in a biased estimate
of coefficients provided that X and Wo (observed proxy variables) are correlated, as
shown in Assumption 3.
    Assumption 3.                     Corr (X, Wo) ≠ 0.
This property forms the specification test of this paper. Specifically, we successively
drop each one of the five sets of proxy variables and check whether there is a
significant difference between estimated coefficients of X using different proxy-
variable sets. If so, this indicates that the effect of heterogeneous preferences on life
insurance cannot be fully excluded through the mixture density model by only using a
partial set of proxy variables. Assumption 3 is necessary for the validity of specification
test we proposed above; otherwise, the coefficient of X would always be consistently
estimated even if the unobserved insurance preference is not fully excluded.
    In HKS, a sharp boundary for both the probability of being each type and the
probability of the outcome conditional on a certain type can be obtained under
Assumption 1 and 2. Moreover, in the two-type case, point identification can be
achieved under Assumption 1, 2 as well as an additional restriction. It is suggested
that one type dominates in the left tail and the other type dominates in the right tail,
which is satisfied, in our case, by the assumption of symmetric distribution of
dependent variables with the same variance but different means, as implied in
Implication 1.
    Under Implication 1, Assumption 1, and Assumption 2, the mixture density model,
as shown in equation (7) with only two categories (K=2) is uniquely identified.
    In the rest of this part, we will start with the simplest case in which we assume
there are only two types of life insurance preferences ( high-type (h) and low-type (l))

2
  W is called Instrumental-Like Variables (ILV) in Mahajan (2006) in which studies the non-parametric
identification and estimation of regression models with a misclassified binary regressor (Hmis) under the
mixture density framework. The existence of ILV (W) is one of the key assumptions in his paper. ILV is
assumed to be independent of the observed but misclassified (Hmis) conditional on covariates X and true
type. A direct implication of this conditional independence in his context is that the only channel for the
ILV affecting the outcome is through the true type.


                                                    12
and construct the likelihood function with the assumption that the error terms have a
standard joint normal distribution to jointly identify the parameter set ( ch , cl , ch , cl ,

 X ,  X ,). The probability of belonging to each type and the correlations between the
error terms for each type can also be estimated simultaneously.

   Our objective function for MLE is:

                                                                  N

                                                max  ln f ( Die , LFI                 i        i   | X i ,Wi )
                                                                i 1                                                   (10)

where,

         f ( Diei , LFIi )  Pr( Diei  1, LFIi  1)1( Diei 1, LFIi 1) *Pr( Diei  1, LFIi  0)1( Diei 1, LFIi 0) *

                                     Pr( Diei  0, LFIi  1)1( Diei 0, LFIi 1) *Pr( Diei  0, LFIi  0)1( Diei 0, LFIi 0)

                                  [ f ( Die
                                  m  0,1
                                                           i    m, LFI i  n)]1( Diei m, LFIi n )
                                  n  0,1


                                        {Pr( Diei  m, LFI i  n | H  H h )*Pr( H  H h ) 
                              Pr( Die
                              m  0,1                       m, LFI i  n | H  H l )*Pr( H  H l )}1( Diei m, LFIi n )
                                                       i
                              n  0,1


   Let uh*  1vh*  h , and ul*  2vl*  l ; then 2h  1  12 and 2l  1  22 by the

assumption that uh*(l ) ~ N (0,1) and vh*(l ) ~ N (0,1) . We then write down one of the four

cases in our objective function as below:
      f ( Diei  1, LFIi  1| X i ,Wi )  Pr( Diei  1, LFIi  1| H  H h , X i )*Pr( H  H h | Wi )
                                                            Pr( Diei  1, LFIi  1| H  Hl , X i )*Pr( H  Hl | Wi )
                                         Pr(ch  X i  X  uh*  0, Ch  X i X  vh*  0 | X i )*Pr(Wi *    0)

                                             Pr(cl  X i  X  ul*  0, cl  X i X  vl*  0 | X i )*[1  Pr(Wi *    0)]
                                                   
                                                                        ch  X i  X  1vh*
                                                               (
                                                                                  1       2
                                                                                                           ) (vh* )dvh*(Wi * )
                                              ch  X i X                                1

                                                                 
                                                                                 cl  X i  X  2vl*
                                                                          (
                                                                                           1  2      2
                                                                                                                  ) (vl* )dvl*[1  (Wi * )] ; (11)
                                                            cl  X i X




                                                                                  13
 C. Data

    The data set to be used here is the HRS cohort of the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS) data during the period 2000 to 2008. We restrict our analysis to data from
2000 to 2008, since 2000 is the first year which includes all the variables we apply to
distinguish individuals’ heterogeneity in preferences of life insurance, and 2008 is the
latest data we may access. The average age of our respondents in 2000 is 66, and 70
percent have life insurance (including both term and whole life insurance). Same
respondents are followed over time, allowing us to observe actual mortality from 2000
to 2008. During this eight-year time window, 20.6% of our sample die at some point. A
different approach to measure the ex-post risk is to work on age-sex-race adjusted
mortality instead of working on the binary variable of dying. This method calculates
each individual’s updated survival possibility conditional on if he/she has died, as
suggested in Gan, Hurd, and McFadden (2005). For simplicity, this paper employs the
binary variable as the record of the occurrence of insured event.
    The dataset contains information on insurance status, mortality, and a series of
public information on individual demographics and health conditions, all of which may
be used to determine risk classifications by insurers. The data also contain information
that is only available to individuals but not to insurers. Specifically, HRS asks
respondents about their self-perceived likelihood of being alive for next 10 to 15 years.
The specific question is: “Using a number from 0 to 100, where 0 means absolutely no
chance and 100 equals absolutely certain, what do you think are the chances that you
will live to be 80 to 100?” These subjective survival probabilities have been shown in
the literature to carry additional information on individual actual mortality (Hurd and
McGarry, 1995) and performs better in predicting individuals’ behavior (Gan, Gong,
Hurd, and McFadden, 2013). We, therefore, use the self-perceived likelihood of being
alive for next 10 to 15 years as a proxy variable for private information, Z, which
captures a subset of private information of individuals. It is worth noting that the
higher the value is, the lower probability of mortality the individual believes.
    One well-known potential problem with self-perceived risk is that individuals have
propensity to report figures 0, 50, and 100 percent (Hurd and McGarry, 2002; Gan,
Hurd, and McFadden, 2005). These focal responses suggest that individual subjective
                                            14
probabilities on subsequent mortality can only serve as a noisy proxy for private
information.
    The data also contain information that is potentially useful to distinguish
individuals’ different preferences in life insurance: bequest motives; risk tolerance; the
number of years of education; employment status; and financial variables such as
whether own stock, loan, and house. The proxy variables for risk tolerance include
whether an individual practices preventative health activities such as flu shot and
blood test for cholesterol. The proxy variables for bequest motives include whether
individuals take care of grandkids if they have and whether they have religion
preferences. For more details on the data and our sample see Table 3.


III. Results

   A. Private information about mortality


   Column (2) of Table 4 shows the estimated results from the bivariate probit
estimation of equation (2). They show the relationship between individual beliefs and
subsequent mortality and the relationship between individual beliefs and purchases of
life insurance, controlling the public information used by insurance companies for
determining the classification of risk.
   We find that an individual’s belief about the likelihood of being alive for next ten to
fifteen years is a significant, negative predictor of insurance purchases as well as
subsequent mortality. This indicates that the individuals who have higher self-
perceived probability of being alive for next 10 to 15 years are less likely to have life
insurance and are also less likely to experience mortality. The estimated coefficients for
individual beliefs in Die and LFI equation are -0.0011 and -0.00078, respectively, and
corresponding to marginal effects of -0.00025 and -0.00027. That is, every 10
percentage point increase in self-perceived survival probability is associated with a
0.25% decrease in the probability of mortality between 2000 and 2008 and a 0.27%
decrease in the probability of holding life insurance in the year 2000, respectively.
Reasons for this statistically significant but economically trivial effect may be ascribed
to focal point responses and problem of noisy reports, which are quite common in
                                             15
these subjective questions. Nevertheless, these results provide direct evidence for the
existence of private information in life insurance markets.
   In addition, we also include “self-reported health status (SRH)”, which is a
subjective but more comprehensive judgment for current health condition, into the
public information, X. The specific question we use is: “Would you say your health is
excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor?” People are asked to use number 1 to 5, which
represent poor, fair, good, very good, and excellent, respectively, to evaluate his/her
current health condition. We find the estimated coefficients for SRH in Die equation is
significantly negative, while, in LFI equation, it is positive. This indicates that
individuals who are in a better state of health are less likely to die but more likely to be
included in the pool of individuals holding life insurance.
   However, except for the direct evidence for the existence of private information we
stated at the beginning of this part, when we apply the standard test, we obtain a
significantly negative estimate at -0.0341 for the correlation between the two error
terms. In other words, the standard test does not provide evidence for the existence of
private information. These findings are consistent with the conclusions made by
Cawley and Philipson (1999), in which they confirm a neutral relationship between
subjective mortality risk and life insurance ownership.


   B. Private information about insurance preferences

   The third column of Table 4 represents the results of model (5), in which we add
the proxy variables for individuals’ preferences for life insurance. We confirm that the
signs of these variables are opposite in these two equations, indicating that compared
to private information on risk type, these factors can have an offsetting effect on the
correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence. Specifically, individuals
who have wealth, employment, low risk tolerance, strong bequest motives, and more
years of education, who own stock, house, and loan are more likely to purchase life
insurance but less likely to experience the insured events. However, even after
controlling these variables, the correlation between the two error terms is still negative
and not significantly different from zero.


                                             16
   Column (4) of Table 4 report the results from the same probit model, with self-
perceived risk of mortality added. All the results are similar to what reported in
column (3).


   C. Life insurance and individual’s mortality


   Another approach, suggested by Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), is also applied
here to confirm this negative or neutral relationship between life insurance purchases
and the mortality we derived above. Table 5 shows the estimated coefficients from
probit estimation of subsequent mortality on the ownership of life insurance (equation
(3)). In column (1) of Table 5, we control for the public information that is available to
insurers. The coefficient for life insurance is negative and statistically significant at -
0.053 (0.029), indicating that individuals who have life insurance are 2% less likely to
die than those who do not. In the second column of Table 5, we add proxy for private
information, i.e., the self-perceived risk of mortality. A similar result is obtained. The
third and fourth columns in Table 5 report the results with proxies for individuals’
preferences in life insurance added, where the fourth column includes self-perceived
risk while column (3) does not. We find that the estimated coefficient for life insurance,
unsurprisingly, is still not significantly different from zero.


   D. Identification of private information about mortality using mixture density
       model

   We now estimate the mixture density model as shown in equation (7), assuming
individuals can be categorized into two types based on their different insurance
preferences. Let H=1 be h type, and H=0 be l type. As discussed before, we cannot
observe which type the individual belongs to, but we can use a series of proxy variables
W which are related to H to probabilistically determine the type of an arbitrary
individual. We then use ML method to estimate our log likelihood function (10).
   Column (1) of the top panel of Table 6 reports the estimated effects of the series of
socioeconomic factors predicting the type of an individual. Overall, 86 percent of
individuals belong to the h type.
                                              17
   Not surprisingly, people who belong to different types are quite different in their
behaviors. As expected, with everything equal, individuals who are h type are more
likely to purchase life insurance but less likely to experience mortality. For an h-type
individual, the average likelihood of purchasing life insurance is 0.779 and the
probability of mortality is 0.079; while, for an l-type person, the average likelihood of
purchasing life insurance is 0.178 and the probability of mortality is 0.19. In other
words, the h type is 60 percentage points more likely to purchase life insurance but 11
percentage points less likely to experience mortality than the l type.
   The conclusion above can also be confirmed from the perspective of the magnitude
of constant terms. For the Die model, with everything equal, the magnitude of the
estimated constant for the h type ch is -0.2888 (3.1764), which is smaller than the

estimated constant for the l type cl at 0.2451 (3.1754). However, for the LFI model,

with everything equal, the magnitude of the estimated constant for h type ch is -3.8322

(2.5344), which is larger than the estimated constant for the l type cl at -5.5241
(2.5530), although they are not significantly different. It is worth mentioning here that
all the results are consistent with the predictions made in Implication 1, the
assumption that guaranteed the point identification of this model.
   Most importantly, by distinguishing individuals into h and l types based on their
different preferences in life insurance, we obtain direct evidence of private information
from the standard test. The estimated correlation between the error terms in Die
model and LFI model is, respectively, positive at 0.114 (0.0568) for h-type and 0.327
(0.0777) for l-type individuals, which are both statistically significant at the 5 percent
level. Note that such positive correlation is achieved without using any data on private
information.
   In the second column of Table 6, we include one dimension of private information,
the self-perceived probability of being alive for next ten to fifteen years, in both the Die
equation and LFI equation. Consistent with the results reported in one type model in
Table 4, the coefficient of this variable is negative and statistically significant in both
equations, indicating that private information still plays a key role in determining the
purchases of life insurance and predicting subsequent mortality after controlling the

                                              18
classification of risk calculated by insurance companies. We find when adding one
proxy variable for private information, the correlation between the two error terms for
h type and l type are still significantly positive at 0.112 (0.0564) and 0.334 (0.0790),
respectively. All other estimates are similar to the results reported in column (1) of
Table 6.


   E. A specification test
   In this section, we focus on the test of the key assumption (Assumption 2) which
ensures the full exclusion of such heterogeneity in insurance preferences through the
mixture density model. Given the above assumptions, the probability of mortality and
life insurance purchases conditional on each type can be expressed in the following
forms:
    Pr( Die  1| X , H  H h )  (ch  X  X ) , and Pr( LFI  1| X , H  H h )  (ch  X  X ) ;

    Pr( Die  1| X , H  Hl )  (cl  X  X ) , and Pr( LFI  1| X , H  Hl )  (cl  X  X ) .

   Provided that corr ( X ,W )  0 , Assumption 2 holds if and only if for any arbitrary
two sets of proxy variable, say Wa and Wb , there is no significantly different estimation
of ch , cl , ch , cl ,  X and  X when using Wa and Wb to determine the types of

individuals, respectively. This enlightens the specification test which is similar to the
over-identification test in the instrumental model when more than one dimension of
instrumental variables W is available. Such method to test Assumption 2 in our paper
is also suggested by HKS. We therefore vary the variables we used in the type equation
as a test of Assumption 2. Specifically, in the present setting, the set of W includes
individuals’ characteristics from five aspects: bequest motives, risk aversion, education,
employment status, and financial conditions. We would like to respectively exclude
each of these five aspects in our specification tests.
   Table 7 (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) reports the result when proxy variables for bequest
motives, risk attitudes, the number of years of education, employment status and
financial conditions are excluded, respectively, where the first column only includes
public information, X, while the second column includes both public information, X,
and private information on subsequent mortality in next ten to fifteen years, Z. We see

                                                    19
under all of these five settings, the constants in both equations satisfy the predictors of
two-type model; parameters in both Die and LFI equations are similar to the
corresponding parameters estimated in Table 6, when a full set of W is used. Moreover,
the correlations between the error terms in Die and LFI equations are still significantly
positive for most of specifications; although such positive correlation is not significant
in case (d) for h type and case (e) for l type.
   Table 8 presents a formal Hausman-type test comparing the estimated parameters
of interest in the Die and LFI equations (i.e., ch , cl , ch , cl ,  X and  X ) presented in

Table 7 with each of the five cases in Table 8. Results under five specifications, which
correspond to the specification test in Table 8, are reported. In the first to fifth set of
columns, we compare the estimates from the full model with the bequest motive-
excluded model, risk aversion-excluded model, education-excluded model,
employment status-excluded model, and financial conditions-excluded model,
respectively. The first and second rows compare the parameter estimates in Die
equation and LFI equation, respectively. As expected, estimates in the Die and LFI
equations in all five settings are not significantly different from the parameters
estimated from the full model.


   F. A three-type model


   Section D and E present results from of the mixture density model with the
assumption that individuals’ heterogeneity in life insurance preferences (H) is
categorized into two types, although, it is possible to categorize them into three or
more types. We distinguish people into three types based on their high, medium, or
low preference for life insurance by using the same set of variables we employed when
separating individuals’ preferences in life insurance into two types, with the
assumption that the probability of being each type has a multinomial logit distribution.
Meanwhile, we make the same restrictions in the two-type model:  X and  X are set to
be identical for each type, while the correlation between the two error terms in each
type as well as the constant terms are allowed to differ. Table 9 shows the results
estimated from a three-type model, where column (1) includes only public information
                                                 20
and column (2) contains both public information as well as self-perceived probability
of being alive for next 10 to 15 years.
   We find the correlations between the error terms in Die and LFI equation in each
type are still significantly positive, which are 0.164 (0.069), 0.342 (0.151), and 0.202
(0.348), respectively, when only public information is included. However, compared to
the two-type model, many of the variables used to distinguish people’s heterogeneous
preferences in life insurance in the three-type model become insignificant, indicating
the delimitation of individuals’ different preferences for life insurance is not that clear
when separating individuals into three types by the same set of variables we used for
two types. In other words, there exists much more in common on the taste for life
insurance between each two types of individuals when we categorize individuals into
three types than when we separate them into two.
   Next, we apply the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian Information
Criterion (BIC) as a further comparison of the relative goodness of fit between two-
type and three-type model. Results are shown in Table 10. We find that when there is
only public information added into the Die and LFI equations, the value of AIC is
27375.7 for three-type model, while for two-type model is 27456.9, suggesting that the
three-type model minimizes the information loss compared to the two-type model and
thus is preferred by AIC. However, after introducing a larger penalty term for the
number of parameters, the two-type model is more favorably suggested by BIC. The
corresponding value of BIC for two-type model is 28170.2, while for three-type model
it is 28195.1. The same conclusions can be made when both public and private
information are included in Die and LFI equations. However, since the difference of
values between Two-type and Three-type model measured by both AIC and BIC is
quite small, we may conclude that increasing the number of types does not help
improve the model a lot.

IV. Conclusions

       This paper makes three contributions to the literature. First, we find after
controlling the insurer’s risk classification, an individual’s subjective belief of being
alive for next 10 to 15 years still is a significantly negative predictor on subsequent

                                             21
mortality, indicating the existence of residual private information in life insurance
markets. Besides, this residual private information is negatively correlated with the
purchase of life insurances. Combined, these two results provide direct evidence of the
asymmetric information. However, this private information cannot be directly detected
by the standard test which is widely used in most literature.
   Second, this paper demonstrates that a series of socioeconomic factors such as
education level, employment status, risk attitudes, bequest motives as well as financial
conditions which result in individuals’ heterogeneity in insurance preferences all have
offsetting effects on life insurance coverage and risk occurrence. Specifically,
individuals who are employed, wealthier, more risk averse, with strong bequest
motives and higher education level as well as those who have stock, loans and houses
are more likely to purchase life insurance but less likely to die. However, even after
controlling these variables, we still cannot observe a positive correlation between life
insurance ownership and subsequent mortality.
    Third, by applying the mixture density model, in which we distinguish people into
two unobserved categories based on their different preferences in insurance, we
successfully detect a significantly positive correlation between life insurance purchases
and subsequent mortality, providing a direct evidence of private information suggested
by the standard test.
   One direction for future work is to use more diverse distribution assumptions on
the error terms to serve as a further test of our result. In this paper, we estimate our
model by assuming a standard normal distribution of error terms; however, more
extensive distribution assumptions on error terms are welcomed to be applied to
secure a more robust result.




                                            22
References:

American Council of Life Insurers (2010): “2010 Life Insurers Fact Book”

Beck, Thorsten, and Ian Webb (2003): “Economic, demographic, and institutional
  determinants of life insurance consumption across countries.” The World Bank
  Economic Review, Vol.17, No.1 51-58

Browne, M.J., and K. Kim (1993): “An international analysis of life insurance demand,
  Journal of Risk and Insurance,” 60(4): 616-634.

Cawley, John and Tomas Philipson (1999): “An empirical examination of information
  barriers to trade in insurance.” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), pp.827-
  846

Chiappori, Pierre-Andre (2000): “Econometric models of insurance under asymmetric
  information.” In Georges Dionne, ed. Handbook of Insurance Economics. London:
  Kluwer

Chiappori, Pierre-Andre and Bernad Salanié (1997): “Empirical contract theory: the case
  of insurance data.” European Economic Review, page 943-950

Chiappori, Pierre-André, and Bernard Salanié (2013): “Asymmetric information in
  insurance markets: predictions and tests.” Forthcoming in G. Dionne, ed. Handbook
  of Insurance, 2nd edition.

Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, and Bernard Salanié (2000): “Testing for asymmetric
  information in insurance markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 108 (1), page 56-78

Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, Bruno Jullien, Bernard Salanié, and Francois Salanié (2006):
  “Asymmetric information in insurance: general testable implications.” The RAND
  Journal of Economics, Vol 37, Issue 4, pages 783–798

Cutler, David, Amy Finkelstein and Kathleen McGarry (2008): “Preference
  heterogeneity and insurance markets: explaining a puzzle of insurance.” American
  Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 98:2, page 157-162

Fang, Hanming, Michael P. Keane, and Dan Silverman (2008): “Sources of
  advantageous selection: evidence from the Medigap insurance market.” Journal of
  Political Economy, Volume 116, Issue 2, page 303-350

Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry (2006): “Multiple dimensions of private
  information: evidence from the long-term care insurance market.” American
  Economic Review, Vol.96 No.4, page 938-958

                                          23
Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba (2002). “Selection effects in the market for
  individual annuities: new evidence from the United Kingdom.” Economic Journal,
  2002, 112 (476), pp. 28-50.

Gan, Li, Michael Hurd and Daniel McFadden (2005): “Individual subjective survival
  curves.” In David Wise, ed., Analysis in Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press, page 377-411

Gan, Li, Feng Huang and Adalbert Mayer (2010): “A simple test of private information
  in the insurance markets with heterogeneous insurance demand.” NBER WPS
  #16738

Gan, Li, Guan Gong, Michael Hurd, and Danie McFadden (2013): “Individual subjective
  survival curves and bequests.” Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.

Gan, Li and Manuel Hernandez (2013): “Making friends with your neighbors?
  Agglomeration and tacit collusion in the lodging industry.” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, July 2013, 95(3): 1002-1017.

Hakansson, Nils H. (1969). “Optimal investment and consumption strategies under risk,
 an uncertain life time, and insurance.” International Economic Review, Vol. 10, No. 3
 Oct, 1969, pp. 443-466.

He, Daifeng (2009). “The life insurance market: asymmetric information revisited”
  Journal of Public Economics, Vol 93, Issues 9-10, Oct 2009, pp. 1090-1097.

Hendel, Igal, and Alessandro Lizzie (2003). “The role of commitment in dynamic
 contracts: evidence from life insurance.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
 118, No. 1, pp. 299-327

Henry, Marc, Yuichi Kitamura, and Bernard Salanié (2010). “Identifying finite mixtures
  in econometric models” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper #1767

Hu, Yingyao (2008). “Identiﬁcation and estimation of nonlinear models with
  misclassiﬁcation error using instrumental variables: A general solution” Journal of
  Econometrics, 144, 27–61

Hurd, Michael D. and McGarry, Kathleen (2002). "The Predictive validity of subjective
      probabilities of survival." Economic Journal, 2002, 112(482), pp. 966-85

Jullien, Bruno, Bernard Salanié and François Salanié (2007). “Screening risk-averse
  agents under moral hazard: single-crossing and the CARA case.” Economic Theory,
  Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 151-169

Lewis, Frank D. (1989). “Dependents and the demand for life insurance” The American
                                           24
  Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 3, pp. 452-467

Mahajan, Aprajit (2006). “Identification and estimation of regression models with
 misclassification.” Econometrica, Vol.74, No.3 631-665

Meza, David de and David C. Webb (2001). “Advantageous selection in insurance
 markets.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 32 (2), page 249-262

Pauly, Mark V., Kate H. Withers, Krupa Subramanian-Viswana, Jean Lemaire, and John
  C. Hershey (2003). “Price elasticity of demand for term life insurance and adverse
  selection” NBER WPS #9925

Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz (1976) “Equilibrium in competitive insurance
  markets: an essay on the economics of imperfect information.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1976, 90 (4) pp. 629-649.

Smart, Michael (2000) “Competitive insurance markets with two unobservables.”
  International Economic Review, 2000, 41(1) pp. 153-169.

Walliser, Jan and Joachim K. Winter (1998). “Tax incentives, bequest motives and the
 demand for life insurance: evidence from Germany” Working Paper.

Yarri, Menahem E. (1965). “Uncertain life time, life insurance, and the theory of the
  consumer” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 137-150




                                            25
Table 1. Unconditional Relationship between Life Insurance

                         Life insurance ownership

                                0              1            Sum

                  0         22.7%           56.7%           79.4%

     Die          1            7.8%         12.8%           20.6%

                 Sum       30.5%            69.5%




                  Table 2. Thought Experiment

                      Group Number         Probability of    Purchase of Life
                                             Mortality          Insurance
                           1                    20                  1
Low insurance              2                    30                  1
  preference               3                    40                  2
  group (l)                4                    50                  3
                           5                    60                  4
                           A                       10               1
High insurance             B                    20                  2
  preference               C                    30                  2
  group (h)                D                    40                  3
                           E                    50                  4
                                                   10               1
                                                20                  2
 All together                                   30                  3
                                                40                  5
                                                50                  7
                                                60                  4



                                      26
27
                       Table 3. Summary of Statistics

Variables                 Mean      Std. Deviation       Min       Max
Die                        0.21           0.41            0           1
LFI                        0.7           0.46             0           1
Subjective survival       49.51          31.75            0         100
Marriage                  0.69           0.46             0           1
Spouse age                44.49          30.87            0          99
age                       65.92           9.97            27         90
age square                4444           1334            729       8100
age cubic                306172         137461          19683    729000
black                      0.12          0.32             0           1
age x black                 7.6          21.01            0          90
age square x black         499           1430             0        8100
age cubic x black        33482          101661            0      729000
age x gender              26.56          33.14            0          90
age square x gender       1804           2353             0        8100
age cubic x gender       124801         174154            0       72900
male                       0.4           0.49             0           1
arthritis                 0.56            0.5             0           1
high blood pressure       0.48            0.5             0           1
lung                      0.09           0.29             0           1
cancer                     0.12          0.33             0           1
heart                      0.21           0.41             0           1
stroke                    0.06            0.23             0           1
drink                     0.06            0.24             0           1
smoke now                  0.16           0.36             0           1
smoke ever                 0.6            0.49             0           1
diabetes                   0.17             0.44           0           1
incontinent                0.17            0.38            0           1
psych                      0.14             0.34           0           1
depression                 0.23             0.42           0           1
back                       0.33             0.47           0           1
self-reported-health        3.3             1.11            1          5
BMI                       27.25             5.34          12.6      75.5
take drugs                 0.77             0.42            0          1
home care use             0.05              0.23            0          1
nursing home               0.01             0.12            0          1
hospital                   0.23             0.42            0          1
number of kid              3.25             2.15            0        20
kid                        0.94             0.25            0          1
                                     28
No of siblings          2.59         2.31     0       17
siblings                0.85         0.36     0        1
No of grandkids         5.07         5.43     0       80
grandkid                0.8          0.4      0        1
care grandkid missing   0.2          0.4      0        1
care for grandkid        0.28        0.45      0        1
religion                 0.95        0.23      0        1
education               12.47        3.02      0       17
flu shot                 0.61        0.49      0        1
test for blood           0.77          0.42   0         1
employment               0.4         0.49      0       1
stock                   0.36         0.48      0       1
loan                    0.08         0.27      0       1
income ($)              21793         33167   0    2000000




                                29
                      Table 4. One Type Bivariate Probit Model

                            (1)                 (2)              (3)            (4)

                                     public        subjective        public       public
                                  information     survival and    information  information
                                                     public       and proxies and individual
                                                  information          for     survival and
                                                                   insurance    proxies for
                                                                   preference   insurance
                                                                                 demand
Die equation
subjective survival                              -0.0011***                           -0.0010***
                                                  (0.0005)                              (0.0005)
care for grandkids                                                -0.0948***          -0.0945***
                                                                    (0.0344)            (0.0344)
religion                                                           -0.0986**           -0.0989**
                                                                    (0.0600)            (0.0600)
flu shot                                                              0.0135              0.0138
                                                                     (0.0316)           (0.0316)
preventive test for blood                                           -0.217***          -0.215***
    cholesterol                                                     (0.0354)            (0.0354)
education                                                            -0.0004            -0.0002
                                                                    (0.0052)            (0.0052)
employment status                                                  -0.159***           -0.156***
                                                                     (0.0361)           (0.0361)
income                                                            -1.31e-06**         -1.33e-06**
                                                                   (7.21e-07)          (7.21e-07)
have loan                                                            -0.0060             -0.0043
                                                                    (0.0587)            (0.0587)
own house                                                          -0.134***           -0.134***
                                                                    (0.0368)            (0.0368)
have stock                                                        -0.0887***          -0.0887***
                                                                    (0.0320)            (0.0320)
constant                    0.0658                     0.160          -0.882              -0.792
                            (3.1753)                  (3.189)         (3.185)             (3.196)
LFI equation
subjective survival                             -0.0008***                        -0.0011***
                                                (0.0004)                          (0.0004)
care for grandkids                                               0.0807***        0.0814***
                                                                 (0.0279)         (0.0279)
religion                                                         0.230***         0.230***
                                                                 (0.0496)         (0.0496)
flu shot                                                         0.0674***        0.0679***
                                                                 (0.0256)         (0.0256)

                                                30
preventive test for blood                                        0.0657***     0.0677***
   cholesterol                                                   (0.0287)      (0.0287)
education                                                        0.0278***     0.0284***
                                                                 (0.0044)      (0.0044)
Employment status                                                0.334***      0.335***
                                                                 (0.0285)      (0.0285)
income                                                           2.94e-06***   2.94e-06***
                                                                 (3.91e-07)    (3.91e-07)
have loan                                                        0.188***      0.190***
                                                                 (0.0466)      (0.0467)
own house                                                        0.257***      0.256***
                                                                 (0.0316)      (0.0316)
have stock                                                       0.0413*       0.0418*
                                                                 (0.0261)      (0.0262)
constant                    -5.1930***        -5.084***          -3.417**      -3.272**
                            (1.8514)          (1.852)            (1.925)       (1.926)
corr of two error terms      -0.0331**        -0.0341**          -0.00573      -0.00678
                             (0.0178)         (0.0178)           (0.0182)      (0.0182)
observations                14,605            14,605             14,586        14,586
Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15




                                              31
Table 5. The Relationship between Life Insurance and Subsequent Mortality

                               (1)               (2)           (3)             (4)

                             public        subjective        public           public
                          information     survival and    information      information
                                             public           and              and
                                                           proxies for
                                          information                       individual
                                                           insurance
                                                                           survival and
                                                           preference
                                                                            proxies for
                                                                            insurance
                                                                             demand



coefficient from probit     -.0529**           -.0546**     -.0109          -.0126
of mortality on LFI          (.0294)            (.0294)     (.0301)        (.0301)

Observations                 14,605            14,605        14,586        14,586

          Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15




                                          32
                      Table 6. Mixture density model (Two-type)

                                           (1)                                (2)
                                   Public information               Public information and
                                                                      Subjective survival
                                       Type equation
care for grandkids                      0.1686***                            0.1679***
                                         (0.0563)                             (0.0558)
religion                                0.5295***                            0.5216***
                                         (0.1075)                             (0.1060)
flu shot                                0.0988***                            0.0995***
                                         (0.0492)                             (0.0488)
preventive test for blood               0.1764***                            0.1767***
    cholesterol                          (0.0577)                              (0.0571)
education                               0.0334***                            0.0343***
                                         (0.0086)                             (0.0086)
Employment status                       0.3990***                            0.3925***
                                         (0.0631)                             (0.0628)
Income                                 3.52e-05***                           3.5e-05***
                                       (4.38e-06)                            (4.31e-06)
Have loan                               0.3656***                            0.3665***
                                         (0.1120)                              (0.1114)
Own house                               0.4276***                            0.4226***
                                         (0.0607)                             (0.0560)
Have stock                              0.1057***                            0.1062***
                                         (0.0534)                             (0.0530)
constant                               -1.5840***                             -1.569***
                                         (0.2459)                             (0.2436)
                                        Die Equation
                               High-type           Low-type       High-type          Low-type
Subjective survival                                              -0.0011***          -0.0011***
                                                                  (0.0005)           (0.0005)
constant                        -0.2888             0.2451         -0.1787            0.3522
                                (3.1764)           (3.1754)        (3.1831)           (3.1821)
                                        LFI Equation
Subjective survival                                              -0.0014***         -0.0014***
                                                                  (0.0005)           (0.0005)
Constant                       -3.8322*         5.5241***           -3.671           -5.389***
                               (0.0568)            (0.0777)       (2.5556)            (2.5751)
Correlation of two error        0.114***           0.327***        0.112***          0.334***
    terms                         (0.0568)         (0.0777)          (0.0564)         (0.0790)
observations                     14,586             14,586         14,586             14,586
                 Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15

                                              33
                 Table 7a: Specification Tests: Drop “Bequest motives”

                                           (1)                                (2)
                                   Public information               Public information and
                                                                      Subjective survival
                                       Type equation
care for grandkids

religion

flu shot                                0.0985***                          0.0996***
                                          (0.048)                           (0.0477)
preventive test for blood               0.1730***                          0.1727***
    cholesterol                           (0.057)                            (0.056)
Education                                0.033***                           0.034***
                                         (0.008)                            (0.008)
Employment status                      0.0379***                            0.371***
                                         (0.0619)                           (0.0615)
Income                                0.0000359***                       0.0000356***
                                        (4.51e-06)                         (4.45e-06)
Have loan                                0.357***                           0.358***
                                          (0.113)                            (0.112)
Own house                                0.430***                           0.425***
                                          (0.059)                            (0.058)
Have stock                               0.112***                           0.113***
                                          (0.053)                            (0.053)
constant                                -0.980***                          -0.968***
                                          (0.181)                            (0.179)
                                        Die Equation
                               High-type             Low-type     High-type       Low-type
Subjective survival                                              -0.0011***       -0.0011***
                                                                  (0.0004)        (0.0004)
constant                        -0.0168               0.4897        0.093           0.594
                                (3.166)               (3.165)      (3.171)          (3.171)
                                           LFI Equation
Subjective survival                                              -0.0015***        -0.0015*
                                                                  (0.0005)         (0.0005)
Constant                         -4.857**            -6.632***     -4.729**        -6.543**
                                 (2.597)              (2.626)      (2.622)          (2.654)
Correlation of two error      0.106***               0.338**      0.103***         0.348***
    terms                     (0.0529)
observations                     14,586               14,586       14,586           14,586
                 Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15


                                                34
                   Table 7b. Specification Tests: Drop “Risk Averse”
                                         (1)                             (2)
                                 Public information           Public information and
                                                                Subjective survival
                                     Type equation
care for grandkids                    0.168***                        0.167***
                                      (0.056)                         (0.056)
religion                              0.523***                        0.516***
                                       (0.107)                        (0.106)
flu shot

preventive test for blood
    cholesterol
education                               0.035***                           0.036***
                                        (0.0086)                            (0.008)
Employment status                       0.371***                           0.365***
                                         (0.062)                            (0.062)
Income                                0.000036***                        0.000036***
                                       (4.55e-06)                         (4.48e-06)
Have loan                               0.370***                           0.371***
                                         (0.112)                             (0.111)
Own house                               0.427***                           0.423***
                                         (0.061)                            (0.060)
Have stock                              0.116***                           0.116***
                                          0.052)                            (0.052)
constant                                  -1.392                             -1.377
                                         (0.242)                            (0.240)
                                        Die Equation
                               High-type            Low-type      High-type       Low-type
Subjective survival                                               -0.001***       -0.001***
                                                                  (0.0005)        (0.0005)
constant                         -0.266              0.225         -0.162           0.327
                                (3.178)              (3.177)       (3.183)         (3.182)
                                          LFI Equation
Subjective survival                                              -0.0014***       -0.0014***
                                                                  (0.0005)        (0.0005)
Constant                        -3.911*         -5.650***          -3.760*        -5.524***
                                (2.567)              (2.591)       (2.588)         (2.613)
Correlation of two error        0.110***            0.307***      0.107***         0.313***
    terms                       (0.056)             (0.083)       (0.055)          (0.084)
observations                     14,586              14,586        14,586           14,586
                 Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15




                                               35
                      Table 7c. Specification Tests: Drop “Education”

                                           (1)                                (2)
                                   Public information               Public information and
                                                                      Subjective survival
                                       Type equation
care for grandkids                      0.175***                             0.175***
                                         (0.057)                              (0.057)
religion                                0.522***                             0.516***
                                         (0.110)                              (0.109)
flu shot                                0.102***                             0.102***
                                        (0.0503)                             (0.0503)
preventive test for blood               0.194***                             0.195***
    cholesterol                         (0.0594)                             (0.0591)
education                               0.432***                             0.428***
                                         (0.064)                              (0.063)
Employment status

Income                                0.000036***                        0.000036***
                                       (4.31e-06)                         (4.26e-06)
Have loan                              0.3837***                          0.3860***
                                          (0.113)                            (0.112)
Own house                               0.446***                           0.443***
                                         (0.062)                            (0.062)
Have stock                              0.140***                            0.141***
                                         (0.053)                            (0.053)
constant                                -1.308***                          -1.294***
                                         (0.225)                            (0.224)
                                        Die Equation
                               High-type            Low-type      High-type            Low-type
Subjective survival                                               -0.001***            -0.001***
                                                                  (0.0005)             (0.0005)
constant                         -0.599              -0.053        -0.499               0.046
                                (3.185)              (3.184)       (3.194)              (3.193)
                                          LFI Equation
Subjective survival                                               -0.001***            -0.001***
                                                                  (0.0005)             (0.0005)
Constant                        -.852***            -5.456***     -3.677***            -5.296***
                                (2.458)              (2.471)       (2.470)              (2.483)
Correlation of two error        0.118***            0.301***       0.116**             0.305***
    terms                       (0.060)             (0.074)        (0.060)              (0.074)
observations                               14,586                             14,586
                 Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15



                                               36
               Table 7d. Specification Tests: Drop “Employment Status”

                                           (1)                                (2)
                                   Public information               Public information and
                                                                      Subjective survival
                                         Type equation
care for grandkids                        0.161***                           0.165***
                                           (0.061)                           (0.060)
religion                                  0.569***                           0.553***
                                           (0.120)                            (0.117)
flu shot                                   0.086*                            0.087**
                                           (0.053)                            (0.052)
preventive test for blood                 0.161***                           0.160***
    cholesterol                            (0.062)                            (0.061)
education                                 0.044***                           0.045***
                                           (0.009)                           (0.009)
Employment status

Income                                0.000047***                        0.000046***
                                       (5.24e-06)                         (5.13e-06)
Have loan                                0.419***                          0.417***
                                          (0.125)                           (0.124)
Own house                               0.467***                           0.459***
                                         (0.064)                            (0.063)
Have stock                               0.141***                           0.141***
                                         (0.060)                            (0.060)
constant                                -1.660***                          -1.624***
                                          (0.261)                           (0.255)
                                        Die Equation
                               High-type             Low-type     High-type         Low-type
Subjective survival                                               -0.001***         -0.001***
                                                                  (0.0005)          (0.0005)
constant                         0.128                0.590         0.231               0.690
                                 (3.151)              (3.152)      (3.160)              (3.160)
                                           LFI Equation
Subjective survival                                              -0.0014***         -0.001***
                                                                  (0.0005)          (0.0005)
Constant                       -4.916***             -6.555***    -4.786***         -6.472***
                                (2.460)               (2.479)      (2.500)              (2.515)
Correlation of two error         0.052               0.313***       0.052         0.325***
    terms                       (0.041)              (0.080)       (0.041)        (0.082)
observations                                14,586                            14,586
                 Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15



                                                37
              Table 7e. Specification Tests: Drop “Financial Conditions”

                                           (1)                                (2)
                                   Public information               Public information and
                                                                      Subjective survival
                                          Type equation
care for grandkids                         0.248***                          0.245***
                                            (0.082)                           (0.082)
religion                                   0.581***                          0.572***
                                            (0.167)                           (0.167)
flu shot                                   0.178***                          0.177***
                                            (0.067)                           (0.066)
preventive test for blood                  0.336***                          0.333***
    cholesterol                             (0.097)                           (0.096)
education                                  0.084***                          0.084***
                                            (0.017)                           (0.018)
Employment status                          0.935***                          0.921***
                                            (0.179)                           (0.181)
Income

Have loan

Own house

Have stock

constant                                  -1.973***                          -1.958***
                                           (0.607)                            (0.620)
                                          Die Equation
                               High-type            Low-type      High-type          Low-type
Subjective survival                                                -0.001                -0.001
                                                                  (0.0005)           (0.0005)
constant                         -1.115              -0.531        -1.000                0.420
                                (3.297)             (3.297)        (3.299)               (3.299)
                                          LFI Equation
Subjective survival                                              --0.0013***        --0.0013***
                                                                  (0.0005)           (0.0005)
Constant                         -2.284          -4.035***                               -3.884
                                (2.215)             (2.259)                              (2.281)
Correlation of two error       0.225***              0.114        0.223***                0.118
    terms                      (0.082)              (0.104)       (0.082)                (0.110)
observations                    14,586              14,586         14,586                14,586
                 Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15



                                               38
       Table 8. Hausman Tests: The Baseline Model vs Models with

           Only a Subset of Proxy Variables for Insurance Demand



               Baseline model vs            Baseline model vs         Baseline model vs
            Drop “Bequest Motives”         Drop “Risk Averse”         Drop “Education”
              Public     Public and       Public      Public and      Public     Public &
           information subjective      information    subjective   information subjective
                          survival                     survival                  survival
Die            5.46         5.13           4.12          4.19          0.06        6.87

equation     (1.000)       (1.000)       (1.000)       (1.000)       (1.000)     (1.000)

LFI           16.24         11.31         18.06         17.76         14.74      14.60

equation     (0.991)       (1.000)       (0.977)       (0.980)       (0.996)     (0.996)

               Baseline model vs            Baseline model vs
              Drop “Employment               Drop “Financial
                     status”                   Condition”
              Public      Public and      Public      Public and
           information subjective      information    subjective
                            survival                   survival
Die            5.87           5.62         9.58          0.79

equation     (1.000)       (1.000)       (1.999)       (1.000)

LFI           11.94         14.73         9.93          6.20

equation     (1.000)       (0.996)       (0.999)       (1.000)




                                          39
                       Table 9. Three-type model

                           (1)                           (2)
                   Public information        Public information and
                                               Subjective survival
                     Type equation (high-type)
care for               0.757***                        -0.222
  grandkids             (0.340)                       (0.231)
religion                1.041***                        0.252
                         (0.335)                      (0.663)
flu shot                 0.0360                       0.355**
                         (0.195)                      (0.199)
preventive test         -0.0016                        0.352*
 for cholesterol        (0.863)                       (0.221)
education                 -0.176                     0.229***
                         (0.168)                      (0.055)
Employment             1.472***                        -0.144
  status                 (0.412)                      (0.323)
Income               5.19e-05***                  6.39e-05***
                      (1.00e-05)                    (1.13e-05)
Have loan                  0.977                        0.212
                         (0.715)                      (0.374)
Own house                 0.254                      0.917***
                         (0.675)                      (0.193)
Have stock               -0.286                      1.120***
                        (0.809)                       (0.470)
constant                   1.102                    -2.949***
                         (4.118)                      (0.988)
                    Type equation (medium type)
care for               0.886***                    -0.937***
  grandkids             (0.349)                      (0.307)
religion                  0.592                       -0.804
                        (0.952)                      (0.842)
flu shot                  -0.252                       0.336
                         (0.472)                      (0.301)
preventive test           -0.437                       0.172
 for cholesterol         (1.104)                     (0.463)
education              -0.380***                     0.371***
                         (0.057)                     (0.047)
Employment             1.434***                     -1.584***
status                  (0.586)                       (0.412)
Income                 -1.18e-05                     1.12e-05
                      (1.51e-05)                   (1.54e-05)
Have loan                  0.772                      -0.648
                         (0.799)                      (0.716)
Own house                 -0.681                      0.536*
                        (0.628)                      (0.362)
                                        40
Have stock                   -1.398***                           1.259***
                              (0.748)                             (0.554)
constant                       4.395                               -3.171
                              (4.695)                             (2.013)
                                     Die Equation
                    High     Medium       Low          High      Medium          Low
                    type        type     Type          Type        Type          type
Subjective                                           -0.001***   -0.001***    -0.001***
  survival                                           (0.0005)    (0.0005)     (0.0005)
Constants          -0.356     0.158      0.098        -0.460      0.0629       0.0090
                   (3.255)   (3.293)    (3.187)       (3.216)     (3.206)      (3.226)
                                    LFI Equation
                    High     Medium       Low           High      Medium         Low
                    type       type      Type           Type         Type        type
Subjective                                           -0.002***   -0.002***    -0.002***
  survival                                           (0.0006)    (0.0006)     (0.0006)
Constants          -3.727 -5.728    *** -5.30***       -3.496      -5.071**   -5.666***
                  (2.624) (2.666) (2.647)             (2.639)      (2.654)     (2.665)
Corr of two       0.164*** 0.342***      0.202       0.161***     0.252***    0.347***
Error terms       (0.069)     (0.151)   (0.348)       (0.068)     (0.1223)     (0.347)
Observations                  14,586                                14,586
            Standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.05, ** p<0.1, * p<0.15




                                            41
Table 10. A Comparison of the Goodness of Fit between Two-type model and
  Three-type model via Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian
                       Information Criterion (BIC)



                                  AIC

                              Two-Type Model      Three-Type Model

   w/o private information       27456.9              27375.7

   With private information      27447.8              27365.5



                                  BIC

                              Two-Type Model      Three-Type Model

   w/o private information       28170.2              28195.1

   With private information      28176.3              28200.1




                                   42
