                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MACROECONOMIC DETERMINANTS OF RETIREMENT TIMING

                                       Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                             Jae Song
                                        Dmitriy Stolyarov

                                       Working Paper 19638
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19638


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2013




Stolyarov and Gorodnichenko are grateful to the Social Security Administration for financial support.
Gorodnichenko thanks NSF and Sloan Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Jae Song, and Dmitriy Stolyarov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomic Determinants of Retirement Timing
Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Jae Song, and Dmitriy Stolyarov
NBER Working Paper No. 19638
November 2013
JEL No. E24,H55,J26

                                            ABSTRACT

We analyze lifetime earnings histories of white males during 1960-2010 and categorize the labor force
status of every worker as either working full-time, partially retired or fully retired. We find that the
fraction of partially retired workers has risen dramatically (from virtually 0 to 15 percent for 60-62
year olds), and that the duration of partial retirement spells has been steadily increasing. We estimate
the response of retirement timing to variations in unemployment rate, inflation and housing prices.
Flows into both full and partial retirement increase significantly when the unemployment rate rises.
Workers around normal retirement age are especially sensitive to variations in the unemployment rate.
Workers who are partially retired show a differential response to a high unemployment rate: younger
workers increase their partial retirement spell, while older workers accelerate their transition to full
retirement. We also find that high inflation discourages full-time work and encourages partial and
full retirement. Housing prices do not have a significant impact on retirement timing.


Yuriy Gorodnichenko                                Dmitriy Stolyarov
Department of Economics                            University of Michigan
530 Evans Hall #3880                               Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley                 611 Tappan Ave, Room 238
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                            Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER                                           stolyar@umich.edu
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

Jae Song
Social Security Administration
Office of Quality Performance
2121 Crystal Drive, Suite 825
Arlington, VA 22202
jae.song@ssa.gov
“We have 10,000 baby boomers retiring every day. It’s time for us to get serious about ensuring that [major
entitlement programs] are going to be there for them.”
                                                                              House Speaker John Boehner
                                                                                       September 19, 2011


  I.    Introduction
Every day, about 10,000 people reach the age of 65 in the U.S. The rapid aging of the US
population makes labor force attachment of older workers a key question for policymakers. What
factors determine a worker’s exit from the labor force? While retirement decisions crucially
depend on individual characteristics, such as health, work history, accumulated savings etc.,
macroeconomic factors such the state of the labor market, inflation rate, and housing prices can
play a big role as well. How cyclical macroeconomic factors affect retirement timing is a question
with immediate and far-reaching policy implications.
        The impact of macroeconomic forces on retirement timing is not unambiguous. On the one
hand, adverse macroeconomic conditions can deplete household wealth. The life-cycle model
predicts that households should optimally extend their working lives when their wealth
unexpectedly declines. On the other hand, a weak labor market in a recession can induce early
retirement if older workers become discouraged about the future job prospects. Similarly, a high
rate of inflation can negatively affect the purchasing power of household wealth, which should
encourage continued labor force participation. However, inflation can also lead to erosion of real
wages thereby encouraging workers to retire earlier than they would otherwise. The response of
retirement timing to inflation is of current importance, because some fear that the large balance
sheet of the Federal Reserve may lead to out-of-control inflation in the future. Fluctuations in
housing prices create yet another wealth effect for households. Real estate prices may significantly
affect retirement timing because housing wealth is a major part of portfolios of the US middle
class. This paper documents the dynamics of employment/retirement choices of older workers and
estimates the sensitivity of retirement timing to unemployment, inflation and housing prices using
the data from the past 50 years.
        Our analysis uses Continuous Work History Sample (CWHS) dataset of the Social Security
Administration (SSA). This dataset includes comprehensive, administrative-quality information on
the complete records of lifetime earnings of 1 percent of the U.S. population since early 1950s. The
long time series enables us to exploit large variations in macroeconomic indicators. Furthermore, the
large sample size based on administrative records lends more precision to our estimates.


                                                    2
       We associate retirement with a permanent withdrawal from the labor force. This definition
of retirement provides several advantages over defining retirement as Social Security benefit
claiming age. First, defining retirement as permanent labor force exit is more accurate, since many
individuals continue working even after claiming Social Security benefits. Second, our definition
is more flexible. The available evidence (e.g., Ruhn, 1990) points to the fact that for many workers
retirement is not a one-step process. The traditional career job followed by full retirement is
becoming less of a norm. Instead, workers transition from career jobs to lower-paying “bridge”
jobs that they hold for a number of years after their career end date. Workers in career and bridge
jobs may have different incentives and degrees of flexibility with respect to retirement timing, and
one may expect that they show differential responses to macroeconomic conditions.
       We analyze lifetime earnings records to construct the labor force status for every worker. We
categorize workers as either fully employed, partially retired, or fully retired. We start by
documenting important changes in the labor force status of older workers at different levels of
lifetime earnings. Consistent with other studies, we document a general decline in full employment
of older white males during 1960-1990. Although full employment rates declined for all workers,
the trends diverge substantially by earnings level. For example, the recent full-time employment rate
for 60 year olds in the bottom earnings quintile is 1.5 times less than average for their age group, and
for 65 year olds in the bottom earnings quintile it is 2 times less than their age group average. On the
other hand, the 65-67 year old workers in the top quintile of earnings exhibit a full-time employment
trend that diverges from the rest of the population. While average full-time employment rates stayed
relatively stable since 1990, the full-time employment rate for 65-67 year old top earners bottomed
out in the 1990s and has been rising since, suggesting longer careers for this group.
       At the same time, partial retirement has been on the rise across all age and income groups.
While partial retirement was virtually non-existent for 60-62 years olds in 1960, over the past 20
years more than 15 percent of workers in this age group are categorized as partially retired. For
65-67 year olds, the recent partial retirement rate is over 20 percent, up from 5-10 percent in 1960.
       We think that transitions to partial and full retirement should be analyzed as separate labor
market events, especially given that partial retirement became much more widespread in the past
20 years. It is often believed that at least some end-of-career events for older workers are
involuntary and driven by the employer's response to economic conditions. If so, the observed shift
towards earlier end of careers may leave workers with less control over their retirement timing.



                                                   3
On the other hand, at least two factors may have contributed to more flexibility in retirement
timing. First, since 1970, Social Security removed the financial incentive to retire at age 65 by
introducing a gradual increase in the delayed retirement credit. Second, the coincident decline in
defined-benefit pension plans may have reduced instances when workers face age-specific work
disincentives. One can hypothesize that full-time workers and partially retired face different
degrees of retirement flexibility and, perhaps, different incentives. We, therefore, propose to
analyze the behavioral responses for these two groups separately.
        We consider the influence of macroeconomic indicators on the timing of partial and full
retirement for 55-75 year old workers. Our econometric specification is non-parametric in that it
estimates sensitivity parameters separately for each age. We find robust evidence that flows from
full-time work into both partial and full retirement rise significantly in recessions. Workers around
normal retirement age (63-67 years old) are especially sensitive to changes in the national
unemployment rate. We estimate that a 1 percent rise in the national unemployment rate leads to
about 1 percent drop in the full employment rate of all 55-75 year olds, with the full employment
rate among the 63-67 age subgroup dropping as much as 2 percent. The same 63-67 age subgroup
experiences the largest increase in the flow into partial and full retirement associated with
recessions. Among the partially retired, the response to a higher unemployment rate differs by age:
workers younger than 63 extend their partial retirement spell while workers older than 63
accelerate their transition to full retirement.
        Somewhat surprisingly, we find that high inflation is associated with increased exit from
the labor force, through partial as well as full retirement. One explanation for this may be that
during high inflation episodes wages do not keep up with inflation, and lower real wages
discourage labor force participation.
        Our results also indicate that housing prices do not have a significant effect on retirement
timing, which is consistent with the modest sensitivity of retirement timing to movements in the rate
of return on financial assets documented elsewhere (e.g., Bosworth and Burtless, 2011). The result
suggests that either the wealth effects associated with housing prices are small or that housing price
increases are correlated with other macroeconomic variables that encourage labor force participation.
        We further investigate if retirement timing of wealthier workers is less sensitive to changes
in macroeconomic conditions (we use the present value of lifetime earnings as a proxy for wealth).
Wealthy individuals may have more control over their retirement timing either because of their



                                                  4
abundant resources or because of more flexible careers in high-paying occupations. However, we
find that retirement decisions of wealthy workers are only marginally less sensitive to fluctuations
in macroeconomic conditions. The sensitivity of retirement transitions to the unemployment rate
and inflation is quite similar across lifetime earnings quintiles, with the 63-67 year old age group
responding most to changes in the unemployment rate.
       The Great Recession generated a renewed interest in how macroeconomic factors influence
retirement choices. In a closely related study, Bosworth and Burtless (2010) use public-use micro
data on retired-worker benefit awards published by the SSA as well as the data collected in the
March Supplement of the Current Population Survey (CPS). Bosworth and Burtless relate
unemployment rate of prime-age males as well as stock/bond returns on Social Security benefit
acceptance and labor force exit. They find that while these business cycle effects are statistically
significant, they are economically small, yet sufficiently large to offset the impact of negative
wealth shocks in 2007-2009 on old-age labor force participation.
       In another closely related paper, Coile and Levine (2011) use data from the CPS to measure
labor force participation and Social Security benefit receipt of 55-69 year olds. Their main related
finding is that a higher unemployment rate decreases labor force participation of workers around
retirement age, and that the effect is the strongest after age 62. Our results paint a more detailed
picture as we have several retirement states (partial and full), analyze longer time series, use a
large set of macroeconomic variables and provide sensitivities by narrowly defined age and income
groups. For example, we show that even though a higher unemployment rate generally accelerates
retirement, workers younger than 63 who are partially retired actually stay in partial retirement
longer when the unemployment rate is high.
       Much of previous work was constrained by available data. For example, recent studies on
macroeconomic determinants of retirement timing focus mostly on the Great Recession (e.g.,
Bosworth (2012), Hurd and Rohwedder (2010)). This line of work is certainly informative but it
may be hard to generalize from the experience of the Great Recession given particular
characteristics of this downturn (e.g., financial crisis and high leverage of households). Studies
using longitudinal data typically cover only a handful of years. For example, SSA’s Retirement
History Survey data used in Blau (1994) covers only 1969-1979. One may obtain longer time series
by using synthetic cohorts from the Current Population Survey (CPS; see e.g., Coile and Levine
2011) but this can deteriorate measurement of transitions between employment/retirement states



                                                 5
as different people are used in each cross-section. These data constraints limit our understating of
retirement choices over the business cycle.
           The key advantages of our approach relative to previous studies are that (i) CWHS gives
us access to a complete history of earnings for each worker; (ii) CWHS has much less top-coding
than public-use micro data published by the SSA; (iii) CWHS provides much longer time series;
iv) CWHS provide much larger sample sizes so that we can have precise estimates even for
narrowly defined population groups.
           The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we describe the data we use
for the analysis of employment/retirement states and transitions across states. Section 3 defines
employment/retirement states. Section 4 documents trends in retirement timing since 1960. Section
5 reports trends in transition probabilities across employment/retirement states. Section 6 studies
how macroeconomic factors such as unemployment rate, inflation rate, and housing prices influence
transition probabilities between employment and retirement states. We conclude in Section 7.


    II.    Data
We use the Continuous Work History Sample (CWHS) dataset.1 This dataset is a result of a
continuous effort of the Social Security Administration to collect comprehensive data on work
histories to study work patterns for the entire working life of individuals.2 The CWHS file includes
longitudinal earnings and Social Security program entitlement information for a 1-percent sample.
The 1-percent samples is selected based on digits of the Social Security number (SSN) and is
generally considered to be a random sample. The sample is selected from all individuals, workers
and non-workers, with valid Social Security numbers. There are two parts of the CWHS—active
and inactive files. The active file includes those who have ever reported earnings, and the inactive
file includes those who have never reported earnings, covered or uncovered.
           The CWHS is an analytical master file that provides a complete work and Social Security
program participation history of the 1-percent sample. Data elements in the CWHS are taken from
several Social Security Administration Master files, including the Numident, the Master Earnings
File (MEF), the Master Beneficiary Record (MBR), and the Supplemental Security Record (SSR).
The Numident file contains birth and death dates, place of birth, race, and sex. The MEF contains


1
    Some prior studies that use CWHS are Song and Manchester (2007) and Kopczuk et al. (2010).
2
    More information about CWHS is available at http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/ssb/v52n10/v52n10p20.pdf.


                                                        6
annual FICA summary earnings from 1937 to the present. It also contains annual detailed earnings,
Medicare taxable compensation, and total compensation from 1978 to the present for the U.S.
population. The earnings records are taken directly from W-2 forms. The MBR file contains
information related to the administration of the OASDI program, such as application and entitlement
dates, benefit amounts for all individuals who have ever applied for Title II benefits. The SSR file
maintains information on all persons who have ever applied for Title XVI SSI benefits.
       The CWHS provides the full history of individuals’ annual earnings (both capped and
uncapped), Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) benefit entitlements,
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program participation, and death records. Key data elements
are: 1) demographic characteristics—year of birth, sex, race, and date of death (if any); 2) annual
Social Security covered earnings from 1951 to date; 3) annual uncapped total wages from covered
or non-covered employment from 1978 to date; 4) annual Social Security taxable self-employment
income from 1951 to date; 5) number of years employed, first and last years employed, and number
of quarters of coverage from 1937 to date; (3) OASDI insurance status; (8) OASDI and SSI
benefits status and dates of entitlement; (9) Medicare taxable earnings.
       This dataset has several key advantages over previously used data. First, CWHS has a long
time series dimension: Social Security earnings are covered since 1937. Accordingly, we can use
multiple recession episodes to study the cyclical properties of retirement timing. Likewise, these
long time series will allow us to exploit significant variation in inflation rate which is not available
to researchers using other data sets (e.g., Survey of Income and Program Participation).
        Second, CWHS tracks workers over their lives and hence has effectively complete data on
lifetime earnings. In contrast, previously used datasets typically have repeated cross sections (e.g.,
CPS) or short panels with the duration of one to four years (e.g., Survey of Income and Program
Participation). By using CWHS, we can avoid relying on the synthetic cohort approach used in
much previous work.
       Third, CWHS is based on administrative records. Numerous studies (e.g., Haider and
Solon, 2006; Bound et al., 2001; Moore et al., 1997; Bound and Krueger, 1991) report that survey
measures of income exhibit nontrivial biases when compared with administrative records. A
disadvantage of the CWHS is top-coding at the Social Security earnings maximum prior to 1978.




                                                   7
(It includes W-2 data after 1978.) Nevertheless, we can extrapolate annual incomes in censored
cases from the quarter in which SSA limits were reached (see Kopczuk et al., 2010).3
           Fourth, CWHS has records for millions of workers, which is a much larger sample than a
standard dataset such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), SIPP, CPS, or Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CE). The massive size of CWHS allows us to study narrowly defined groups
of the population without having to make parametric assumptions or sacrificing precision of the
estimates. This aspect is particularly important for us since we focus on workers approaching
retirement and the size of this population group is rapidly shrinking with age.
           While CWHS is a random one percent sample of Social Security numbers and thus is
nationally representative, we use several filters to minimize selection effects potentially affecting
retirement choices of individuals. First, we restrict our sample to white males since the racial and
gender composition of labor force, occupations, etc. has changed dramatically over time. By
focusing on white males, we minimize the effects of such changes in labor force participation and
employment. Second, we restrict the sample only to individuals who have at least five years of
continuous earnings above $5,000 (in 1984 dollars). This filter removes observations with irregular
working histories. Finally, we set earnings to zero in the year of death to eliminate any confusion
of reduced earnings in the years of death.
           The main downside of using administrative data like CWHS is that we have limited
information in demographics and other characteristics of workers or employers. For example,
CWHS does not have information on the educational attainment of workers or hours of work.
While one would obviously want to condition on many demographic characteristics in addition to
race and gender, this constraint is not necessarily binding. Economic theory suggests that the
history of earnings may be a sufficient statistic summarizing a variety of individual’s
characteristics. In part, this theoretical prediction motivates our analysis of behavioral responses
of retirement timing to macroeconomic conditions by quintiles of life-time earnings.


III.       Definition of full and partial retirement
Our analysis utilizes information in the individual earnings records to measure the extent of labor
force participation. Our definition of retirement is based on changes in earnings. Since about 15



3
    See also the treatment of censored Social Security earnings data in House et al. (2008).


                                                             8
percent4 of individuals keep working even after claiming Social Security benefits, this approach
offers more flexibility compared to the definition of retirement as benefits claiming age.
        An individual is considered working full time (denoted state                ) until his real earnings
permanently decline to less than 50 percent of his lifetime maximum annual earnings.5 Anyone
whose future annual earnings are less than 50 percent of their lifetime maximum and more than
$5,000 (constant 1984 dollars) is considered partially retired (state ). As soon as a person’s earnings
permanently drop below the $5,000 floor, this person is entering full retirement (state                ). By
construction, retirement age is the last age when the earnings exceed the floor, and partial retirement
age is the last age when the earnings exceed 50 percent of lifetime maximum. Put differently,
retirement is defined as the last continuous spell of non-employment before the individual’s death,
and partial retirement (if any) is the spell of employment at income not exceeding 50 percent of
lifetime maximum that immediately precedes retirement. Consequently, retirement states are
ordered: individuals never transit from retirement back to either partial retirement or full-time work,
and they never go from partial retirement back to full-time work. Figure 1 illustrates a hypothetical
life-cycle earnings profile and the corresponding retirement states.
        The $5,000 cutoff is based on the historical record of minimum wages in the U.S.
Specifically, we assume that a person is not retired if he earns more than the product of the federal
minimum wage rate and 1,000 hours of work, which roughly corresponds to a 40-hour work week
over 6 months or approximately a 20 hour work week over 12 months. While there has been some
variation in the real minimum wage since the inception of minimum wages, the resulting threshold
earnings fluctuate around $5,000 per year. We prefer using a fixed threshold rather than a threshold
that varies with the minimum wage rate because nominal minimum wage rates were revised
periodically rather than continuously and the discreet nature of these revisions can create episodes
where we observe spurious flows into retirement due to movements in minimum wage rather than
due to macroeconomic forces.6
        Earnings records for younger workers who are still alive at the end of the sample period
are truncated. If such an earnings record ends with a period of long-term unemployment, our
procedure may miscatergorize the unemployment event as partial or full retirement. To address



4
  See Friedberg, 2000, Table 2
5
  We deflate nominal earnings with the Consumer Price Index into constant 1984 dollars.
6
  We have experimented with the cutoffs based on actual minimum wages and found similar results.


                                                       9
the potential effects of the truncation, we shorten the sample to exclude observations for 2006-
2010 in our robustness checks.
        The classification of states into full employment, partial retirement and full retirement are
similar to classifications in previous work. For example, Blau (1994) considers full employment,
partial retirement, and out-of-labor force,7 and Gustman and Steinmeier (2000) compare several
definitions of full and partial retirement. The main difference from previous studies lies in what
information we use to classify individuals into states. Previous studies typically use hours of work,
self-reported status, or the timing of when workers start to collect retirement benefits, however,
we observe none of these characteristics in the CWHS, and use earnings instead.8 A key advantage
of classification based on earnings is that earnings effectively combine intensive and extensive
margins of labor market participation.


IV.     Trends in retirement timing
Figure 2 depicts shares of white male workers by retirement status for 1960-2010 for a few age
groups. The figure shows the trend toward lower labor force participation during the 1970s and
1980s, a phenomenon that is well documented in the labor economics literature (e.g., Anderson et
al, 1999). Another important trend is the rising prevalence of partial retirement among older
workers. Many workers appear to depart their career jobs well before reaching their normal
retirement age and transition into so-called “bridge jobs” with substantially lower earnings prior
to taking full retirement. Partial retirement was virtually non-existent for 60-62 year olds in the
1960s. The share of partially retired 60-62 year olds rose to 15 percent by 1990 and has stayed
relatively stable ever since. Partial retirement is even more prevalent among 65-67 year old
workers. The share of partially retired 65-67 year olds rose dramatically during 1960-1990 and
topped 20 percent in the last 20 years of the sample. This finding is consistent with Giandrea et al.
(2009) who conclude that “traditional one-step retirement appears to be fading”.
        We analyze the time trends in labor force status in more detail by splitting our sample into
lifetime earnings quintiles. Specifically, for each individual in our sample, we calculate the present


7
 Most studies do not differentiate between partial and full retirement.
8
 In principle, one could merge CWHS with other SSA’s databases and link the histories of earnings to the timing of
when workers start to collect retirement benefits. However, as we discussed above, workers have been ending full
employment well before they can claim retirement benefits and hence using the official timing of claiming benefits
may be misleading.


                                                       10
value of his earnings between the ages of 25 and 54. We use a 2-percent discount rate for present
value calculations, but results are similar for other discount rates. The individual is assigned to a
quintile based on the ranking of his present value of earnings compared to others in the same birth
cohort. We restrict the ages to 25-54 instead of using all ages because people enter and exit the labor
force at different times and we do not want to mix the extensive margin of earnings (i.e., how many
years a person works) with the intensive margin (i.e., how much a person makes per year). The first
quintile corresponds to the lowest income group and the fifth quintile corresponds to the highest
income group. By construction, an individual stays in his earnings quintile throughout his life.
       Figure 3 illustrates several significant patterns that emerge. Full-time employment rates
started roughly equal across lifetime earnings quintiles in 1960, but subsequent trends are quite
different. In particular, the bottom 40 percent of earners (quintiles 1 and 2) exhibit the most
significant drop in full-time employment. Most strikingly, the full-time employment rate in the
bottom quintile dropped from almost 1 percent in 1960 to below 0.4 percent in 1990 for 60-62 year
olds and from 0.9 percent to about 0.25 percent for 65 year olds. By contrast, the full-time
employment rate of 60 year olds in the top lifetime earnings quintile dropped only slightly, from
0.95 to 0.8 percent. The workers in the top earnings quintile behave differently from the rest in
another important respect as well. While the full-time employment rate has stayed relatively stable
for the bottom 80 percent of earners since 1990, it grew substantially for 65-67 year olds in the top
earnings quintile. One interpretation of this is that workers in the professional occupations that
presumably populate the highest earnings quintile choose to have longer careers.
       In most years of the sample, the full retirement rate is consistently higher for workers with
lower earnings. We see that about 50 percent of 60 year olds in the bottom earnings quintile are fully
retired by age 60. It is interesting to note that the trend towards earlier retirement of males during
1960-1990 coincided with the increase in female labor force participation. One interpretation of
trends towards earlier retirement that we observe is that a dual earner household does not have to
rely on male income as a sole source of financial support, allowing the man to retire earlier.
       Retirement rates have become more similar across earnings quintiles as workers age. The
upward trends in full retirement over time mostly mirror the downward trends in full employment,
with the full retirement rate rising most dramatically among the workers in the bottom earnings
quintile. Figure 3 shows a dramatic rise in the full retirement rate among the bottom quintile of the
population age 60-62. Importantly, the full retirement rate for 60-62 year olds in the bottom



                                                  11
quintile kept climbing in the 2000s as their partial retirement rate kept dropping, with a substantial
uptick during the Great Recession. The permanent exit of these workers from the labor force is
especially concerning, since this population group is too young to qualify for Social Security old
age benefits and presumably has little in the way of assets to cushion their transition to the
retirement benefits claiming phase. This group is more likely to claim Social Security old age
benefits early, which permanently reduces their lifetime income. For example, Bound and
Waidmann (1992) report that a substantial portion of workers leaving the labor force prior to
retirement age receive disability benefits. Thus, the recent upward trend in labor force exit of the
low income 60-62 year olds may have contributed to the dramatic growth in the Social Security
disability program (Duggan and Imberman, 2009).
          Partial retirement rates by earnings quintile exhibit somewhat diverging trends. Among the
60-62 year olds, the workers at the extremes of the earnings distribution have lower rates of partial
retirement than middle earners. For top earners, the relatively low rate of partial retirement reflects
the high rate of full-time employment for this group. For the lowest earnings quintile, by contrast,
the low rate of partial retirement is driven by the high rate of full retirement. All earnings groups
exhibit rates of partial retirement that rise from 1960 to 1990 and remain relatively stable afterwards,
with the exception of 65-67 year olds in the bottom quintile. For the latter group, the rate of partial
retirement has remained relatively low and stable since the early 1970s. The dispersion of partial
retirement rates by earnings quintile rises both over time and with workers’ age.


 V.       Transitions between retirement states
We study transitions of workers between four states: full employment ( ), partial retirement ( ),
full retirement ( ) and death ( ). Let               → |          ,   denote the probability of transitioning
from state to state      conditional on worker’s age and year. Note that by construction of the states,
          → |     ,      0,         → |         ,        0, and             → |    ,     0 for all ages and
times. We calculate each probability as follows:
                                                         ∑        ∈     ,   ∩ ∈    ,
                               → |               ,   ≡
                                                              ∑         ∈     ,

where i indexes individuals,       ,       is the set of people in status     at time    1 and age    at time
 ,    ,   is the set of people in status     at time and age          at time ,   ∙ is the indicator function.
Figure 4 illustrates the transition probabilities, by year, for workers age 60, 62, 65 and 67.


                                                         12
        The probability of remaining in full employment,                     → |          , , remains relatively
stable over time for 60-65 year olds. By contrast, for 67 year olds, the probability of remaining in
full employment rises dramatically after 1980. We conjecture that this is evidence of a selection
effect that strengthens over time: workers who stay attached to the labor force until age 67 are
increasingly more likely to continue their full employment spell. The selection may arise because
of health: the less healthy members of the cohort drop out of the labor force early, and those who
stay employed have better than average health that drives stronger labor force attachment. This
interpretation is consistent with the diminishing flow from full employment into partial retirement
       → |            67,      for 67 year olds. The probability of transitioning from full employment
to partial retirement has been rising over time for other ages as well. For example, for 65 year olds,
the probability increased from less than 5 percent in the early 1960s to about 10 percent in the
2000s. For           → |        , , there is a discernible downward trend for 67 year olds but there is
not a clear trend for other age groups. Specifically,                  → |           67,      fell from about 20
percent in the early 1960s to about 5 percent in the 2000s, while                    → |             60,    stayed
approximately constant at 2-3 percent.
        The probability of remaining in partial retirement,                → |        ,    , rises over time for all
age groups, meaning that partial retirement spells have been increasing in length. This is consistent
with some earlier evidence. For example, Ruhm (1990, Table 2) reports that more than 40 percent
of workers who end their career at age 60-64 spend at least one year in partial retirement, and 17
percent spend more than 5 years in partial retirement. The nature of the partial retirement might have
changed as well. In particular, during the 1960s and 1970s, partially retired workers were dying very
quickly: the death rate among the partially retired,                → |        ,   , has been around 0.3. This
suggests that early on most transitions to partial retirement were driven by health concerns. As bridge
jobs after careers end became more common, the composition of the partially retired has changed to
include an increasing number of healthy bridge job holders. Consequently, the death rate among
partially retired has dropped over time and converged to the population average.9
        Figure 5 presents time series of transition probabilities by income quintile. We observe
differential trends across age groups for all quintiles so that the dynamics of transition we reported
on Figure 3 above are not driven by any single income group. The behavior of these trends is, by


9
       → |       , and          → |     ,    have been declining over time, but the magnitude of these declines was
very modest (1-2 percent) relative to       → |     , .


                                                        13
and large, similar across income quintiles. While transition probabilities by quintile have more
erratic variation than those for the pooled sample, one can discern some differentiation by income
even within age groups. For example, even though the full employment rate for 65-67 year olds in
the bottom earning quintile is lower than average (Figure 3), this group has the highest probability
of labor force attachment,       →     . This pattern may arise if there is strong selection by health
status: by the time the cohort reaches age 67, the less healthy workers have already retired and the
remaining ones have a higher probability of labor force attachment. The probability of labor force
attachment for 65-67 year old workers shows an upward trend since late 1970s (Figure 5, column
1, row 3-4). We believe that this may be a response to the gradual relaxation of the Social Security
retirement earnings test that happened during 1978-1999 and affected workers over the age of 65.
The retirement earnings test withholds Social Security benefits for individuals who continue
working after claiming benefits and their earnings exceed a certain level called the exempt amount.
The exempt amounts were gradually raised for workers older than 65 starting in 1978,
strengthening the incentive to keep working even after claiming Social Security benefits.


VI.     Sensitivity of retirement timing to macroeconomic variables
In the previous section, we document significant movements in the shares of population by
employment/retirement status as well as in transition probabilities across employment/retirement.
Visual inspection of the figures may suggest that some of the variation can be caused by business
cycles. To formally explore this conjecture, we estimate the following econometric specification:
               → |     ,                                                                        (1)
where, as before,       → |       ,   is the probability of transitioning from state to state     (with
three states: full employment (F), partial retirement (P), full retirement (R),         is a variable
measuring the business cycle (which is either the unemployment rate or a dummy variable for a
recession as defined by the NBER), and is a time trend. Note that we estimate specification (1)
for each age separately. To provide an “aggregate” measure of the sensitivity of retirement timing
to business cycles, we also estimate a pooled specification
               → |     ,                                      ,                                 (2)
where    and    are constrained to be the same across ages but intercepts can vary with age. We
also estimate versions of specifications (1) and (2) without trends or with quadratic trends. The
estimations are performed for ages ranging between 55 and 75. Because the error term is likely to


                                                 14
be correlated across ages and time, we use Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors for inference.
Figure 6 and Table 1 report the results.10


       A. Retirement timing and unemployment rate
The unemployment rate is a major business cycle indicator that impacts labor force status. Our
results strongly indicate that a high unemployment rate accelerates transitions from full-time
employment to both full and partial retirement, and that it also accelerates transitions from partial
to full retirement.
           A 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate results in roughly a 1 percentage
point decrease in the fraction of 55-75 year-olds working full time. However, the impact of the
national unemployment rate differs dramatically by age subgroup. For example, the fraction of 64-
67 year olds working full time drops by 2 percentage points when the national unemployment rate
moves up 1 percentage point. Younger and older workers working full time are not as sensitive to
the movements in the unemployment rate. A lower sensitivity of older workers to the
unemployment rate is likely to reflect a selection effect. Fully-employed workers at ages 67 and
above are probably professionals in good health and in industries which are less sensitive to
business cycle fluctuations. For example, doctors, lawyers, professors and similar professions are
typical of this subgroup that continues working well after the typical retirement age.
           The decline in full-time work associated with a higher unemployment rate results in
accelerated transitions into both partial and full retirement. For 55-75 year olds, each percentage
point increase in the unemployment rate results in a 1.05-fold increase in the flow from full-time
work into full retirement, a 1.07-fold increase in the flow from full-time work into partial retirement
and a 1.05-fold increase in the flow from partial to full retirement.11 As Figure 6 shows, flows into
retirement increase the most among workers around normal retirement age, 64 to 67 years old.
           Workers who are already partially retired show a differential response to an increase in
unemployment rate. While workers younger than 63 extend their partial retirement spell when
unemployment rate is high, 64-75 year olds accelerate their transition into full retirement.




10
     Results are similar (Appendix Table 1) if we use a shorter sample (1960-2005) that excludes the Great Recession.
11
     Changes in flows are calculated by dividing the regression coefficient by the corresponding transition probability.


                                                            15
   B. Retirement timing and inflation
While the state of the labor market may be a key determinant of retirement timing, inflation can
play an important role too. To the extent that household portfolios include assets with nominal
returns (such as nominal bonds), households approaching retirement can be exposed to significant
inflation risks. Doepke and Schneider (2006) and Meh and Terajima (2011) show in calibrated
models that even modest increases in the inflation rate can lead to significant redistribution of
wealth. Doepke and Schneider (2006) estimate, for example, that with a 5 percent increase in the
price level (i.e., a one-time 5 percent inflation shock) wealthy older households in the U.S. can
lose between 5.7 and 15.2 percent of GDP in present value terms. These wealth losses would be
even more dramatic if inflation increases gradually and more persistently. The main factor behind
these calculations is that older households hold a significant fraction of their wealth in assets
bearing nominal returns. Although recent financial innovations (e.g., inflation-protected bonds)
helped to reduce these risks to some extent, inflation risk remains an issue. These concerns are
reminiscent of events in the 1970s when the SSA and retiring workers had to address a number of
issues associated with rising and persistent inflation. For example, a series of studies sponsored by
the SSA (e.g., Thompson, 1978; Parnes, 1981) were specifically concerned with understanding
inflation’s effect on accumulated savings of retiring households and retirement timing. These
previous studies found that while inflation created strong incentives for continued labor force
participation by older workers, the actual response of retirement timing was weak.
       This “inflationary” incentive to postpone retirement may be reinforced by other factors.
For example, high inflation can indicate a boom when earnings are higher and thence the
opportunity cost of retirement is higher. In short, one may be led to expect a positive relationship
between inflation and decisions to stay in the workforce (full employment).
       To assess the sensitivity of retirement decisions to inflation, we augment the baseline
specification (2) with annual CPI inflation rate. Columns 4 through 6 in Table 1 show the results:
high inflation reduces full-time work and accelerates transition to partial and full retirement.
Figure 7 demonstrates that this negative relation is typical and is not dependent on outliers or
unusual episodes. For example, this surprising result is not driven by the stagflation of the late
1970s and early 1980s.
       One may argue that the negative relationship between the inflation rate and the full-time
employment rate reflects a combination of (i) a gradual disinflation in the U.S. economy since



                                                 16
Volcker’s fight on inflation, and (ii) a gradual increase in the prevalence of partial and full
retirement. To address this concern, we include time trends as controls but these have no material
effect on the estimates. In addition, inflation rose over the course of the 1960s and early 1970s,
while the trend towards more partial and full retirement has been fairly continuous since the 1960s.
This combination of changes in inflation and retirement patterns in the early part of our sample is
inconsistent with a negative correlation.
        Alternatively, inflation may influence the level of macroeconomic volatility which can
push workers into earlier retirement. While increased inflation can be related to increased
macroeconomic volatility in the U.S. (Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2011), a decrease in
macroeconomic volatility induced by declining inflation should induce (not reduce) early
retirement, because workers facing lower macroeconomic risks should accumulate less
(precautionary) wealth and hence should be able to retire earlier.
        Another possibility is that inflation marks times that are most conducive to self-
employment, and to the extent that the self-employed fail to report their earnings to SSA, we may
observe declining full employment after inflationary shocks. While older workers are more likely
to be self-employed, the share of self-employed has been gradually declining since late 1960s and
has shown little if any cyclical variation (e.g., Karoly and Zissimopoulos, 2004).
        A plausible explanation of this negative relationship is likely to lie in the nature of how
nominal wages respond to inflation. Barattieri et al. (2013) and others document that nominal
wages are more rigid than prices. A rise in inflation is unlikely to be matched by a rise in wages
of similar size. An inflation shock is likely to reduce real wages and, hence, make retirement a
more attractive option. Inflation-indexed benefits of many Social Security programs probably
reinforce incentives to retire.


    C. Retirement timing and housing prices
A significant portion of middle class wealth is in the form of housing equity. One should expect,
therefore, that movements in housing prices should substantially affect household wealth, which
may alter decisions about when to retire. We have not found a strong association between housing
price levels and labor force status transitions, with one exception. High home prices seem to
accelerate the flow from partial to full retirement (which is consistent with a wealth effect), but
have an ambiguous effect on other transitions (Table 1, columns 7-12). This low sensitivity of



                                                17
retirement timing to movements in home prices may indicate that (potential) retirees do not use
their housing wealth as a source of immediate income. Since retirees are more likely to own
houses, have lower outstanding mortgages, and receive relatively stable income from other sources
(SSA benefits, financial savings, part-time work, etc.), they are unlikely to face systematic,
immediate pressure to capitalize homes in recessions. In other words, potential retirees can
continue to enjoy the flow of services from their housing and postpone the sale of their homes until
the housing market improves. This flexibility can rationalize the low estimated sensitivity of
retirement to housing prices.12


     D. Sensitivity of retirement transitions by earnings quintile
We proceed by estimating specification (2) separately for each lifetime earnings quintile. This
analysis is interesting for several reasons. First, in the context of the life-cycle model, theoretically
optimal behavior implies that the present value of lifetime earnings is proportional to wealth at
retirement. Hence, individuals in the top lifetime earnings quintile should have considerably more in
retirement wealth (housing, financial assets, and SSA benefits) than individuals in the bottom
lifetime earnings quintile (some housing, but mostly SSA benefits). One may expect that a higher
wealth level makes one less sensitive to macroeconomic conditions. This may be because individuals
with more resources may have more control over their retirement timing and be better able to
withstand adverse macroeconomic conditions. Besides, income quintiles are likely to reflect
differences in occupations with varying degrees of career flexibility and control over the retirement
timing. For example, top income quintile is likely to be populated by professional workers such as
doctors, lawyers, engineers with flexible work schedules and low risk of unemployment during
recessions, while the bottom income quintile is likely to be populated with low-education, manual
workers such as secretaries, clerks, assembly line workers with fairly inflexible work schedules (e.g.,
40 hour work week) and relatively high risk of unemployment during recessions. The latter group is
particularly interesting given recent trends in job polarization (see Jaimovich and Sui 2013) and
using disability claims to make transitions to retirement (see Autor and Duggan 2006). In short, one
may expect large differences in the sensitivity of transition probabilities across income quintiles.



12
  We also experimented with including returns on equity and bonds as potential determinants of retirement timing.
Similar to Bosworth and Burtless (2010), we did not find any strong and robust relationship between returns and
retirement timing. Results are available upon request.


                                                        18
           We find (Table 2) some differences in the sensitivities but these differences are not
statistically significant. For example, in the specification with the linear time trend for the bottom
income quintile (column 2), the sensitivity of staying in full employment is -0.77 while the
sensitivity for the top income quintile in the same specification (column 14) is -0.54, which is
consistent with more insulation from business cycles for the top income quintile. This difference
is considerable but we cannot statistically reject the null at conventional significance levels that
these sensitivities are the same. Figure 8 shows that the sensitivity is broadly similar across age
groups and, in this sense, the result is robust.13 A similar pattern emerges for sensitivity to inflation
and housing prices although there is some variation across specifications and sometimes the
differences across income quintiles are statistically significant. For example, high inflation appears
to be associated with a higher probability of exiting full employment for the bottom income
quintile than for the top income quintile. In summary, the sensitivity of retirement to
unemployment, inflation and housing prices is similar across income quintiles.


       E. Robustness
In the previous sections, we document that the timing of retirement is sensitive to recessions: when
unemployment rises, workers are more likely to transition to partial or full retirement. In this
section, we present a series of checks to establish the robustness of this result. Specifically, we
examine the sensitivity of retirement timing to alternative measures of business cycles and using
alternative samples.
           First, the key limitation of our approach to identify the employment/retirement state is that
it may be sensitive to the end-of-sample truncation. For example, if a worker is laid off in the last
year of our sample, we classify this worker as retired because we do not observe positive or large
earnings of this worker. This end-of-sample issue is potentially exacerbated by the fact that the
Great Recession happens in the end of our sample. Indeed, in the end of the sample we observe an
increase in transitions to retirement. While this may be a genuine effect of the Great Recession,
we can separate it from the end-of-sample issue only as more years of data become available.
           To address this concern, we re-estimate our baseline specification on the sample that ends
in 2005. With this shorter estimation sample, we minimize the adverse effects of the end-of-sample
issue because we have additional five years of earnings for each worker and we have enough time

13
     See also Appendix Figures 1 and 2.


                                                    19
after 2005 to establish whether a worker returns to full employment. Figure 9 shows that results
based on this shorter sample are barely changed and, if anything, more precise than the results in
the full sample.
       Second, the data exhibits trends and one may be concerned that including a linear trend can
drive our results or, alternatively, that using linear trends does not provide enough flexibility in
capturing low-frequency variation in transitions. As a check, we experiment with including no
trends (Figure 10) and including a quadratic trend (Figure 11). None of these modifications
changes the results materially.
       Third, we use the unemployment rate as a measure of recessionary periods. The
unemployment rate is the headline rate which is calculated for both men and women of all ages.
On the other hand, the retirement hazards are calculated for white males. Since the dynamics of
unemployment may be different across demographics groups, we examine whether our results are
sensitive to using unemployment rates for subsets of the population. To control for possible
differences between men and women, we explore the sensitivity to the unemployment rate for
males and find no change in the results (Figure 12). In Figure 13, we further narrow the set of
workers used to calculate the unemployment rate to include only men in prime working ages (25-
54). This alternative rate is likely to minimize feedbacks from retirement to unemployment for the
55+ year old group we study. Again, we observe no tangible difference in the results. Finally, we
use dummy variables equal to 1 for times declared as recessions by the NBER and 0 otherwise, to
measure the state of the economy. Since recessions declared by the NBER may cover only fractions
of years while the hazard rates are calculated at the annual frequency, we experiment with several
approaches to measure recessions: (i) a recession dummy variable is equal to 1 in a given year if
at least one month of that year was in a recession; (ii) a recession variable is equal to the fraction
of months in recession in a given year. While the scale of the estimated sensitivity is not
comparable to the sensitivity based on the unemployment rate, the qualitative patterns are
preserved (Figure 14 and Figure 15).


VII.   Concluding remarks
This paper analyzed individual earnings histories to document the trends in labor force
participation of older workers and to investigate how macroeconomic factors influence retirement
timing. The full retirement rate for white males shows a pronounced increase during 1960-1990.


                                                 20
This increase was especially dramatic for the workers in the bottom lifetime earnings quintile: half
of bottom earners are out of the labor force by age 60. To the extent that labor force exit is
correlated with poor health, this increases the potential pool of applicants for disability benefits.
The increase in the full retirement rate was accompanied by a significant increase in the partial
retirement rate for all age and earnings groups. Currently, as many as 15 percent of workers age
60-62 are partially retired, a phenomenon that was virtually non-existent in the 1960s. The partial
retirement spells have grown longer for all workers.
       Our results indicate that during periods of high unemployment, transitions into full and
partial retirement accelerate substantially, with workers around the normal retirement age being
particularly sensitive to the unemployment rate. Therefore, demand for Social Security old age
benefits is likely to rise in downturns. As recessions induce a permanent exit of older workers from
the labor force, one can expect a decline in the employment to population ratio following
recessions. This response, for example, can help explain persistent declines in employment to
population ratio in recent recessions, which were characterized by jobless recoveries and occurred
against the backdrop of an aging population.
       We also find that the behavioral response of retirement to inflation is such that inflationary
shocks can accelerate retirement. While SSA does not have control over inflation, the Federal
Reserve System (the Fed) does. We see two key policy implications in this context. First, the Fed’s
decision on long-term inflation targets can influence retirement choices of the aging workforce.
Specifically, persistently low inflation should make people work longer and help relieve some
pressures that the Social Security system is now facing. While the benefits of low inflation targets
are discussed elsewhere in detail (e.g., Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Wieland 2012), we are not
aware of the connection between inflation and retirement timing established in the previous
literature. Second, the Fed often uses the employment to population ratio to gauge the health of
labor markets. For example, the recent expansionary policies of the Fed appear to be motivated by
a big decline in employment to population ratio even when the unemployment rate fell below 8
percent. To the extent that expansionary monetary policy can generate inflation, older workers
may retire earlier and thus reduce the employment to population ratio, thus calling for even more
expansionary policies, which appears to be a counterargument to the recent call to raise inflation
targets. Analyzing this potentially vicious circle is beyond the scope of this paper, but
policymakers should be aware of this potential drawback.



                                                 21
       Changes in housing prices are found to have only minor effects on retirement timing,
suggesting that wealth effects may be modest. Moreover, individuals with different wealth levels
respond to macroeconomic conditions in very similar ways, which further supports the conclusion
that wealth level is not a major factor in retirement timing.




                                                 22
VIII.   References
 Anderson, Patricia M., Alan L. Gustman, and Thomas L. Steinmeier “Trends in Male Labor
         Force Participation and Retirement: Some Evidence on the Role of Pensions and Social
         Security in the 1970s and 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 17, No. 4 (October
         1999), pp. 757-783.
 Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2006. “The Growth in the Social Security Disability
         Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3): 71-96.
 Barattieri, Alessandro, Susanto Basu, and Peter Gottschalk, 2013. “Some Evidence on the
         Importance of Sticky Wages,” forthcoming in AEJ Macroeconomics.
 Blau, David M., 1994. “Labor Force Dynamics of Older Men,” Econometrica 62(1), 117-156.
 Bosworth, Barry, 2012. “Economic Consequences of the Great Recession: Evidence from the
         Panel Study of Income Dynamics,” CRR WP 2012-4.
 Bosworth, Barry, and Gary Burtless, 2011. “Recessions, wealth destruction and the timing of
         retirement,” CRR WP 2010-22.
 Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann, “Disability Transfers, Self-Reported Health, and the
         Labor Force Attachment of Older Men: Evidence from the Historical Record” The
         Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 4 (Nov., 1992), pp. 1393-1419.
 Bound, John, and Alan B. Krueger, 1991. “The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal
         Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?” Journal of Labor Economics 9: 1-24.
 Bound, John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz, 2001, “Measurement Error in Survey
         Data.” Chapter in Handbook of Econometrics, V. 5, eds. E. E. Leamer and J.J. Heckman,
         pp. 3705-3843.
 Chan, Sewin and Ann Huff Stevens “Job Loss and Employment Patterns of Older Workers,”
         Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 19, No. 2 (April 2001), pp. 484-521.
 Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2011, “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation, and the
         Great Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation,” American Economic Review 101(1),
         341–370.
 Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland, 2012. “The Optimal Inflation
         Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise Their Inflation Targets in
         Light of the Zero Lower Bound?” Review of Economic Studies 79(4), 1371-1406.
 Coile, Courtney C. and Phillip B. Levine, 2011. “Recessions, Retirement, and Social Security,”
         American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 101(3), 23-28.
 Doepke, Matthias, and Martin Schneider, 2006. “Inflation and redistribution of nominal wealth,”
         Journal of Political Economy 114(6): 1069-1097.
 Driscoll, J.C., and A.C. Kraay, 1998. “Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation With Spatially
         Dependent Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4): 549-560.
 Duggan, Mark, and Scott A. Imberman, 2009. “Why are the disability rolls skyrocketing? The
         contribution of population characteristics, economic conditions, and program generosity,”
         in David M. Cutler and David A. Wise, eds. Health at Older Ages: The Causes and




                                                23
       Consequences of Declining Disability Among the Elderly. University of Chicago Press,
       pp. 337-379.
Friedberg, Leora “The Labor Supply Effects of the Social Security Earnings Test,” The Review
       of Economics and Statistics, February 2000, 82(1): 48–63
Giandrea, Michael D., Kevin E. Cahill, Joseph F. Quinn, 2009. “Bridge Jobs A Comparison
       Across Cohorts,” Research on Aging 31(5), 549-576.
Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier, “Retirement Outcomes on the Health and Retirement
       Study,” Social Security Bulletin, Vol. 63, No. 4, 2000, pp. 57-71.
Haaga, Owen, and Richard W. Johnson, 2012. “Social Security claiming: Trends and business
       cycle effects,” CRR WP 2012-5.
Haider, Steven, and Gary Solon, 2006. “Life-Cycle Variation in the Association between Current
       and Lifetime Earnings,” American Economic Review 96(4): 1308-1320.
House, Christopher, John Laitner and Dmitriy Stolyarov, “Valuing Lost Home Production of
       Dual Earner Couples,” International Economic Review 49, no. 2 (May 2008): 701-736.
Hurd, Michael D., and Susann Rohwedder, 2010. “The effects of the economic crisis on the older
       population,” MRRC WP 2010-231.
Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry Sui, 2013. “The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless
       Recoveries,” manuscript.
Karoly, Lynn A., and Julie Zissimopoulos, 2004. “Self-Employment Trends and Patterns Among
       Older U.S. Workers,” Monthly Labor Review 2004(July), 24-47.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, Emmanuel Saez and Jae Song. “Earnings Inequality and Mobility in the
       United States: Evidence from Social Security Data Since 1937,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics (2010), 125(1): 91-128.
Meh, Cesaire A., and Yaz Terajima, 2011. “Inflation, nominal portfolios, and wealth
       redistribution in Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics 44(4): 1369–1402.
Moore, Jeffrey C., Linda L. Stinson, and Edward J. Welniak, Jr., 1997. “Income Measurement
       Error in Surveys: A Review,” U.S. Census Bureau Research Report SM97/05.
Parnes, Herbert S., 1981. “Inflation and early retirement: Recent longitudinal findings,” Monthly
       Labor Review 27: 27-30.
Ruhm, Christopher J. “Bridge Jobs and Partial Retirement,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 8,
       No. 4 (Oct., 1990), pp. 482-501.
Song, Jae and Manchester, Joyce, “New evidence on earnings and benefit claims following
       changes in the retirement earnings test in 2000,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 91(3-
       4), 669-700.
Thompson, Gaule B., 1978. “Impact of inflation on private pensions of retirees, 1970-74:
       Findings from the Retirement History Study,” Social Security Bulletin 41(11): 16-25.




                                               24
Figure 1. Retirement states for a hypothetical age‐earnings profile




                                25
                                                       Figure 2. Share of population by employment status.



                                                   F                                                                            P




                                                                                       .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                    1
                    .8
                    .6
                    .4
                    .2




                                                                                       0
                         1960    1970       1980       1990      2000      2010                            1960   1970   1980       1990   2000   2010



                                                   R
                    .6
                    .4




                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                    62
                    .2




                                                                                                                                    65
                                                                                                                                    67
                    0




                         1960    1970       1980       1990      2000      2010




Notes: the figure plots time series of shares of (living) population by employment/retirement status for selected ages. F denotes full employment, P denotes partial
retirement, R denotes full retirement.


                                                                                  26
                                        Figure 3. Share of population by employment status by quintile of PV life‐time earnings (quintile 5 = top quintile)


                                                          Age 60                                                     Age 62                                                     Age 65                                                     Age 67


                 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                            .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                               F




                                                                                          F




                                                                                                                                                     F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                F
                                                1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                          Age 60                                                     Age 62                                                     Age 65                                                     Age 67
                                .3




                                                                                           .3




                                                                                                                                                      .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
                                .2




                                                                                           .2




                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                 P




                                                                            P




                                                                                                                                       P




                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                .1




                                                                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                                0




                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                          Age 60                                                     Age 62                                                     Age 65                                                     Age 67
                 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                            0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                                                                                       0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
                            R




                                                                                       R




                                                                                                                                                  R




                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010


Notes: the figure plots time series of shares of (living) population by employment/retirement status and by quintile of life-time earnings for selected ages. The
present value of earnings for each worker is calculated for ages between 25 and 54 years. F denotes full employment, P denotes partial retirement, R denotes full
retirement.


                                                                                                                                      27
                                                           Figure 4. Time series of transition probabilities by age.




                                  prob_FF                                         prob_FP                                             prob_FR




                                                               .25




                                                                                                                       .25
                   1
                   .9




                                                               .2




                                                                                                                       .2
                                                               .15




                                                                                                                       .15
                   .8
                   .7




                                                               .1




                                                                                                                       .1
                                                               .05




                                                                                                                       .05
                   .6
                   .5




                                                               0




                                                                                                                       0
                        1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                           1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010



                                  prob_PP                                         prob_PR                                             prob_PD
                   1




                                                               .6




                                                                                                                       .4
                   .8




                                                               .5




                                                                                                                       .3
                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                                                                                     62
                                                               .4
                   .6




                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                                     65
                                                               .3




                                                                                                                                                     67
                   .4




                                                                                                                       .1
                                                               .2
                   .2




                                                               .1




                                                                                                                       0
                        1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                           1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010



Notes: the figure plots time series of transition probabilities across employment/retirement states for selected ages. prob_XY denotes the probability of moving
from state X to state Y. F denotes full employment, P denotes partial retirement, R denotes full retirement, D denotes death.



                                                                                     28
                                                                                Figure 5. Time series of transition probabilities by age and income quintile.


                                      Age 60                                        Age 60                                        Age 60                                Age 60                               Age 60




                                                                                                              .06
                                                               .1
                      1




                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                        .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                              .3
                      .95




                                                                                                              .04




                                                                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                           PR
                                                               FP




                                                                                                                                                    PP
                                                                                                      FR
                 FF




                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                              .02
                      .9




                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                                                                         .2
                      .85




                                                               0




                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010        1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                      Age 62                                        Age 62                                        Age 62                                Age 62                               Age 62




                                                                                                              .08
                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                      1




                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                               .08




                                                                                                                                                         .8
                      .95




                                                                                                              .06




                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                        .04 .06




                                                                                                                                                         .6
                                                                                                      .04




                                                                                                                                                                                            .3
                                                                                                                                                                                           PR
                                                           FP




                                                                                                                                                    PP
                                                                                                      FR
                 FF
                 .9




                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                      .85




                                                                                                              .02
                                                               .02
                                                                                                                                                                                       3




                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                      .8




                                                               0




                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                         0
                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010        1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                      Age 65                                        Age 65                                        Age 65                                Age 65                               Age 65
                      .95




                                                                                                              .12




                                                                                                                                                         .9




                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                               .15




                                                                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                                              .1
                      .9




                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                               .1




                                                                                                      .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                                                                    .6 .7
                 .85




                                                                                                                                                                                           PR
                                                        FP




                                                                                                                                                      PP
                                                                                                                 FR
                 FF




                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                                                               .05
                      .8




                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                                                                                                                         .4
                      .75




                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                               0




                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010        1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                      Age 67                                        Age 67                                        Age 67                                Age 67                               Age 67
                      .9




                                                               .3




                                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .6
                                                               .25
                      .8




                                                                                                              .3




                                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                      .7




                                                        .15 .2




                                                                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                                                                                                           PR
                                                           FP




                                                                                                                                                    PP
                                                                                                      FR
                 FF




                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                    .6
                      .6




                                                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                         .4
                      .5




                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                               .05
                      .4




                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                              0




                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010         1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010        1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010



Notes: the figure plots time series of transition probabilities across employment/retirement states for selected ages. prob_XY denotes the probability of moving
from state X to state Y. F denotes full employment, P denotes partial retirement, R denotes full retirement, D denotes death.



                                                                                                                                  29
                                                   Figure 6. Response of transition probabilities to unemployment rate, linear trend.




                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                           2
                          0




                                                                                1.5




                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                       prob_FR to ur
                                                                   prob_FP to ur
                   prob_FF to ur
                             -1




                                                                                                                             .5
                                                                         1
                   -2




                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                               -.5
                          -3




                                                                           0
                                   55   60   65     70        75                      55   60        65    70     75                     55   60     65      70     75
                                             age                                                     age                                             age




                                                                           3
                          4




                                                                                 2
                                                                   prob_PR to ur
                   prob_PP to ur
                              2




                                                                                                                                               estimates by age
                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                               95% CI
                    0




                                                                                                                                               pooled across ages
                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                               95% CI
                          -2




                                                                           -1




                                   55   60   65     70        75                      55   60        65    70     75
                                             age                                                     age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to unemployment rate. The black, solid line
plots the sensitivity estimated for each age separately as in equation (1). The shaded region is the 95% confidence interval. The red, solid line shows the estimated
sensitivity of prob_XY to the unemployment rate pooled across ages as in equation (2). The red, dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval for the pooled
estimate of the sensitivity.


                                                                                                30
                            Figure 7. Probability of staying in full employment vs. inflation. Age = 65.



                              2004 2005 2006
       .85
                          2002 2007
                                  2003
                         19651964         2008
                                       2001

                  2009      196620001967
                        1963         1968
       .8




                          1998
                          1999    1997
                     1962 1961            1969
                                1996
    prob_FF




                               1994      1984       1970
                                1995
                                   1993
                                    1985
      .75




                               19921972        1971
                                       19861989
                         1987           1988 1990                                 1979
                                     1973
                                     1983                                                         1975
                                                       1976
                                                 1991 1978
                                                                                  1974                     1980
                                              1977
       .7




                                                                           1982


                                                                                                  1981
       .65




              0                                  .05                                   .1                         .15
                                                                inflation


Notes: The figure presents a scatter plot of probability of staying fully employed vs. inflation rate for 65
year olds. 0.1 inflation corresponds to a 10 percent annual inflation rate.




                                                                31
                                      Figure 8. Response of transition probabilities by income quintile to UR (unemployment rate), linear trends.



                                   FF to ur                                           FP to ur                                             FR to ur




                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                  1.5
                 0




                                                                                                                       1
                                                                  1
                 -1




                                                                                                                       .5
                                                                  .5
                 -2




                                                                                                                       0
                                                                  0
                                                                  -.5




                                                                                                                       -.5
                 -3




                      55      60      65          70         75         55       60        65          70         75         55       60            65    70   75
                                      age                                                  age                                                      age
                                   PP to ur                                           PR to ur
                                                                  4
                 4




                                                            1
                                                            2
                                                            3
                                                                  3


                                                            4
                                                            5
                 2




                                                                  2
                 0




                                                                  1
                                                                  0
                 -2




                      55      60      65          70         75         55       60        65          70         75
                                      age                                                  age


Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to unemployment rate. Quintile 1 corresponds to
the bottom income quintile. Each line plots the sensitivity estimated as in equation (1) separately for each age and income quintile.



                                                                                         32
                                        Figure 9. Response of transition probabilities to unemployment rate. Estimation sample 1960‐2005 (exclude the Great Recession).




                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                         2
                          0




                                                                                               1.5




                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                    prob_FR to ur
                                                                                  prob_FP to ur
                   prob_FF to ur
                            -1




                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                          .5
                   -2




                                                                                .5




                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                            -.5
                          -3




                                   55         60       65        70        75                        55   60        65    70   75                     55   60     65      70     75
                                                       age                                                          age                                           age
                          4




                                                                                         3    2
                                                                                prob_PR to ur
                   prob_PP to ur
                              2




                                                                                                                                                            estimates by age
                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                            95% CI
                    0




                                                                                                                                                            pooled across ages
                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                            95% CI
                          -2




                                                                                         -1




                                   55         60       65        70        75                        55   60        65    70   75
                                                       age                                                          age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to unemployment rate. The black, solid line
plots the sensitivity estimated for each age separately as in equation (1). The shaded region is the 95% confidence interval. The red, solid line shows the estimated
sensitivity of prob_XY to unemployment rate pooled across ages as in equation (2). The red, dash lines shows the 95% confidence interval for the pooled estimate
of the sensitivity. Estimation sample covers 1960-2005.


                                                                                                               33
                                                    Figure 10. Response of transition probabilities to unemployment rate, no trends.




                                                                                                                              2
                                                                             2
                          0




                                                                                  1.5
                               -1




                                                                                                                       prob_FR to ur
                                                                    prob_FP to ur
                   prob_FF to ur




                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                             1
                        -2




                                                                       .5




                                                                                                                        0
                          -3




                                                                             0
                                                                             -.5
                          -4




                                                                                                                              -1
                                    55   60   65     70        75                       55   60        65    70   75                   55   60     65      70     75
                                              age                                                      age                                         age
                          10




                                                                             3     2
                                                                     prob_PR to ur
                   prob_PP to ur
                              5




                                                                           1


                                                                                                                                             estimates by age
                                                                                                                                             95% CI
                    0




                                                                                                                                             pooled across ages
                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                             95% CI
                                                                             -1
                          -5




                                    55   60   65     70        75                       55   60        65    70   75
                                              age                                                      age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to unemployment rate. The black, solid line
plots the sensitivity estimated for each age separately as in equation (1), with no trends. The shaded region is the 95% confidence interval. The red, solid line
shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY to unemployment rate pooled across ages as in equation (2), with no trends. The red, dashed lines show the 95%
confidence interval for the pooled estimate of the sensitivity.


                                                                                                  34
                                                    Figure 11. Response of transition probabilities to unemployment rate, quadratic trends.




                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                              1
                          0




                                                                                                                                        .8
                              -.5




                                                                                                                          prob_FR to ur
                                                                       prob_FP to ur
                   prob_FF to ur




                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                             .5
                       -1




                                                                                                                             .4
                          -1.5




                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                  0
                          -2




                                    55   60   65        70        75                   55   60        65    70       75                      55   60     65      70     75
                                              age                                                     age                                                age
                          2




                                                                              3
                          1




                                                                       prob_PR to ur
                   prob_PP to ur




                                                                                 2
                            0




                                                                                                                                                   estimates by age
                                                                                                                                                   95% CI
                      -1




                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                   pooled across ages
                                                                                                                                                   95% CI
                          -2




                                                                              0
                          -3




                                    55   60   65        70        75                   55   60        65    70       75
                                              age                                                     age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to unemployment rate. The black, solid line
plots the sensitivity estimated for each age separately as in equation (1), with quadratic trends. The shaded region is the 95% confidence interval. The red, solid
line shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY to unemployment rate pooled across ages as in equation (2), with quadratic trends. The red, dashed lines show the
95% confidence interval for the pooled estimate of the sensitivity.


                                                                                                 35
                                                          Figure 12 Response of transition probabilities to unemployment rate for males.




                                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                                                  2
                             0




                                                                                        1.5
                                    -.5




                                                                                                                             prob_FR to ur_men
                     prob_FF to ur_men




                                                                         prob_FP to ur_men




                                                                                                                                             1
                               -1




                                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                                 1
                         -1.5




                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                              0
                   -2        -2.5




                                                                                                                                      -.5
                                                                                  0
                                          55   60   65    70        75                        55   60        65    70   75                       55   60     65      70     75
                                                    age                                                      age                                             age
                             4




                                                                                  3
                   prob_PP to ur_men




                                                                         prob_PR to ur_men
                                                                                         2
                                 2




                                                                                                                                                       estimates by age
                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                       95% CI
                      0




                                                                                                                                                       pooled across ages
                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                       95% CI
                             -2




                                                                                  -1




                                          55   60   65    70        75                        55   60        65    70   75
                                                    age                                                      age


Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to unemployment rate for males. The black,
solid line plots the sensitivity estimated for each age separately as in equation (1). The shaded region is the 95% confidence interval. The red, solid line shows the
estimated sensitivity of prob_XY to unemployment rate pooled across ages as in equation (2). The red, dashed lines shows the 95% confidence interval for the
pooled estimate of the sensitivity.


                                                                                                        36
                                                    Figure 13. Response of transition probabilities to unemployment rate for males with ages between 25 and 54 years old.




                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                   2
                                           0




                                                                                                                                                prob_FR to ur_25_54_men
                   prob_FF to ur_25_54_men




                                                                                       prob_FP to ur_25_54_men
                                                                                                          1.5
                                     -.5




                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                -1




                                                                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                           .5
                          -1.5




                                                                                            .5




                                                                                                                                                    0
                     -2         -2.5




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                            -.5
                                               55    60       65        70        75                             55   60        65    70   75                             55   60     65      70     75
                                                              age                                                               age                                                   age




                                                                                                   3
                                4
                   prob_PP to ur_25_54_men




                                                                                       prob_PR to ur_25_54_men
                                                                                                          2
                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                estimates by age
                                                                                                  1



                                                                                                                                                                                95% CI
                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                pooled across ages
                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                95% CI
                                -2




                                                                                                   -1




                                               55    60       65        70        75                             55   60        65    70   75
                                                              age                                                               age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to unemployment rate for males with ages between
24 and 55 years old. The black, solid line plots the sensitivity estimated for each age separately as in equation (1). The shaded region is the 95% confidence interval.
The red, solid line shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY to unemployment rate pooled across ages as in equation (2). The red, dashed lines shows the 95%
confidence interval for the pooled estimate of the sensitivity.



                                                                                                                           37
                                                           Figure 14. Response of transition probabilities to NBER recessions, measure i).




                                                                                                                                     .04
                                                                                   .06
                              .02      0




                                                                                        .04




                                                                                                                             prob_FR to usrec
                       prob_FF to usrec




                                                                          prob_FP to usrec




                                                                                                                                         .02
                    -.06 -.04 -.02




                                                                                .02




                                                                                                                                0
                                                                          0
                              -.08




                                                                                   -.02




                                                                                                                                     -.02
                                           55   60   65    70        75                       55   60        65    70   75                      55   60     65      70     75
                                                     age                                                     age                                            age




                                                                                   .15
                              .05




                                                                          prob_PR to usrec
                      prob_PP to usrec
                                     0




                                                                                      .1
                            -.05




                                                                                                                                                      estimates by age
                                                                                                                                                      95% CI
                                                                            .05




                                                                                                                                                      pooled across ages
                    -.1




                                                                                                                                                      95% CI
                              -.15




                                                                                   0




                                           55   60   65    70        75                       55   60        65    70   75
                                                     age                                                     age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to NBER recessions measure i), which is dummy
variable is equal to one in a given year if at least one month of that year was in a recession. The black, solid line plots the sensitivity estimated for each age separately
as in equation (1). The shaded region is the 95% confidence interval. The red, solid line shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY to the NBER recession measure
(i) pooled across ages as in equation (2). The red, dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval for the pooled estimate of the sensitivity.


                                                                                                        38
                                                           Figure 15. Response of transition probabilities to NBER recessions, measure ii).




                              .02




                                                                                     .06




                                                                                                                                            .04    .03
                                                                          prob_FP to usrec_max




                                                                                                                                 prob_FR to usrec_max
                    prob_FF to usrec_max




                                                                                           .04
                                      0




                                                                                                                                             .02
                              -.02




                                                                                   .02




                                                                                                                                       .01
                       -.04




                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                  0
                              -.06




                                                                                     -.02




                                                                                                                                            -.01
                                           55   60   65    70        75                           55   60        65    70   75                           55   60     65      70     75
                                                     age                                                         age                                                 age
                              .05




                                                                                     .1     .08
                                                                          prob_PR to usrec_max
                    prob_PP to usrec_max
                                   0




                                                                                      .06


                                                                                                                                                               estimates by age
                                                                                .04




                                                                                                                                                               95% CI
                        -.05




                                                                                                                                                               pooled across ages
                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                               95% CI
                              -.1




                                                                                     0




                                           55   60   65    70        75                           55   60        65    70   75
                                                     age                                                         age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to NBER recessions measure ii), which is equal
to the fraction of months in recession in a given year. The black, solid line plots the sensitivity estimated for each age separately as in equation (1). The shaded region
is the 95% confidence interval. The red, solid line shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY to NBER recessions measure (ii) pooled across ages as in equation
(2). The red, dashed lines shows the 95% confidence interval for the pooled estimate of the sensitivity.


                                                                                                            39
Table 1. Sensitivity of transition probabilities to macroeconomic factors:       → |        ,
 Trend                          No            Linear      Quad        No         Linear         Quad       No         Linear     Quad       No         Linear     Quad
                                (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)            (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)
 Panel A: →
 unemployment rate              -0.90***      -0.90***    -0.71***    -0.70***   -0.68***       -0.62***   -0.86***   -0.82***   -0.72***   -0.69***   -0.60***   -0.60***
                                (0.11)        (0.11)      (0.16)      (0.13)     (0.12)         (0.17)     (0.13)     (0.13)     (0.16)     (0.14)     (0.13)     (0.15)
 inflation                                                            -0.30***   -0.32***       -0.24***                                    -0.29***   -0.32***   -0.26***
                                                                      (0.06)     (0.06)         (0.04)                                      (0.06)     (0.05)     (0.06)
 log(HousePrice)                                                                                           0.01       0.03       -0.01      0.01       0.03       0.01
                                                                                                           (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.03)

 Panel B: →
 unemployment rate           0.66***      0.61***      0.44***      0.58***      0.45***        0.38***    0.74***    0.53***    0.44***    0.65***    0.37***    0.37***
                             (0.18)       (0.08)       (0.09)       (0.19)       (0.06)         (0.09)     (0.16)     (0.10)     (0.09)     (0.15)     (0.07)     (0.08)
 inflation                                                          0.12         0.23***        0.14***                                     0.16       0.24***    0.15***
                                                                    (0.11)       (0.04)         (0.03)                                      (0.10)     (0.03)     (0.05)
 log(HousePrice)                                                                                           0.04**     -0.03**    0.00       0.04**     -0.03**    -0.01
                                                                                                           (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.02)

 Panel C: →
 unemployment rate           0.28**       0.30***      0.30***      0.20**       0.27***        0.28***    0.19**     0.31***    0.30***    0.14*      0.27***    0.27***
                             (0.10)       (0.06)       (0.07)       (0.09)       (0.07)         (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.06)     (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.07)     (0.06)
 inflation                                                          0.12**       0.05*          0.07**                                      0.09*      0.05*      0.07**
                                                                    (0.06)       (0.03)         (0.03)                                      (0.05)     (0.03)     (0.03)
 log(HousePrice)                                                                                           -0.04***   0.00       0.00       -0.03***   0.00       -0.00
                                                                                                           (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)

 Panel D: →
 unemployment rate           0.64         0.31         -0.61*       1.05         0.15           -0.41      1.41       -0.20      -0.63**    1.59       -0.36      -0.36
                             (1.33)       (0.52)       (0.30)       (1.33)       (0.66)         (0.32)     (1.14)     (0.52)     (0.29)     (1.11)     (0.65)     (0.28)
 inflation                                                          -0.61        0.23           -0.51***                                    -0.30      0.24       -0.56***
                                                                    (0.70)       (0.29)         (0.11)                                      (0.65)     (0.27)     (0.11)
 log(HousePrice)                                                                                           0.33***    -0.19***   -0.02      0.33***    -0.19***   0.03
                                                                                                           (0.10)     (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.11)     (0.03)     (0.03)


 Panel E: →
 unemployment rate           0.76         0.88***      1.18***      0.39         0.71*          0.96***    0.49       1.13***    1.24***    0.22       0.96**     0.95***
                             (0.50)       (0.29)       (0.24)       (0.52)       (0.38)         (0.25)     (0.46)     (0.27)     (0.25)     (0.49)     (0.38)     (0.22)
 inflation                                                          0.56*        0.26           0.59***                                     0.46*      0.26       0.59***
                                                                    (0.28)       (0.15)         (0.09)                                      (0.26)     (0.15)     (0.10)
 log(HousePrice)                                                                                           -0.12**    0.09***    0.05       -0.10**    0.09***    -0.00
                                                                                                           (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.02)     (0.03)

 Observations                980          980          980          980          980            980        980        980        980        980        980        980
 Number of age groups        20           20           20           20           20             20         20         20         20         20         20         20
Notes: The estimated specification is           → |       ,                                           where X is a vector of macroeconomic factors. Driscoll and Kraay (1998)
standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.


                                                                                                      40
Table 2. Sensitivity by income quintile

                                          Quintile 1                            Quintile 2                            Quintile 3                             Quintile 4                             Quintile 5
                              No           Linear        Quad          No        Linear       Quad            No       Linear        Quad          No         Linear        Quad           No        Linear        Quad
                              (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)        (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)          (13)        (14)         (15)
 Panel A: →
 unemployment rate         -0.76**        -0.77**       -0.77***    -0.67**     -0.61*       -0.62**     -0.62***     -0.52***     -0.52***     -0.78***     -0.63***     -0.61***     -0.69***     -0.54***     -0.52***
                           (0.29)         (0.27)        (0.23)      (0.31)      (0.29)       (0.29)      (0.17)       (0.16)       (0.17)       (0.15)       (0.14)       (0.16)       (0.13)       (0.13)       (0.12)
 inflation                 -0.39***       -0.39***      -0.50***    -0.28**     -0.31***     -0.34***    -0.34***     -0.39***     -0.37***     -0.21***     -0.30***     -0.17**      -0.27***     -0.33***     -0.14**
                           (0.10)         (0.09)        (0.06)      (0.11)      (0.10)       (0.10)      (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.07)       (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.09)       (0.06)
 log(HousePrice)           -0.02          -0.03         0.01        -0.01       -0.00        0.01        0.00         0.03         0.02         0.02         0.06***      0.02         0.03*        0.07***      0.01
                           (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.03)

 Panel B: →
 unemployment rate           0.60***        0.45***     0.45***      0.53***       0.32**      0.32**     0.64***      0.35***      0.34***      0.71***       0.41***     0.40***       0.58***      0.36***     0.34***
                               (0.15)         (0.12)      (0.11)       (0.17)       (0.15)      (0.15)      (0.18)       (0.08)       (0.10)       (0.19)        (0.08)      (0.08)        (0.14)       (0.10)      (0.08)
 inflation                   0.22***        0.26***     0.27***          0.11     0.20***     0.20***        0.17*     0.30***      0.27***         -0.02      0.17***         0.08          0.10     0.20***         0.06
                               (0.07)         (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.08)       (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.09)       (0.04)       (0.05)       (0.09)        (0.05)      (0.06)        (0.07)       (0.05)      (0.04)
 log(HousePrice)             0.04***            0.00       -0.00      0.04**         -0.01       -0.01     0.05**      -0.03**         -0.02        0.04*     -0.04***        -0.01          0.01    -0.04***        -0.00
                               (0.01)         (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.01)      (0.02)        (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.02)

 Panel A: →
 unemployment rate              0.26*         0.36**    0.36***          0.22        0.29*     0.30**         0.08       0.19**       0.20**          0.14    0.23***      0.22***       0.21***     0.21***      0.20***
                               (0.15)          (0.14)     (0.10)       (0.15)       (0.15)      (0.14)      (0.09)        (0.07)       (0.08)       (0.09)      (0.06)       (0.08)        (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.07)
 inflation                    0.14**          0.11**    0.20***       0.12**         0.09*     0.11**      0.12**           0.06         0.07      0.15**         0.10         0.05       0.12**      0.12**          0.07
                               (0.06)          (0.05)     (0.02)       (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.06)      (0.07)       (0.06)        (0.05)      (0.06)       (0.05)
 log(HousePrice)                -0.01         0.02**       -0.00        -0.01         0.01       -0.00   -0.03***          -0.00        -0.00    -0.04***       -0.02*        -0.00     -0.02***     -0.02**         -0.01
                               (0.01)          (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)

 Panel A: →
 unemployment rate               1.26           -0.45      -0.45*        0.96        -0.64   -0.73***         1.80         -0.37     -0.47**         3.13          0.33         0.17         2.14         0.02        -0.05
                               (1.04)          (0.74)      (0.26)      (0.99)       (0.72)      (0.24)      (1.22)        (0.71)       (0.17)      (2.03)        (1.04)       (0.40)       (1.27)       (0.65)       (0.32)
 inflation                      -0.01            0.46   -0.49***        -0.38         0.36   -0.43***        -0.45          0.54    -0.33***        -1.02         0.77*     -0.30**         -0.89         0.08    -0.58***
                               (0.64)          (0.32)      (0.08)      (0.51)       (0.31)      (0.08)      (0.63)        (0.32)       (0.06)      (0.77)        (0.42)       (0.13)       (0.58)       (0.26)       (0.12)
 log(HousePrice)              0.23**        -0.22***         0.04     0.20**     -0.21***         0.02     0.31**      -0.24***          0.02    0.48***      -0.28***       0.06**      0.40***     -0.14***          0.06
                               (0.09)          (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.08)       (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.11)        (0.04)       (0.02)      (0.16)        (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.11)       (0.04)       (0.04)

 Panel A: →
 unemployment rate               0.14           0.75     0.75**          0.26        0.94*    0.99***          0.07     0.84**      0.88***          0.51      0.99**       1.00**         0.48*     0.77***      0.77***
                               (0.59)         (0.50)      (0.30)       (0.58)       (0.50)      (0.27)       (0.55)      (0.39)       (0.22)       (0.56)       (0.43)       (0.42)        (0.27)      (0.23)       (0.23)
 inflation                       0.39           0.22    0.67***          0.45         0.14    0.56***       0.59**         0.24     0.55***      1.11***      0.80***      0.84***       0.69***     0.56***      0.58***
                               (0.26)         (0.19)      (0.12)       (0.27)       (0.19)      (0.10)       (0.24)      (0.14)       (0.09)       (0.23)       (0.26)       (0.21)        (0.14)      (0.14)       (0.12)
 log(HousePrice)                -0.06       0.10***        -0.02        -0.06     0.12***        -0.01     -0.09**     0.10***          0.01     -0.09**          0.04         0.02     -0.08***        -0.01        -0.01
                               (0.04)         (0.02)      (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.04)

 Observations                    980             980         980         925           925        925           925         925          925          875          875          875          925          925          925
 Number of age groups             20              20          20          20            20         20            20          20           20           20           20           20           20           20           20
Notes: The estimated specification is          → |      ,                                          where X is a vector of macroeconomic factors. This specification is estimated for
each quintile separately. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                                         41
APPENDIX TABLES AND FIGURES




            42
                                     Appendix Figure 1. Response of transition probabilities by income quintile to unemployment rate, no trends.



                                   FF to ur                                          FP to ur                                             FR to ur




                                                                                                                      1.5
                 1




                                                                 1.5
                 0




                                                                                                                      1
                                                                 1
                 -1




                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                 .5
                 -2




                                                                                                                      0
                                                                 0
                                                                 -.5




                                                                                                                      -.5
                 -3




                      55      60      65          70        75         55       60        65          70         75         55       60        65    70   75
                                      age                                                 age                                                  age
                                   PP to ur                                          PR to ur
                 6




                                                            1    4
                                                            2
                                                            3
                                                                 3
                 4




                                                            4
                                                            5
                                                                 2
                 2




                                                                 1
                 0




                                                                 0
                 -2




                      55      60      65          70        75         55       60        65          70         75
                                      age                                                 age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to the unemployment rate. Quintile 1 corresponds
to the bottom income quintile. Each line plots the sensitivity estimated as in equation (1), without time trends, separately for each age and income quintile.



                                                                                        43
                                Appendix Figure 2. Response of transition probabilities by income quintile to UR (unemployment rate), quadratic trends.



                                   FF to ur                                           FP to ur                                            FR to ur




                                                                  1.5
                 0




                                                                                                                       1
                                                                  1
                 -.5




                                                                                                                       .5
                                                                  .5
                 -1




                                                                                                                       0
                 -1.5




                                                                  0
                                                                  -.5




                                                                                                                       -.5
                 -2




                        55    60       65          70        75         55       60        65          70         75         55      60         65        70   75
                                       age                                                 age                                                  age
                                   PP to ur                                           PR to ur
                 2




                                                             1    4
                                                             2
                                                             3
                 1




                                                                  3


                                                             4
                                                             5
                 0




                                                                  2
                 -1




                                                                  1
                 -2




                                                                  0




                        55    60       65          70        75         55       60        65          70         75
                                       age                                                 age

Notes: each panel shows the estimated sensitivity of prob_XY (the probability of transition from state X to state Y) to the unemployment rate. Quintile 1 corresponds
to the bottom income quintile. Each line plots the sensitivity estimated as in equation (1), with quadratic trends, separately for each age and income quintile.



                                                                                         44
                                        Appendix Table 1. Sensitivity of transition probabilities to macroeconomic factors: Estimation sample 1960‐2005.
        Trend                     No          Linear        Quad           No           Linear        Quad      No            Linear      Quad        No        Linear     Quad
                                  (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)       (7)           (8)         (9)         (10)      (11)       (12)
        Panel A: →
        unemployment rate         -0.89***     -0.89***     -0.44***     -0.58***    -0.56***       -0.36***   -0.85***     -0.82***     -0.42***    -0.56***   -0.51***   -0.36***
                                  (0.13)       (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.11)      (0.09)         (0.12)     (0.15)       (0.14)       (0.11)      (0.12)     (0.11)     (0.11)
        inflation                                                        -0.35***    -0.36***       -0.20***                                         -0.34***   -0.36***   -0.17***
                                                                         (0.06)      (0.06)         (0.04)                                           (0.06)     (0.05)     (0.05)
        log(HousePrice)                                                                                        0.02         0.04         -0.04***    0.01       0.03*      -0.02*
                                                                                                               (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.01)

        Panel B: →
        unemployment rate         0.66***      0.63***      0.28***      0.52**      0.41***        0.24***    0.73***      0.57***      0.27***     0.57***    0.35***    0.24***
                                  (0.19)       (0.08)       (0.07)       (0.21)      (0.06)         (0.08)     (0.17)       (0.10)       (0.07)      (0.17)     (0.07)     (0.08)
        inflation                                                        0.16        0.25***        0.11***                                          0.19*      0.24***    0.10**
                                                                         (0.11)      (0.04)         (0.03)                                           (0.11)     (0.03)     (0.04)
        log(HousePrice)                                                                                        0.04         -0.04*       0.02**      0.04*      -0.03**    0.01
                                                                                                               (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.01)

        Panel C: →
        unemployment rate         0.26**       0.28***      0.21***      0.14        0.21***        0.18**     0.19*        0.28***      0.20***     0.10       0.21***    0.18***
                                  (0.11)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.09)      (0.05)         (0.06)     (0.09)       (0.06)       (0.06)      (0.08)     (0.06)     (0.06)
        inflation                                                        0.13*       0.08**         0.06*                                            0.10*      0.08**     0.05
                                                                         (0.06)      (0.03)         (0.03)                                           (0.05)     (0.03)     (0.03)
        log(HousePrice)                                                                                        -0.04***     -0.00        0.01**      -0.04***   -0.00      0.01
                                                                                                               (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.00)      (0.01)     (0.00)     (0.00)

        Panel D: →
        unemployment rate         0.93         0.68***      -0.15        1.58        0.69**         0.05       1.65         0.36         -0.12       2.01       0.40       0.05
                                  (1.45)       (0.23)       (0.23)       (1.50)      (0.29)         (0.22)     (1.19)       (0.21)       (0.23)      (1.18)     (0.26)     (0.22)
        inflation                                                        -0.72       -0.02          -0.50***                                         -0.44      -0.04      -0.47***
                                                                         (0.82)      (0.19)         (0.11)                                           (0.74)     (0.17)     (0.10)
        log(HousePrice)                                                                                        0.42***      -0.16***     -0.07**     0.41***    -0.16***   -0.03
                                                                                                               (0.13)       (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.14)     (0.03)     (0.03)


        Panel E: →
        unemployment rate         0.65         0.75***      0.80***      0.05        0.39*          0.58***    0.37         0.89***      0.75***     -0.11      0.52***    0.58***
                                  (0.56)       (0.24)       (0.21)       (0.55)      (0.19)         (0.19)     (0.48)       (0.21)       (0.21)      (0.45)     (0.17)     (0.19)
        inflation                                                        0.68**      0.41***        0.55***                                          0.57*      0.42***    0.49***
                                                                         (0.32)      (0.10)         (0.09)                                           (0.29)     (0.10)     (0.09)
        log(HousePrice)                                                                                        -0.16***     0.07***      0.10***     -0.15***   0.07***    0.05**
                                                                                                               (0.05)       (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.05)     (0.01)     (0.02)

        Observations              980          980          980          980         980            980        980          980          980         980        980        980
        Number of age groups      20           20           20           20          20             20         20           20           20          20         20         20
Notes: The estimated specification is           → |       ,                                           where X is a vector of macroeconomic factors. Driscoll and Kraay (1998)
standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels respectively. Estimation sample is 1960-2005.


                                                                                               45
