NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING MEDIA MARKETS IN THE DIGITAL AGE:
ECONOMICS AND METHODOLOGY
Brett Danaher
Samita Dhanasobhon
Michael D. Smith
Rahul Telang
Working Paper 19634
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19634
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

The authors thank the editors of this volume as well as Heidi Williams for helpful comments on this
research. Danaher acknowledges financial support from an NBER Economics of Digitization Research
Fellowship Grant. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19634.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Brett Danaher, Samita Dhanasobhon, Michael D. Smith, and Rahul Telang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding Media Markets in the Digital Age: Economics and Methodology
Brett Danaher, Samita Dhanasobhon, Michael D. Smith, and Rahul Telang
NBER Working Paper No. 19634
November 2013
JEL No. K42,L38,L82,O3,O34
ABSTRACT
Digitization raises a variety of important academic and managerial questions around firm strategies
and public policies for the content industries, with many of these questions influenced by the erosion
of copyright caused by Internet file-sharing. At the same time, digitization has created many new opportunities
to empirically analyze these questions by leveraging new data sources and abundant natural experiments
in media markets.
In this chapter we describe the open “big picture” questions related to digitization and the copyright
industries, and discuss methodological approaches to leverage the new data and natural experiments
in digital markets to address these questions. We close our chapter with a specific proof of concept
research study that analyzes an important academic and managerial question — the impact of legitimate
streaming services on the demand for piracy. We use ABC's decision to add its content to Hulu.com
as a natural experiment and show that it resulted in an economically and statistically significant drop
in piracy of that content.
Brett Danaher
Wellesley College
bdanaher@wellesley.edu

Michael D. Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
mds@cmu.edu

Samita Dhanasobhon
Carnegie-Mellon University
samita@cmu.edu

Rahul Telang
Carnegie Mellon University
rtelang@andrew.cmu.edu

1.

Introduction

Digital distribution channels have created opportunities that have transformed the delivery of
information, opening new way for firms to add value to media and entertainment products.
However, these new opportunities can create tension for firms struggling to adapt their business
models to new markets and new competitors. The availability of pirated digital content only
exacerbates this conflict, making it even harder for firms to develop viable digital business
models. Piracy also raises issues for governments seeking to adapt established copyright
practices to the unique realities of digital markets. Our intent in this chapter is to provide a
tutorial for applying modern empirical methodologies to the abundance of natural experiments
brought about by discrete changes in the media distribution market, thereby helping firms and
government adapt their practices based on data and empirical evidence as opposed to dogma and
conventional wisdom.
Our position in this paper is that empirical research using modern methods for causal
identification are called for in order to determine the optimal copyright and business policies in
the digital era. Having written several papers on these subjects, we hope to provide a roadmap
for future research to apply econometric methods for causal inference to answer the many
managerial and policy questions raised by digital markets. The research we discuss in this
chapter addresses these questions by exploring the factors that influence demand for media
content across various distribution channels and how consumers respond to changes in these
channels resulting from firm strategy or government action. Our research to date has shown the
following: First, that a graduated-response anti-piracy law in France causally increased digital
music sales by 22-25% following widespread awareness of the law. Second, that the shutdown of
the popular file-sharing cyberlocker Megaupload.com causally increased revenues from digital
movies by 6-10%. Third, that the removal of NBC’s video content from the iTunes store caused
piracy levels of that content to increase by 11% but had no impact on DVD sales of the same
content, implying that digital distribution of media may mitigate piracy without necessarily
cannibalizing physical channel sales in the short-run. Finally, new research in this chapter
demonstrates that distribution of television through online streaming (in this case, Hulu.com) can
decrease piracy of that content by 15-20%. In short, our research seems to suggest that firms can

1

compete against ‘free’ pirated content by either making legitimate digital content easier to
consume, or by making pirated content harder to consume. This implies that both firm strategy
and government intervention may play a role in managing the disruption caused by digitization.
The remainder of our chapter proceeds as follows: In section 2 we summarize three of our prior
studies pertaining to digital media with particular focus on the methodologies employed and
other questions those methodologies might be used to answer. In section 3 we present new
research on the impact of distribution through online streaming on demand for piracy. Finally in
section 4 we discuss the results presented in the chapter and set the agenda for future research.
2.

Three Categories of Natural Experiments

In order to better understand the impact that a government intervention or a new firm strategy
has on outcome variables such as sales or piracy levels, one must have a means to isolate and
identify the causal impact of the event on the outcome. For example, if a government were to
pass a policy aimed at reducing piracy, simply examining piracy levels before and after
implementation of the policy would be insufficient as piracy levels may have risen or fallen at
that time for reasons unrelated to the policy. In the words of a common adage in the social
sciences “correlation doesn’t establish causation.”
To establish causation in such an environment, economists and social scientists often use a
difference-in-difference strategy. The basic idea of a diff-in-diff approach is to identify a
“control” group of individuals, regions, or products that can aid in estimating the counterfactual
of what would have happened to the “treated” group if the treatment had not happened. The
difference between this counterfactual and what we observe indicates the actual effect of the
treatment, assuming that the control group can accurately predict the counterfactual. In this
section, we give three examples of natural experiments and methodologies that can be used to
analyze the impact of a treatment using this methodology, but where each case involves a
different type of variation in the data and thus a different manner of applying the methodology.

2

Case 1: The Effect of a Graduated Response Anti-piracy Law on Digital Music Sales
(Danaher et al. 2013)
In Spring of 2009 the French government passed an anti-piracy law known as HADOPI,
establishing the HADOPI administrative authority and giving it the power to monitor online
copyright infringement and to act against pirates based on information submitted by
rightsholders. The HADOPI authority had a number of responsibilities including promoting and
educating consumers about legal sales channels, but the most widely known program under
HADOPI was the strikes and penalty system. Under this system, individuals would receive a
warning for their first and second observed instances of copyright infringement and upon the
third, they could be taken to court and potentially penalized with monetary fines or suspension of
their Internet access for up to one month. This law was controversial and received a great deal of
publicity, causing consumers to be very aware of the new policy and potentially affecting their
behavior by migrating potential filesharers to legal purchasing channels. To analyze the impact
of the HADOPI law on French consumers’ digital music purchases we obtained a panel of
weekly iTunes digital music sales data from the four largest music labels for nearly three years
surrounding the passage of HADOPI.
In this instance, the policy shock — the passage of HADOPI — was limited to one geographic
region (France), and there was little reason to think it would have direct impact outside the
boundaries of that country. Most other European countries had not experienced any relevant
policy shocks at this time, and so our goal was to find a set of control countries whose sales
trends over time closely matched France’s prior to HADOPI, expecting that such a control group
should have continued to trend similarly to France if not for the policy shock. We considered
several control groups that in theory might have such a trend, examining only the pre-HADOPI
sales trends to find the group that most closely matched France’s trend.1 The group of countries
that best matched France’s sales trends in the pre-period of our data was Spain, Germany, Italy,
Belgium, and the UK. Notably these were also the five countries, other than France, with highest
digital sales levels among EU countries.

1

In this stage, examining only the pre-Hadopi period is important. If one were to examine the entire period, one
might be guilty of a form of “data mining,” searching for a control group against which France would appear to
increase or decrease after HADOPI. By only examining the pre-period to find the best-fitting control group, one
remains agnostic as to the effect of the treatment and thus the diff-in-diff test that follows is valid.

3

Before running a diff-in-diff model, another challenge that arose was selection of the “treatment
date” that we would use in our model. Sometimes this is clear — if a government were to one
day simply block all access to pirated material, that day would be the most obvious treatment
date for analysis. However, the HADOPI bill was debated for over half a year in French
government, even being passed by one government body only to be rejected and then
subsequently accepted by another. With such confusion as to whether the law was in effect or not,
we chose to consider the peak level of awareness of HADOPI as the effective treatment date.
Google Trends data is a useful tool for measuring awareness of a law or policy as it measures the
number of searches over time for a given search term (as well as the number of articles
containing the search term) for a given geographic area. Thus we used Google Trends to
augment our dataset and determine the effective treatment date of HADOPI.
The following Figure 1, reproduced from our paper, shows the results from an OLS model
predicting the natural log of iTunes song sales for France and the control group plotted against
the Google Trends index of searches in France for the term “HADOPI.”
Figure 1: iTunes Song Unit Sales Trends, France vs. Control Group

Two important facts are clear in this picture. First, weekly sales trends of the control group
match closely to France prior to widespread awareness of HADOPI (moreover, a formal
statistical test of joint differences between the control and treatment groups before treatment
cannot reject that the two trends are the same during this period at a 95% confidence level).

4

Second, increased awareness of the HADOPI law (proxied by Google search intensity) coincides
with the persistent rise in the French sales trend above the control group.2 Thus, these results
suggest that awareness of the HADOPI law in France had a positive causal impact on iTunes
sales in France, and that laws like this may migrate consumers from illegal file-sharing to legal
digital channels.
To provide further evidence that the effect we found was indeed causal, we added another level
of difference to the model showing that the diff-in-diff increase in French sales was larger for
more heavily pirated genres of music (and thus genres that should be more significantly impacted
by the law) and smaller for less pirated genres. The logic here is that more heavily pirated genres
should have a large number of customers “treated” by the anti-piracy intervention than less
heavily pirated genres do.
The more general point about this paper is that when a government passes a policy or a firm
implements a strategy in one region and when other regions could be expected to be unaffected
by that change, a diff-in-diff strategy can provide useful evidence as to the policy’s impact when
a suitable control group can be found. This is not always easy. The iTunes store had been open in
each of these countries for similar periods of time and so development of the market was
reasonably stable across these countries. However, we found it difficult to study the impact of
HADOPI on users of legal music streaming services like Deezer or Spotify, as these services
were at very different levels of development across countries and thus we could find no group of
countries whose sales/subscription trends were following a pattern similar to France’s. Despite
this limitation, we believe that policy variation across countries (coupled with additional
differences across attributes like genre) will be a powerful tool to analyze the impact of other
government interventions like the Digital Economy act in the UK and the Copyright Amendment
Act of 2011 in New Zealand, as well as industry-led interventions like the Copyright Alert
System put in place by US Internet Service Providers.

2

A point worth making about studies such as this is that the traditional standard error clustering approach (Bertrand
et. al. 2004) does not generate correct standard errors for the treated group in the post-treatment period, partly due to
the low number of countries in the study but also due to the fact that there is only one “treated” group. Our paper
outlines a manner in which robust standard errors can be calculated in such a situation through permutational
inference.

5

Case 2: The Effect of the Megaupload Shutdown on Digital Movie Sales (Danaher and Smith
2013)
In January 2012, the U.S. Department of Justice secured an indictment against the popular
cyberlocker Megaupload.com, allowing them to raid Megaupload’s offices and shut down
Megaupload’s Internet presence. Prior to this, Megaupload was an online cloud storage service
and the 13th most visited site on the Internet according to Alexa.com. However, according to the
injunction, the vast majority of the content stored on Megaupload was copyright infringing and
Megaupload’s policies (such as not requiring passwords for storage accounts or providing
incentives to upload popular content) encouraged rampant file-sharing. The shutdown was
controversial on many fronts, and opponents of the shutdown claimed that in spite of all of the
costs of this government intervention, it would have little impact on consumer behavior as the
content that had been available on Megaupload was available through other piracy channels (a
conjecture aligned with the empirical evidence presented by Lauinger et al. (2013)).
From an empirical perspective, what was notable about the shutdown was that it occurred all
over the world on the same date, and thus unlike in our HADOPI study there was no geographic
region that could be considered a “control” area for estimating how sales would have changed in
the absence of the shutdown. This challenge also arises with other policies or strategies that are
taken worldwide all at once, or when there is a shock to a country but the only appropriate
variation to study is within that country. In situations like this, no clear control group exists and
so the simplest form of difference-in-difference may not be adequate to estimate the causal
impact of the shock.
Fortunately, another way of implementing a diff-in-diff approach is to model the first difference
as post- vs. pre-treatment but to use a more continuous variable as the second difference, where
the continuous variable is a measure of how intensely each individual, region, or unit in the data
was treated. In the Megaupload example, even though Megaupload was shut down in every
country on the same date, each country had different pre-shutdown usage levels of Megaupload.
To measure this variation, we gathered data on the number of unique visitors to Megaupload.com
by country for the month prior to the shutdown, as well as data on the number of Internet users in
each country at the end of the same month. Dividing the former by the latter, we imputed each
country’s Megaupload Penetration Ratio (MPR), or the percent of Internet accountholders who
6

visited Megaupload at least once in the month prior to the shutdown. With respect to the
shutdown, the MPR can be seen as a measure of treatment intensity, as countries with higher
MPR received a stronger “shock” from the shutdown and thus, if the shutdown actually boosted
media sales, the post-shutdown sales growth should be larger in high MPR countries relative to
low MPR countries.

0

Figure 2: Post-Shutdown Change in Digital Movie Sales vs. MPR
3 Weeks Before and After Shutdown

-.1

Belgium

France

-.2

% Change in Sales

Mexico

Spain

-.3

Austria
Germany
Great Britain
New Zealand
United States

-.4

Canada
Australia

-.5

Ireland

0

.05

.1
.15
Mega Penetration Ratio Dec '11

.2

Combining the MPR data with weekly digital movie sales data from two of the major motion
picture studios, we showed that prior to the shutdown, the sales trends of high MPR countries
were relatively similar to the sales trends of low MPR countries. 3 But immediately after the
shutdown, high MPR countries experienced larger growth (or smaller declines from December to
January sales levels) than low MPR countries do. Figure 2 presents a scatterplot that
demonstrates this relationship, but in the paper we display results from OLS regression models

3

With the exception of during the Christmas holiday. In the paper we discuss how we deal with this anomaly in the
pre-shutdown period.

7

that more precisely show the sales trends and more strongly support our inference that the
shutdown of Megaupload caused an increase in digital movie sales.
One thing that stands out about this scatterplot is the positive relationship between increased
MPR (x-axis) and increased relative sales change between December and January (y-axis). This
positive relationship is the basis for the rest of the statistical evidence we provide in the paper
that the shutdown of Megaupload caused an increase in digital movie sales. But another key
takeaway is the importance of the diff-in-diff methodology here: sales in nearly all of the
countries were actually decreasing after the shutdown, but this is due to a seasonal decline from
Christmas highs that happens every year in January. Simply examining average sales before and
after the shutdown would show a decrease following the shutdown, but our diff-in-diff evidence
indicates that the natural seasonal declines were mitigated by the closure of Megaupload, thereby
causing revenues to be higher than they would have if not for the closure.
It is worth nothing that in studies like this with a small number of clusters or “experiments”
(countries), one might worry that pre-existing trends could drive the results if high MPR
countries were already growing faster than low MPR countries. In our paper we provide
evidence from the pre-period indicating that this does not appear to be a driving factor. However,
a better solution in situations like this is to add in country-specific trends to the diff-in-diff
regression. Essentially this means modeling each country’s specific week-to-week time trend
based on some functional form (linear, quadratic, etc.), adding these terms into the regression,
and asking if post-shutdown deviations from these modeled trends are larger in high MPR (high
treatment intensity) countries. In this paper, we showed that the addition of these trends actually
increased the magnitude of our coefficient of interest and did not impact sign or significance.
As an additional test of causal inference, we tested whether the relationship between MPR and
sales changes was unique to 2011-2012 (when Megaupload was shutdown) or whether this same
sales change pattern was common during this time of year. Indeed, in event studies such as these,
a placebo test of a similar time period at some point (or in some location) where there was no
treatment can help to verify causal inference. Accordingly, we showed that there was no
statistically significant relationship between the December 2011 MPR and the percent change in
digital movie sales after January 19, 2013.

8

Finally, from a policy perspective, one might ask how a model like this, that uses variation in
treatment intensity across regions, can be interpreted and explained to someone without training
in econometrics. Essentially what the model does is to model the linear relationship (or any
functional form one considers appropriate) between pre-shutdown MPR and post-shutdown
changes in sales. This relationship can then be extrapolated to estimate what would have been the
post-shutdown sales change in a country with zero Megaupload usage, which is akin to asking
what would have happened to sales in a country unaffected by the shutdown. In this manner a
control “counterfactual” is estimated, allowing one to then estimate how much lower sales would
have been in each country if not for the shutdown. An analogy could be made to a form of
medical trial – the experiment is like giving one group of sick patients a pill that is 20% medicine
and 80% sugar (placebo), giving another group a pill in a 40/60% ratio, and still another group
an 80/20% pill, and then asking whether the groups given a higher concentration of medicine
began to recover faster after the treatment than the groups given lower concentrations.
We suggest that the type of event study we conducted with Megaupload might also be useful for
examining the effects of shocks when there is no clear control group. For example, the shutdown
of Limewire in 2010 was similar to Megaupload, and its effect on sales of recorded music should
be of interest to policymakers. Or, in 2009, Youtube.com chose to stop allowing individuals in
the UK access to all premium music videos on their site due to a breakdown in negotiations with
the British Performing Right Society. If there existed some geographic variance across the UK in
pre-blackout usage of Youtube for music video watching, then this shock could be used to
determine the effect of streaming music content (on Youtube) on sales or piracy of that content
— a question that is currently of great interest to many parties involved in the music industry.
Case 3: The Effect of Digital Distribution of Television on Piracy and DVD Sales (Danaher et
al. 2010)
Considerable debate exists within the media industries around the use of new digital distribution
channels such as paid download stores like iTunes and subscription streaming services such as
Spotify or Hulu. Proponents argue that such channels will more readily compete with illegal filesharing by offering consumers a more convenient legal means of acquiring content that includes
a revenue stream to rightsholders. Critics worry that such channels — often delivering lower

9

profit margins — will cannibalize pre-existing channels with higher profit margins. With each
potential channel the answers to these questions may be different, and yet they remain critical to
determining the profitability of such channels or, in some cases, the size and direction of
royalties that should be paid for the delivery of content. 4 But often these new channels are
opened or closed with little evidence as to their effects on other channels.
Fortunately, these questions can sometimes be answered using not variance at the geographic
level as above, but rather using variance at the product or firm level. Whether or not certain
products are offered on these new channels is often based not on the piracy or sales levels of
those products, but on contractual negotiations between rightsholders and delivery channels.
For example, in early 2007 around 40% of all video content on the iTunes store was provided by
NBC-Universal. Due to contract disputes related to iTunes pricing policies, NBC chose not to
renew their contract with iTunes and on November 30, 2007 they removed all of their television
content from the iTunes store. However, similar networks (Fox, CBS, and ABC) continued to
offer their content, providing a potential control group for NBC content. We used this productlevel variation5 and the NBC shock to determine the impact that selling television content on
iTunes has on both piracy levels of that content and on physical DVD box set sales. Similarly,
we used the return of NBC content to iTunes the following year to verify and provide additional
insights into our results.

4

For example, if users listening to a subscription music streaming service buy more music from existing channels,
then perhaps royalties are unnecessary. But if these users buy less music, substituting streaming for purchasing, then
the rate of sales displacement resulting from the service might be one determinant of the size of royalties that the
streaming service should pay to rightsholders.
5
Technically this variation was at the network level, not the product level. But in the paper we argue that each
television series was a unique experiment and treat standard errors accordingly.

10

Figure 3: NBC vs. Non-NBC Piracy Surrounding December 1, 2007
4.9
4.8

4.6
4.5
4.4
4.3

Non-NBC

4.2

NBC

4.1
4
12/24/2007

12/22/2007

12/20/2007

12/18/2007

12/16/2007

12/14/2007

12/12/2007

12/8/2007

12/10/2007

12/6/2007

12/4/2007

12/2/2007

11/30/2007

11/28/2007

11/26/2007

11/24/2007

11/22/2007

11/20/2007

11/18/2007

3.9
11/16/2007

predicted ln of pirated downloads

4.7

While the full results can be found in our paper, Figure 3 highlights an example of the results
from a diff-in-diff model comparing piracy of NBC content to a control group of ABC, CBS, and
Fox content.
Similar to the results in our HADOPI paper, we show that the average pirated downloads of
NBC episodes trended similarly to the average of control group episodes prior to iTunes
removal,6 but that immediately following the removal of NBC content from iTunes, piracy of
those episodes spiked above the control group and remained above the control group during our
the period covered by our data. Thus, we demonstrate that removing content from iTunes caused
an increase in piracy, and by extension that selling digitally on iTunes mitigates piracy. In the
same paper, and using the same methodology, we showed that removal of NBC content from
iTunes did not cause any increase in DVD sales of that content on iTunes, representing the
reverse of the digital distribution question.
We believe that this approach has broad application to questions in the media industries in the
age of digitization. The “gold standard” of causal inference is randomized controlled trials,
whereby a random set of individuals or products are treated with a shock and the others are not.
Such trials may not be out of reach – in our experience, firms in the media industries have been
willing to randomly select some products to “treat” with availability on a new channel, shorter
6

An appropriate means of testing this is to ask whether a Wald test of joint significance for the difference between
NBC and non-NBC content for all dates prior to the shock can be rejected at a specified significance level.

11

release windows, or variation in prices. When selection is truly random, many of the usual
concerns about endogeneity are of less worry as unobserved characteristics will be similar on
average across the control and treatment groups. Such experiments can be of value to both firms
and researchers.
Absent such experimentation, the negotiations between rightsholders and content delivery
platforms may create a plethora of natural experiments where some rightsholders come to terms
with the platform (or do not come to terms) for reasons that can be shown to be unrelated to the
dependent variables of interest. For example, on music streaming services, one label may choose
to initiate or discontinue availability of its artists’ albums while other labels make no changes to
the status quo, and this might allow researchers to study the impact of music streaming on piracy,
paid downloads, or CD sales. Our NBC paper provides a straightforward example of how to use
such product-level variation to tease out the impacts of such strategies.
The focus of our descriptions of these three papers has been on the generalizability of these
methodologies for a vast array of questions and experiments in the media industries following
digitization. Specifically, our review establishes a set of methodologies and provide examples on
how to impute causal impact across a variety of regularly occurring natural experiments —
discrete changes at a country level (e.g., France and HADOPI), at a site level (e.g., Megaupload),
or at a product or firm level (e.g., NBC and iTunes) — on variables of interest. Given the large
number of these sorts of “natural experiments” driven by changes in how firms and governments
respond to digital markets for entertainment, these methodologies could find wide application,
and could help firms and governments understand the drivers of consumer behavior and the
impact of such changes.
To demonstrate this, in the final section of this chapter we provide proof-of-concept that these
methodologies are generalizeable to other settings by adapting the strategy from our NBC paper
to study the effect of streaming television content on Hulu.com (a popular streaming site) on
piracy of that content. Unlike the prior three examples where we provided high level analysis, we
now present precise details on data and methodology.
The Effect of Television Streaming on Piracy

12

Copyright holders have approached new digital distribution channels with a great deal of caution,
despite the prevailing view that the vast majority of future sales inevitably will come through
digital distribution, and the prevailing view that smart management should conduct experiments
in advance of that arrival to understand the impact of these channels. Their concern about
embracing new digital distribution channels seems to be driven by three main factors. First,
digital distribution channels may substitute for sales in (more profitable) physical distribution
channels. For example, Jeff Zucker, CEO of NBC Universal, has been quoted as saying that the
number one challenge for the motion picture industry in approaching digital channels is to avoid
“trading analog dollars for digital pennies.” Second, the use of digital distribution channels may
accelerate the reduction in revenue from downstream channels, reducing the future profitability
of present downstream channel partners. For example, it has been widely reported that Wal-mart
forcefully protested Disney’s distribution of its movies through iTunes by returning “boxes and
boxes” of DVDs to Disney, and by threatening to significantly reduce their future stock of
Disney content. Finally, rights holders may be concerned that digital distribution channels are
not commercially viable given the availability of “free” pirated content online. The concern here
is that firms will have to significantly lower their prices today to compete with free pirated
content and that this may reduce consumers’ willingness to pay in the future. In short, competing
with free pirated content today could have long-term impacts on the overall profitability of the
industry into the future.
One managerial decision where these arguments have come into play is the decision of whether
to allow television content to be shown on Internet websites for streaming video. Streaming
video channels could be seen as low margin competitors to the higher margin established
broadcast of physical sales channels. On the other hand, allowing consumers to view television
content through streaming channels may increase interest in the show and may decrease demand
for digital piracy of this content. A legitimate streaming channel may also give copyright holders
a great deal of flexibility in terms of assembling content and numerous opportunities to
differentiate this content from physical DVDs, opening up new and untapped consumer markets
and advertising revenues without significantly impacting demand in existing physical channels.
In this more optimistic view, the firm who first figures out a viable streaming approach could
improve its competitive position relative to its rivals, generating a strong incentive to experiment
with these sorts of channels. Such a firm may also take leadership position in creating platform
13

and infra-structure for digital distribution and streaming thereby giving it a powerful position in
the market.
Given these factors, it is notable that television and movie studios have begun to explore content
distribution through many new digital distribution channels in recent years. These changes in
distribution policies create a unique series of natural experiments in which to analyze the impact
of free digital distribution on demand through physical channels and on demand for pirated
content.
In our analysis below we analyze the impact of free streaming video websites on demand for
digital piracy, and we also suggest that a similar approach could be used in the future to analyze
the effect of streaming on physical sales or broadcast television. To analyze this question, we use
a quasi-experiment that occurred on July 6, 2009 when ABC started streaming their television
content on Hulu.com. Hulu.com is an advertising supported Internet portal for streaming video.
Interestingly, television networks themselves took leadership in creating this platform and it was
launched to the public in March 2008 as a joint venture between Fox and NBC. In April 2009,
ABC reached an agreement to take a partial ownership position in Hulu.com and add its content
to the site. This timing is important – Hulu had already existed for a year with content from two
major networks, such that when ABC added their content to Hulu the site already had a large
existing user base and public awareness. As such, the addition of ABC represents a discrete
shock to available content on a major delivery platform. The data suggests that this shock was
exogenous with respect to piracy trends, as the timing was based on a series of contractual
negotiations versus expectations of future piracy or sales.
In that sense, this experiment looks much like the one in our paper on NBC and iTunes in that
when ABC added its content to Hulu.com on July 6, 2009, there were no shocks to content on
other networks (NBC, CBS, CW, and Fox). Thus television series on these four networks may
serve as a control group for the “treated” ABC content, allowing us to identify the causal effect
of Hulu.com streaming availability on levels of piracy. This differs from our prior paper on NBC
in that we are studying a digital streaming service rather than a download service and we are
studying the addition of content to a distribution channel rather than its removal from one.

14

Background and Theory: Hulu.com was created as an attempt to give consumers a convenient,
readily available platform on which to watch television content online on their own time. Unlike
peer-to-peer filesharing piracy, Hulu is a streaming service and requires no download time before
one can watch episodes of a show. However, also unlike piracy, Hulu is supported by short, 1530 second advertisements inserted into the programs. And so despite the convenience and
reliability of Hulu, it is not clear whether consumers will consider this service to be an attractive
alternative to piracy.
During the timeframe covered by our dataset, Hulu only offered the most recent 5 episodes of
each television series and all episodes and seasons before that were unavailable on Hulu. 7
Despite the fact that pirated copies of an episode of television are often available through torrent
sites the day after the episode airs, the owners of some series choose to delay availability of an
episode on Hulu for several days after airing on television. This was not a factor in our study as
the “shock” to availability occurred between seasons and so we study piracy of episodes of
television that had aired at least a month prior to the beginning of our study. Nevertheless, it
remains a question whether consumers who would otherwise pirate will be attracted to the
convenience (and legality) of Hulu enough to convert to consumption through legal streaming.
Finally, it is worth noting that television networks and their partners (like Cable companies or
downstream DVD sellers) may be worried that streaming would cannibalize DVD box set sales
or over-the-air television viewing, where the profit margins are currently significantly higher
than they are on streaming channels. In this study we will not analyze such potential
cannibalization, but we believe one could undertake such analysis in the future with proper data
on DVD sales, data on over-the-air audience viewing audience levels, and with a similar
methodology to that employed here.
Data: To address the research question we collected a panel of data on consumption of pirated
television content through the BitTorrent tracker site Mininova.org. From these data, we
analyzed all television series (excluding reality shows and live programming) that were available
on the five major television networks (ABC, CBS, CW, Fox, and NBC) starting in the Fall of

7

Today, one can get access to all episodes of a number of series by paying to subscribe to Hulu Plus. However,
Hulu Plus did not exist during the time period of our study.

15

2008 and extending through the Fall of 2009. This encompasses a total 71 television series. We
describe these data in more detail below.
Figure 4 displays the timeline of events in our study. It shows that ABC added its content to
Hulu on July 6, 2009, a date after the end of the Fall 2008 to Spring 2009 television season and
before the start of the Fall 2009 to Spring 2010 television season. As a result, we focus our
analysis on episodes of television programs from the Fall 2008 to Spring 2009 season, and our
analysis period covers the four weeks before and after ABC added its content to Hulu (with
robustness checks for different window lengths). We also include only episodes that have at least
10 downloads on each date to increase the signal to noise ratio of our tests.
Figure 4: Timeline of events during period of study

May 2009
End of Fall
2008 - 2009
Season

July 6th,
2009
ABC joined
Hulu

June 9th,
2009
Four weeks
before ABC
joined Hulu

August 3rd,
2009
Four weeks
after ABC
joined Hulu

September
2009
Beginning of
Fall 2009 2010 Season

Table 1 summarizes, by network, the 71 television series in our data and whether they were
available on Hulu.com during the Fall 2008 season. As noted in the Table, of the 71 television
series active in the Fall 2008 to Spring 2009 television season, 27 of these series had their most
recent five episodes available on Hulu.
Table 1: Hulu Availability for Each Network’s Series, Fall 2008-Spring 2009 Season
ABC
CBS
CW
FOX
NBC
Total

Not On Hulu
16
19
6
6
6
53

On Hulu
0
0
2
8
8
18

16

Total
16
19
8
14
14
71

In terms of what changed, note that prior to July 6, 2009, there were no ABC series available on
Hulu, while after July 6, 2009, 9 ABC television series became available on Hulu. These are the
only changes in availability during this timeframe — of the remaining 62 series, the 44 that were
not available on Hulu prior to July 6, 2009 remained unavailable after July 6, 2009 and the 18
that were available on Hulu prior to July 6, remained available on Hulu after July 6. As such,
from these television programs, we use the 9 ABC television series that were made available on
Hulu on July 6, 2009 as our treatment group and the remaining 62 series whose status on Hulu
did not change as the control group.
Following Smith and Telang (2009) and Danaher et al. (2010), we use BitTorrent piracy
measured by Mininova.org as a proxy for overall video piracy for the television content in our
sample. We selected Mininova because it was the most popular BitTorrent tracker site listed by
Alexa.com during our study period.8 A further advantage of Mininova is that it provided the
number of cumulative downloads for each tracker listed on its site, allowing us to calculate the
number of daily downloads for each piece of content in our sample. The process for gathering
these data and coding them are described in more detail in our NBC/iTunes paper.
To study the effect of the addition of ABC video content to Hulu, we focus our analysis on the
four-week period before and after the July 6, 2009 launch date. This allows us to calculate the
change in piracy for ABC content after its addition to Hulu.com, and to compare this change to
the change in the control group. We focus our analysis on the four-week before and after period
because we want to see the immediate impact of the policy and we want to exclude unrelated
factors that might affect consumption over a longer time-frame. We also test whether the change
in piracy observed below is typical of other timeframes by conducting the same analysis
described here on the period one year prior to our study (the four-week period before and after
July 6, 2008) as a further counter-factual reference point for how ABC piracy would have
changed if it had not been added to Hulu. Importantly, we limit our piracy analysis to just the
most recent five episodes of each series in our data, as these are the only episodes of any series

8

See http://www.alexa.com/browse/general/?&CategoryID=1316737

17

(treatment or control) which were on Hulu.9 Table 2 provides summary statistics of piracy data
during the four-week period before and after July 6, 2009.
Table 2: Daily Number of Downloads

Pirated Downloads
Treatment
Before7/6/09
After7/6/09
Control
Before7/6/09
After7/6/09

Mean
353.8
209.4
388.4
301

Std. Dev.
428.2
302.5
558.5
437.7

%Change
-40.80%
-22.50%

We use a balanced panel of episodes that were available both before and after ABC joined Hulu
in these summary statistics and in our regression analysis. Table 2 reports the mean of the daily
download numbers for the most recent five episodes of each series in both the control and
treatment group. We found that the average number of daily downloads is consistent with the
previous literature (Danaher et al 2010), showing between 200 to 400 downloads per episode per
day.
During the four week period before and after the addition of ABC content to Hulu, the average
number of daily pirated downloads for the last five episodes in the treatment group decreased by
40%, whereas the average number of daily pirated for the control group decreased by 23%. We
note that we would expect the number of downloads to decrease over time given that episode
popularity will decline following an initial surge of interest immediately after broadcast.
However, the relative sizes of these summary statistics suggest that there was a larger decrease in
piracy for those series that were added to Hulu than there was for series where there was no
change in their Hulu availability. We explore this result more formally in our regression analysis.
Results: Before comparing changes in the treatment and control groups after the introduction of
ABC content to Hulu, we gather evidence as to whether piracy of the control group can be
expected to trend similarly to piracy in the treated group if not for the shock. We use equation (1)
9

It would certainly be interesting to consider the impact of having 5 episodes on Hulu on piracy of the entire series.
However, sometimes individuals download a torrent containing all episodes from a season or series and because of
the nature of our observational data, we cannot determine whether the download of a season is because the
downloading individual wanted just 2-3 of the most recent episodes, and downloaded the season torrent to get them,
or actually wanted the entire season. Any analysis on piracy of episodes other than the five most recent would be
subject to this data limitation.

18

to compare the time trend of piracy levels in the control and treatment groups prior to July 6,
2009. If the control group trends similarly to the treated group prior to the shock, then one might
reasonably expect it to provide a good estimate of the counterfactual for the treated group after
the shock.

ln Downloadsit   0  1t Dt   2t Dt * ABCHulu i   i  eit

(1)

In equation (1) above, Downloadsit is the total number of pirated downloads of episode i on day t,
Dt is a vector of date fixed effects for each day, ABCHului is an indicator variable equal to one if
episode i is broadcast on ABC and was made available on Hulu on July 6, 2009 (and is equal to 0
for all episodes on other networks and untreated episodes on ABC), and u is a vector of episode
fixed effects. In this model, vector β1 captures the day to day piracy trend for the control group,
and β2 represents how this differs for piracy of the treated group. Rather than displaying eight
weeks worth of coefficients, we plot the predicted value from the resulting coefficients in Figure
5 using β0+β1 as the predicted log piracy of the control group and β0+β1+β2 as the predicted log
piracy of the treated group.
Figure 5: Treated vs. Control Group Piracy Surrounding July 6th, 2009
6
5.8

Predicted ln pirated downloads

5.6
5.4

5.2
5
Control
Treated

4.8

4.6
4.4
4.2
4

19

While Figure 5 demonstrates that piracy trends of the treatment and control groups were not
quite the same prior to the experiment, they were quite close. However, after treated ABC series
were added to Hulu on July 6, 2009, there is an immediate break in piracy levels of the last five
episodes of each of these series in the treated group that is much larger than any drop/change in
piracy of the control group. Based on the timing of this relative drop and the lack of a similar
drop before the experiment, we believe the most logical explanation is that people pirated ABC
content less once it was added to Hulu.
In addition to this break in the treated group’s piracy relative to levels in the control group, one
also notes a break in the control group’s piracy levels relative to historical norms. Because the
other networks made no major policy changes on this date, this break might suggest a spillover
effect: If new viewers of ABC content on Hulu discovered the other shows they like on Hulu,
they may have stopped pirating those shows or they may have substituted from non-Hulu shows
(which they previously pirated) toward newly discovered shows on Hulu. While we do not have
a suitable identification strategy to formally test for these effects, we note that such a spillover
effect result would be consistent with similar results in Danaher et al. (2010). They found that
when NBC removed their television content from iTunes, in addition to an increase in demand
for NBC piracy relative to the control group (ABC, CBS, FOX), there was also an increase in
demand for piracy of the control group. Finally, we note that if there was a spillover effect in our
present Hulu context, then our control group was partially impacted by the treatment and our
reported results will underestimate the effect of adding content to Hulu on piracy of that content.
In order to obtain a statistical estimate of the size of the impact that the streaming channel had on
piracy of ABC treated content, we adapt equation (1) as follows:

ln Downloadsit   0  1 Aftert   2 Aftert * ABCHulu i   i  eit

(2)

The variables in equation (2) are the same as in (1) except that here After is an indicator variable
equal to one for all dates after and including July 6, 2009. β2 thus measures the average
difference between treatment and control group in the period after ABC was added to Hulu,
compared to any difference beforehand. Under the assumption that the treated group would have
trended similarly to the control if not for the experiment, β2 measures the effect that adding ABC

20

content to Hulu had on piracy of that content.10 Because there could exist correlation between
downloads of different episodes of the same season or even series, we cluster our standard errors
at the series level, treating each series in our data as a unique experiment.
Table 3: OLS of Log Pirated Downloads
8 week window 4 week window 2 week window
After 7-6-2009
After 7-6-2009 * ABC
Constant

Observations
# of Series
R-squared

-0.194*
(0.053)
-0.190
(0.121)
5.214*
(0.026)

-0.072
(0.054)
-0.169+
(0.098)
5.218*
(0.025)

-0.067
(0.048)
-0.164+
(0.088)
5.232*
(0.024)

14132
71
0.139

7121
71
0.071

3886
71
0.074

Robust standard errors clustered at series level appear in parentheses
+ significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; * significant at 1%

Estimating (2) through OLS, B2 is -0.19 (in the 8 week window specification), indicating that the
post-experiment decrease in pirated downloads was 18% larger for treated ABC content than it
was for control content. The p-value for this coefficient is 0.13, so we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that changes in ABC piracy were the same as for the control group. This may be due
to lack of power in the test: when we conservatively cluster standard errors at the series level,
there are only 9 treated clusters in the data. However, if we shorten the experimental window to
either one or two weeks before and after the treatment (thereby reducing random variance from
other unrelated factors), we find similar coefficients but with p-values less than 0.1, allowing us
to reject the null hypothesis at a 10% significance level or lower.
As further evidence, we estimated (2) for the same dates in 2008 (using content from the Fall
2007 season), expecting no diff-in-diff change for ABC content as there was no shock to content
in this period. Indeed, β2 for the 2008 period is estimated as -0.02 with a standard error of 0.04,

10

We ran a more flexible model with a full vector of date fixed effects which produced nearly identical estimates
and standard errors for the coefficient of interest. But in this model the “after” variable (for the control group) is
subsumed by these fixed effects and so we present the results from the less flexible specification in the table so that
reader may compare the change in the treatment group to the change in the control group.

21

indicating that the change in piracy of ABC content was economically and statistically
insignificant relative to the change in piracy of the control group content in this placebo test.
While the significance levels are somewhat low due to small sample size, the magnitude of the
estimate is fairly large. Thus our point estimates and our placebo test indicate a pattern in which
the addition of ABC content to Hulu caused a nearly 20% drop in pirated downloads of the
added content, and we interpret this result similarly to the results in our paper on NBC and
iTunes. That is, delivering television content in more convenient, readily available channels can
cause a substantial number of pirates to turn from illegal file-sharing channels to legal channels.
Future research might explore the coding of the torrent data differently in an attempt to
determine whether the addition of the most recent five episodes of a series to Hulu reduces
pirated consumption of just those five episodes (our finding) or pirated consumption of the entire
series.
3.

Discussion

We began this chapter by pointing out a variety of questions that have arisen in the media
industries as a result of the digitization of content and of the resulting weakening of intellectual
property due to file-sharing. The goal of this chapter was to point researchers to a number of
topics that we believe to be interesting and of managerial or regulatory importance and then to
highlight the importance of using natural experiments that arise in the context of rapidly
changing media markets as a way of addressing these and other related questions.
To this end, we have shown how several of our papers address these topics through the analysis
of natural experiments and through exploiting different types of variance in the data. We have
given suggestions of other government interventions or firm strategies that are not well
understood and that could be studied with one of the methodologies from our prior work.
Finally, as proof of concept, we applied the difference-in-difference model from our paper on
distribution through the iTunes channel to a completely different dataset and event: the streaming
of television content to consumers on Hulu.com. As file-sharing continues to be a commonly
chosen consumption channel and as firms continue to innovate through new platforms or
strategies for delivering content, the ability to understand the interactions between these channels

22

and the impact that government policies can have on digital markets will only increase in
importance. We hope that this chapter serves as a basis for new research to paint a clearer, more
complete picture of the complex interplay between media firms’ strategies, government policy,
and consumer behavior.

23

References:
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, S. Mullainathan. 2004. How Much Should We Trust Differences in
Differences Estimates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2 249-275
Danaher, B., S. Dhanasobhon, M.D. Smith, R. Telang. 2010. Converting Pirates without
Cannibalizing Purchasers: The Impact of Digital Distribution on Physical Sales and Internet
Piracy. Marketing Science, 29(6) 1138-1151.
Danaher, B., M.D. Smith, 2013. Gone in 60 Seconds: The Impact of the Megaupload Shutdown
on Digital Movie Sales. Working Paper. (available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2229349)
Danaher, B., M.D. Smith, R. Telang, S. Chen. 2013. The Effect of Graduated Response AntiPiracy Laws on Music Sales: Evidence from an Event Study in France. Forthcoming, Journal of
Industrial Economics. (Pre-press version available from http://ssrn.com/abstract=1989240).
Danaher, B., M.D. Smith, R. Telang. 2014. Piracy and Copyright Enforcement Mechanisms,
Lerner and Stern, eds. Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 14, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Hu, Y., M.D. Smith. 2012. The Impact of eBook Distribution on Print Sales: Analysis of a
Natural Experiment. Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA (Available
from http://ssrn.com/abstract=1966115).
Lauinger, T., M. Szydlowski, K. Onarlioglu, G. Wondracek, E. Kirda, C. Kruegel. 2013.
Clickonomics: Determining the Effect of Anti-Piracy Measures for One-Click Hosting. Working
Paper, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts.
Liebowitz, S. 2008. File-Sharing: Creative Destruction or just Plain Destruction? Journal of Law
and Economics, 49 1-28.
Mortimer, J.H., A. Sorensen, C. Nosko. 2010. Supply Responses to Digital Distribution:
Recorded Music and Live Performances. Information Economics and Policy, 24(1) 3-14.
Oberholzer-Gee, F., K. Strumpf. 2010. File Sharing and Copyright, Lerner and Stern, eds.
Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 10, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Waldfogel, J. 2012. Copyright Protection, Technological Change, and the Quality of New
Products: Evidence from Recorded Music since Napster. Journal of Law and Economics, 55(4)
715-740.

24

