                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         WHEN IDEAS TRUMP INTERESTS:
               PREFERENCES, WORLD VIEWS, AND POLICY INNOVATIONS

                                               Dani Rodrik

                                         Working Paper 19631
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19631


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2013




I thank seminar participants at Harvard’s Kennedy School and the Elinor Ostrom workshop at Indiana
University for comments, Davit Autor, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Avinash Dixit, and Timothy Taylor for detailed
suggestions, Sharun Mukand for helpful conversations along the way, and Mark Blyth for reading
recommendations. I owe a special debt to the recent book by Wayne Leighton and Edward López
(2013) for stimulating me to put down on paper a number of ideas I had been mulling over for some
time. This paper is forthcoming in The Journal of Economic Perspectives. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Ideas Trump Interests: Preferences, World Views, and Policy Innovations
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 19631
November 2013
JEL No. F5,P16

                                             ABSTRACT

The contemporary approach to political economy is built around vested interests – elites, lobbies, and
rent-seeking groups which get their way at the expense of the general public. The role of ideas in shaping
those interests is typically ignored or downplayed. Yet each of the three components of the standard
optimization problem in political economy – preferences, constraints, and choice variables – rely on
an implicit set of ideas. Once the manner in which ideas enter these frameworks is made explicit,
a much richer and more convincing set of results can be obtained. In particular, new ideas about policy—or
policy entrepreneurship—can exert an independent effect on equilibrium outcomes even in the absence
of changes in the configuration of political power.


Dani Rodrik
School of Social Science
Institute for Advanced Study
Einstein Drive
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
drodrik@ias.edu
       Ideas are strangely absent from modern models of political economy. In most prevailing

theories of policy choice, the dominant role is played instead by “vested interests” ‐‐ elites,

lobbies, and rent‐seeking groups which get their way at the expense of the general public.

Economists, political scientists, and other social scientists appeal to the power of special

interests to explain key puzzles in regulation, international trade, economic growth and

development, and many other fields. Why does regulation favor incumbent firms at the

expense of consumers or potential entrants? Because bureaucracies can be captured by well‐

organized “insiders” who can shape regulation in their favor (Stigler 1971; Peltzman 1976;

Laffont and Tirole 1991). Why are trade restrictions so rampant despite the well‐known gains

from trade? Because import tariffs and quotas redistribute incomes to politically powerful

business groups and lobbies (Krueger 1974; Grossman and Helpman 1994; Rodrik 1995). Why

do political elites not favor growth‐promoting policies and institutions? Because growth‐

suppressing policies, such as weak property rights, excessive regulation, or over‐valued

currencies provide them with access to rents that would disappear otherwise (Bates 1981;

Acemoglu and Robinson 2006, 2012). Insights from political‐economy models in each of these

fields exert a strong influence on the way economists think of societal outcomes and the

operation of the political system.

       Any model of political economy in which organized interests do not figure prominently is

likely to remain vacuous and incomplete. But it does not follow from this that interests are the

ultimate determinant of political outcomes. I will challenge here the notion that there is a well‐

defined mapping from “interests” to outcomes. This mapping depends on many unstated
                                                 ‐2‐


assumptions about the ideas that political agents have about: (a) the nature of the maximand,

(b) how the world works, and (c) the set of tools they have at their disposal to further their

interests. Importantly, these ideas are subject to both manipulation and innovation, making

them part of the political game. There is in fact a direct parallel, as I will show, between

inventive activity in technology, which economists now routinely endogenize, and investment in

persuasion and policy innovation in the political arena. Once their fluid nature is recognized,

vested interests become much less determining and the space of possible outcomes much

wider.

         While hidden assumptions play a role in all economic models, I will argue that the failure

to recognize the role of ideas in shaping interests (and their pursuit) has especially serious

implications in political economy. Taking ideas into account allows us to provide a more

convincing account of both stasis and change in political‐economic life. It provides a way of

bridging the sharp divide between policy analysis (what should be done) with political economy

(what actually happens). It also yields an explanation for a common anomaly in the real world—

the fact that, in practice, many reforms turn out to benefit the elites who previously blocked

them.

         I begin by providing a taxonomy of the ways in which ideas make their way, more often

than not implicitly, into established models of political economy. Next, I focus specifically on

models professing to explain economic inefficiency and argue that outcomes in such models are

determined as much by the ideas that elites are presumed to have on feasible strategies as by

vested interests themselves. A corollary is that new ideas about policy—or policy

entrepreneurship—can exert an independent effect on equilibrium outcomes even in the
                                                  ‐3‐


absence of changes in the configuration of political power. I conclude by discussing the sources

of new ideas.



Making the Role of Ideas Explicit



       Every rational‐choice model is built on the purposive behavior of individual decision‐

makers. Typically, behavior is determined by assuming individuals solve a well‐defined

optimization problem. At least three components must be specified in such an optimization

exercise: a) an objective function (like a consumer utility function); b) a set of constraints (like a

budget constraint); and c) a set of choice variables (like the quantities of consumption to be

chosen). Political economy models in the rational‐choice mold translate this framework into the

political arena. Political agents (voters, lobbies, elites, congressmen) are represented as rational

individuals who solve explicit optimization problems. This means: (a) they maximize a utility

function defined over consumption, rents, or political benefits; (b) they operate within

constraints imposed by the rules of the game, both economic and political; and (c) they choose

a set of actions—which in various models may include votes, political contributions, rebellion,

and suppression—that maximize their objection function given the constraints. For example,

business lobbies decide how much political contribution they should make in return for tariff

protection, taking into account that politicians value societal welfare alongside the

contributions (Grossman and Helpman 1994). Or a dictator decides whether to develop his

economy so as to maximize his intertemporal stream of rents, taking into account that his

decision affects both economic and political outcomes, including his longevity in power (Olson
                                                 ‐4‐


1993, Acemoglu and Robinson 2006).1

       Ideas enter this problem in several distinct ways that are rarely recognized. In fact, each

of the three components of the optimization problem – preferences, constraints, and choice

variables – rely on an implicit set of ideas. I discuss these in turn below. I emphasize that I am

not contesting rationality or the utility of the basic optimizing framework in the political arena.

My goal is to explore the role of ideas in shaping how interests are defined and pursued.



Preferences: Who Are We?

       Self‐interest presumes the idea of a “self” – that is, a conception of who I am and what

my purpose is. In many economic applications, the maximand is clear. It is reasonable to assume

households want to maximize their consumer surplus and producers their profits, although

these assumptions are not always entirely uncontroversial. In the political sphere, the choice of

what is to be maximized is much less evident: depending on context, honor, glory, reputation,


1
 More formally, we can express the canonical political‐economy problem as follows. Let a
denote the vector of choice variables, c the gross private consumption vector, and α the share of
the economy’s surplus (or gross private consumption) that political agents can extract. Then the
optimization problem that each agent solves takes the following form:




where ϴ is a vector of exogenous parameters. The agent’s utility depends, at least in part (and
not necessarily exclusively), on the surplus that the agent can extract. The constraints in this
optimization exercise come in two forms, specifying the economic and political model,
respectively. The first relationship     describes the economic equilibrium, which is
determined jointly by actions and exogenous parameters. The second relationship describes
the political mechanism, represented by g(.), that specifies how political actions, along with
other endogenous and exogenous variables, translate into rent extraction. While time
subscripts are not included, it should be clear how this framework can be extended to a
dynamic setting.
                                                 ‐5‐


respect, income, power, durability in office, and “good of the country” are all plausible. As Elster

(2000) has written in a critique of political economy frameworks attempting to explain historical

political developments, seventeenth‐century French nobility may have been as much interested

in honor and glory as in material benefits. Much human behavior is driven by abstract ideals,

sacred values, or conceptions of loyalty that cannot be reduced to economic ends. Studies by

anthropologists and psychologists suggest “humans will kill and die not only to protect their

own lives or defend kin and kith, but for an idea—the moral conception they form of

themselves, of ‘who we are’” (Atran and Ginges 2012, p. 855) – a point that should not be

controversial in an age of suicide bombings.

       How we evaluate different social states and judge whether they advance our “interests”

depend crucially on how we define ourselves. We might view ourselves as a member of a social

class (“middle class”), ethnic group (“white majority”), religion (“evangelical”), nation (“global

citizen”), demographic cohort (“baby boomer”), profession (“educator”), or a myriad other

possible identities. As Amartya Sen (2006) has suggested, we might even combine all these

identities in varying degrees. In political science, a well‐established line of research has long

held that interests of political actors are socially constructed rather than determined by well‐

defined material facts. In this “constructivist” tradition, conceptions of interests arise

endogenously from norms, ideologies, and causal beliefs (Wendt 1999; Ruggie 1998; Blyth

2002; Hay 2011). Interests, in fact, are “one form of idea” (Béland and Cox 2011, p. 10). In

international law, a parallel discussion pits “legal realists” who argue that behavior among states

is determined exclusively or largely by national interests against scholars who see a significant

role for norms of justice or law (Howse 2013; Goldsmith and Posner 2005).
                                                ‐6‐


       Economists have rarely ventured that far, but the role of ideas in determining

preferences has crept into various strands of research in economics. For example, the partisan‐

politics literature in macroeconomics endows political parties with explicit ideologies, typically

represented as different preference weights on inflation versus unemployment (Alesina and

Rosenthal 1995). These differences in preferences are typically imposed exogenously, with little

explanation. More recently there has been some work, both at the macro and micro level, that

looks at the endogenous determination of ideologies: see, for example, Alesina, Cozzi, and

Mantovan (2012), Della Vigna and Kaplan (2007) and Yanagizawa‐Drott (2012) on the formation

of political preferences through exposure to societal outcomes, media, or early childhood

experiences.

       The work of Akerlof and Kranton (2000, 2005) on the economics of identity is

particularly relevant here. Akerlof and Kranton consider models where individuals associate

themselves with specific social categories and their desired behavior derives from the attributes

of those categories. Workers, for example, may acquire identities that moderate the incentive

compatibility constraint vis‐à‐vis their employers (leading them to behave in greater conformity

with the objectives of firms). In turn, employers may seek to alter such identities to enhance

workplace performance. Such models could explain a range of “anomalous” political action,

including voting against immediate material interests. But their application to political

phenomena has not yet received much attention.

    In each of these frameworks, ideas play a crucial role. Instead of being epiphenomenal,

they determine preferences directly, and therefore shape patterns of political behavior. This

perspective requires social scientists to engage with the questions where ideas come from and
                                                ‐7‐


how they are spread and internalized.



The Model: How Does the World Work?

       Policymakers operate under certain working assumptions about how the world works.

Their worldviews shape their perception of the consequences of their and others’ actions, in

both economic and political domains. These ideas may fall on either side of some of the biggest

controversies in the history of economic thought: Does the economy work better under laissez‐

faire or planning? Are economic growth and development more rapid under free trade or under

protection? Does macroeconomic stability require Keynesian counter‐cyclical policies or

Hayekian non‐intervention? Each of these positions presumes a particular model of how the

economy works and therefore has different implications for political behavior. In recent

decades, a succession of economic ideas (think of Keynesianism, monetarism, rational

expectations, the “Washington consensus”) have served to change elites’ understanding of

“economic reality” and thereby altered the political equilibrium.

       A rent‐extracting autocrat is likely to tax his subjects to the hilt when he believes they

have little choice but to pay up; he will be more restrained when he believes they can evade the

tax or mount an effective opposition. “Elasticity pessimism,” the belief that economic activities

tend to be unresponsive to prices, lay behind the widespread consensus on the dirigiste

economic development policies of the 1950s and 1960s. Mehta and Walton (2012, pp. 17‐18)

describe the Nehruvian cognitive map that shaped India’s development path in the decades

following independence: the need for a big investment push, suspicions over the private sector,

emphasis on the leading role of capital goods, and export pessimism all derived from ideas
                                                 ‐8‐


about how a market system worked (or failed to do so). As research demonstrated poor people

were as responsive to price incentives as rich, policies in the developing world began to move in

a more market‐oriented direction (Schultz 1964; Krueger 1997).

       Economic research is all about sharpening our ideas about the “right model.” Yet actors

in political economy models live in worlds where these questions have been effectively

resolved. They believe that they know how the world works, if not precisely, at least

probabilistically. Rational expectations mean agents base their expectations, and hence

behavior, on how the world really works. Even if they disagreed for a time, adherents of this

view argue, agents would eventually reach agreement on the “right model” as events and

reactions to policy choices unfold. In practice, however, people often downplay evidence that

seems inconsistent with their model of the world. Anomalous outcomes are dismissed as a fluke

or as the result of insufficiently vigorous application of their preferred policy. Even with rational

Bayesian updating, a common signal may exacerbate posteriors – increase polarization – when

priors differ, as Dixit and Weibull (2007) show.2 And divergences in beliefs need not disappear

even asymptotically when there is disagreement over the interpretation (that is,

informativeness) of the signals received (Acemoglu, Chernozhukov, and Yildiz 2009).

       A more realistic representation may be that cognitive and other limitations force political

agents to live in a world of Knightian uncertainty with respect to their understanding of causal

relationships (for example, see Denzau and North 1994; Blyth 2011). Their view of the world

could be wrong and could remain so even in the face of new evidence, if that evidence is just

2
 An example provided by Dixit and Weibull (2007, 7353): Observing a sudden rise in
unemployment, a Keynesian might strengthen his belief that monetary policy is too tight, while
a monetarist might infer monetary policy is even looser than he thought and is discouraging
employment creation by generating expectations of future inflation.
                                                  ‐9‐


used to confirm past beliefs. Conversely new information may present realities not previously

considered. For instance, voters may discover that an office holder has a long criminal track

record, a possibility that may not have entered their calculus earlier. An interesting new

empirical literature has begun to document how the provision of such information can influence

voters’ behavior (Pande 2011).

       Consider the experience of the global economic and financial crisis in recent years and

the extent to which it has altered beliefs. Many observers, such as Johnson and Kwak (2010)

have argued that the policies that produced the crisis were the result of powerful banking and

financial interests getting their way, which seems like a straightforward application of the theory

of special interests. Still, without the wave of ideas “in the air” that favored financial

liberalization and self‐regulation and emphasized the impossibility (or undesirability) of

government regulation, these vested interests would not have gotten nearly as much traction as

they did. After all, powerful interests rarely get their way in a democracy by nakedly arguing for

their own self‐interest. Instead, they seek to adduce legitimacy to their claims by saying these

policies are in the public interest. The argument in favor of financial deregulation was not that

it was good for Wall Street, but that it was good for Main Street. Other observers have argued

that the financial crisis was a result of excessive government intervention to support housing

markets, especially for lower‐income borrowers. These arguments were also grounded on

certain ideas ‐‐ about the social value of homeownership and the inattentiveness of the

financial sector to those with lower incomes. Again, ideas apparently shaped politicians’ views

of how the world works ‐‐ and therefore their interest in acting in ways that precipitated the

crisis. Finally, although all parties have observed the same Great Recession taking place,
                                                 ‐10‐


relatively few have altered their fundamental beliefs about whether the financial sector is over‐

regulated or under‐regulated as a result.



The Strategy Space: What Can Political Actors Do?

       Much politics is about strategy: setting the agenda, making alliances, issuing promises

(or threats), expanding or restricting the menu of options, building or spending political capital.

Regardless of whether they aim to enrich themselves or further a broader set of interests,

politicians must continually ask: “What can be done?” Typically, political economy models

restrict the strategy space in arbitrary ways: they over‐structure the political game by limiting,

for example, the policy choices on the menu. This limitation is usually put in place for

tractability, but it is not harmless. New ideas about what can be done – innovative policies – can

unlock what otherwise might seem like the iron grip of vested interests. The history of

economics is replete with how ideas can shape politics (see Leighton and López 2013 for a

useful recent discussion).

       The formal parallelism between behavior in the political arena and consumer behavior in

the market place is least useful here. Consumers in a market have well‐defined choices to make:

how much to consume of each available good, given prices and their budget constraint. The

standard utility maximization problem does not do great injustice to their strategy space. By

contrast, political agents design their own strategy space. The available instruments are up for

grabs, and limited only by their political imagination.

       In what follows, I will focus on this third aspect of ideas – “ideas as policy innovation” –

both because it has received relatively little attention in the literature and because it ties in
                                                 ‐11‐


directly with the kind of policy analysis in which economists often engage. I will illustrate the

importance of such ideas in an important sub‐class of political economy models – those that

focus on explaining inefficient policy outcomes.




The Political Economy of Inefficient Policy Choice



       Explaining why political systems end up making economically inefficient policy choices is

a major preoccupation of the political economy literature; it can even be said to be its original

raison d’être. Taking ideas explicitly into account, especially in terms of policy innovation, can

shed substantial new light on existing approaches. I will show how widely accepted results

often rest on arbitrary restrictions on political actors’ strategy space. More positively, I argue

that an ideas‐based perspective allows us to better understand the circumstances under which

political systems are in fact able to move towards more efficient outcomes.

       Political economy models that generates equilibrium policy inefficiency rest on a number

of building blocks: 1) interests determine policy preferences; 2) political power determines

whose interests matter (more); and 3) political institutions (or “rules of the game”) determine

the specific political equilibrium among many. However, while these three postulates can

explain redistribution from less powerful to more powerful groups, they do not explain

inefficiency. Consider Figure 1, which divides society into two groups for the sake of

concreteness: elites – defined as the group that has both a veto and agenda‐setting power – and

politically powerless citizens. (Ignore the curve labeled PP for now.) At best, the three
                                                 ‐12‐


postulates can help us understand why we are at point like A instead of B. They cannot explain

why we often end up inside the economic possibilities frontier at a point like S. The equilibrium

at S violates Pareto‐efficiency; it would be possible to improve the incomes of elites without

harming citizens. If all elites want is to extract income from society and are powerful enough to

get their way, why do they have to do it by generating inefficiency?

       To generate inefficiency, political economy models must add one or both of these two

additional features, each of which restricts the feasible set of elite actions: 4) more‐efficient

redistributive mechanisms, including lump‐sum transfers, are unavailable; and 5) political

power is endogenous, and outcomes that move the economy closer to the efficient frontier

may reduce the power of elites. The first of these assumptions rules out myriads of

compensatory policies that can move the equilibrium from S closer to A. For example, most

forms of economic liberalization, such as removing a tax or an import tariff, are not Pareto‐

optimal, unless accompanied by compensation. Ruling out compensation of elites that lose out

from liberalization is an easy way to generate inefficient outcomes. In international economics,

for example, policies that restrict trade are third‐best for redistributive purposes. So the typical

practice in the literature on the political economy of trade policy is to assume away not only

lump‐sum transfers but also producer subsidies in order to create pressure, within the model,

for policies that restrict trade (Rodrik 1995). A similar strategy is at play in explaining why

productivity‐enhancing privatizations of state‐owned do not take place: the insiders (workers,

managers) would lose out for sure if there is no possibility to compensate them for losses they

would experience in a privatized firm. Such restrictions are often rationalized by appealing to
                                                 ‐13‐


the inability to commit to compensation,3 even though innovative strategies can be often found

to get around this constraint as I will show below.

       The other argument, which posits a feedback from economics back to politics, opens up

the possibility that elites avoid efficient policies for fear that such policies may undercut their

political power and hence their ability to determine future policies. Under this scenario, the

only feasible move to the efficient frontier involves traveling to a point such as C in Figure 1,

where the elites would be worse off.

       This type of argument has been invoked in the work of Acemoglu and Robinson (2006,

see also Acemoglu 2003), to explain for example why some states have blocked policies that

would foster industrialization and economic growth during the nineteenth century in Europe.

Because economic growth uproots people from their traditional rural base and facilitates

collective political action, it can destabilize entrenched elites. Forward‐looking elites will prefer

to ensure their power is not challenged, even if that means more inefficiency and less growth.

       A different mechanism that produces a similar result is the dynamic inconsistency of

compensation policies. In the model of Fernandez and Rodrik (1991), reform is impeded by

individual‐specific uncertainty combined with the pattern of information revelation over time

when reform is implemented. Beneficiaries of today’s inefficient policies cannot be made to

accept a reform‐now‐and‐compensation‐later package, because they know reform will reveal

the identity of a large group of winners and shift future political power to those winners. After

the reform, the beneficiaries will have no need (or incentive) to carry out their promise of

3
 A subtle argument against lump‐sum transfers specifically, mentioned by Avinash Dixit in his
comments on this paper, is that even atomistic agents will have the incentive to misrepresent
their “type” (Hammond 1979). For a good discussion of the political transaction costs that
block efficiency see Dixit (1996, especially chapter 2).
                                                  ‐14‐


compensation.

        While the claim that elites block enhanced economic opportunities so that they can

maintain their own power seems to make sense, it too may imply an unreasonable restriction

on feasible strategies. In particular, it denies elites the creativity to devise strategies that would

allow them to take advantage of enhanced economic opportunities without losing power.

Unless we posit a highly mechanical relationship between economics and politics, such

strategies will exist in general. This restriction on feasible strategies is often relaxed in practice,

as we shall see, by innovation in the area of “political ideas.” I use the term “innovation”

deliberately, as there is a useful analogy here with technological innovation. Just as we think of

technological ideas as those that relax resource constraints, we can think of political ideas as

those that relax political constraints, enabling those in power to make themselves (and possibly

the rest of society) better off without undermining their political power. To develop this point, I

introduce the heuristic device of a “political transformation frontier,” akin to the economic

transformation constraint.




The Political Transformation Frontier and Relaxing Political Constraints



        I define the “political transformation frontier” as the set of maximal economic outcomes

achievable by those currently in power, the elites. It depicts the maximum level of rents that

elites can extract in political‐economic equilibrium, taking into account, in particular, the

endogeneity of their political power. Return to Figure 1, which depicts a production possibility
                                                ‐15‐


frontier that shows the tradeoffs between resources consumed by political elites and those

consumed by other citizens. The political transformation frontier is depicted as the PP schedule

in Figure 1. The rising part of the PP curve represents what we may call “the goose that lays the

golden eggs effect”: along this part of the curve, elites benefit from the enrichment of citizens

as a whole and therefore there is no tradeoff in this region between economic efficiency and

political redistribution. Elites behave here like Mancur Olson’s (1993) “stationary bandits,”

brigands who stay long enough with the farmers from whom they steal that they have an

incentive to encourage a degree of prosperity. The declining part of the curve, in turn,

represents what Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) call “the replacement effect”: enrichment of

citizens now comes at the expense of the ability of elites to cling to power and therefore their

ability to extract rents. When elites act as Stackelberg leaders they will select the maximum

point on the political transformation frontier. The equilibrium outcome is labeled “status quo,”

which is far inside the economic transformation frontier.

       As the figure is drawn, politics is the binding constraint on this economy. The allocation

of resources and overall economic performance are determined not by technological or

resource constraints, but by the location and shape of the political transformation frontier PP.

In turn the location and shape of the political transformation frontier depends on the set of

feasible elite actions – which is determined by the ideas that elites have about the range of

strategies available to them, including policies, actions, coalitions and so on. Good

political/policy ideas relax the political constraint, moving the political transformation frontier

(PP) outward. Just as technological innovations relax the conventional resource constraint,

political innovation relaxes the political transformation frontier. Economists recognize the
                                                 ‐16‐


importance of technological innovation and have made it the centerpiece of their models of

long‐term growth. In political economy models, by contrast, the working assumption is that

there is no room for discovery. Many political innovations are likely to remain ephemeral,

inconsequential or soon forgotten. But some, as with general‐purpose technology, may prove

substantial and durable. Think of political parties, independence of judiciary, or indeed

democracy.

       Technological change need not make everyone better off. Similarly, policy innovation

could leave the non‐elites worse off. (An outward shift of PP in Figure 1 may move the new

equilibrium to the northwest of S.) Some ideas could be bad from the standpoint of society at

large and yet gain currency: imagine elites successfully persuading non‐elites that they should

work harder in this life so they can have redemption in the next, or (closer to home) that an

extremely low rate of capital taxation actually benefits them.

       Although the idea of a political transformation frontier rarely receives much attention in

political economy, practical economists and policy makers do spend considerable effort

generating new policy ideas that seek, not always successfully, to work around political

constraints. Perhaps the most telling examples of how political innovation can move the political

transformation frontier come from the real world. Here are some illustrations that made elites

and non‐elites both better off.



Achieving Industrialization Without Losing Power

       Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) discuss how several governments evaded the trap of

blocking industrialization for fear of being replaced, and in doing so, they illustrate the feasibility
                                                 ‐17‐


of strategies that shift the political transformation frontier outward. Consider why the Japanese

elite decided to spur industrialization and economic development after the Meiji restoration

circa 1868. Acemoglu and Robinson note that “the drive for modernization in Japan took a

special form, strengthening the centralized government and increasing the entrenchment of

bureaucratic elites. In terms of our model, this can be viewed as a strategy to industrialize while

also minimizing the probability of replacement…” They add that this was similar to what

happened in Britain and Germany where “the nonindustrial elites maintained their political

power despite the process of industrialization” (p. 128). In Britain, “by adopting a strategy of

gradual concessions, [elites] were able to control the political equilibrium and maintain power

for at least a century following the onset of the political impact of industrialization ... [and] the

long history of Britain as a trading nation and mercantile power meant that many aristocrats

had relatively diversified wealth…” (p. 126). In Germany, “the Junkers forged the coalition of

'Iron and Rye' with the rising industrial class to secure their economic interests” (p. 126).

       What stands out in each of these explanations is the purposive strategy pursued by elites

to mitigate their concern over being replaced as a result of economic change. State‐directed

industrialization, gradual concessions to the rising industrial classes, diversification into

commerce and industry, alliance with industrial interests, and similar choices ensured elites

could benefit from industrialization while retaining much of their power. The existence of such

strategies raises the question of why similar strategies were not tried elsewhere, in the non‐

industrializing cases. More importantly, it highlights the role of (and space for) innovation in

relaxing political constraints that might have otherwise appeared irremovable.
                                               ‐18‐


Dual‐Track Reform in China

       During the 1970s, China was a centrally‐planned economy in which administered prices

were a mechanism of generating rents and transfers to groups favored by the Communist

regime. Price liberalization and the removal of obligatory grain deliveries to the state would

generate significant efficiency gains in the countryside, where the bulk of the population lived.

But it would come at the expense of depriving the state of its tax base, and urban workers of

their cheap rations of food. By the standards of basic political economy models, these strong

redistributive consequences provide an adequate explanation of why efficiency‐enhancing

reforms were resisted by the Chinese leadership.

       But the Chinese government was able to devise a short‐cut. Starting in the late 1970s, it

made use of policy innovations such as two‐track pricing and special economic zones that broke

the link between price reform and their usual distributional effects. Consider, for example, how

agricultural was reformed. Instead of abolishing the planned grain deliveries at fixed prices, the

state simply grafted a market system on top of the centralized allocation system. Once the

planned deliveries were made at state‐set prices, farmers were free to sell additional amounts

at any price the market would bear. As Lau, Qian, and Roland (2000) show, this system delivers

allocative efficiency under fairly non‐restrictive conditions. But from a political economy

perspective, the main virtue of the dual‐track approach was that it shielded the prevailing

stream of rents from the effects of the reform. The state did not lose its revenue and urban

workers were not denied their cheap food rations.

       China’s special economic zones functioned similarly. Rather than liberalize its trade

regime in the standard way, which would have decimated the country’s inefficient state
                                                ‐19‐


enterprises, China allowed firms in SEZs to operate under near‐free‐trade rules while

maintaining trade restrictions elsewhere until the late 1990s. This enabled China to insert itself

in the world economy while protecting employment and rents in the state sector. The Chinese

Communist Party was strengthened and enriched, rather than weakened, as a result.



Democratization in South Africa

       The black majority demanding democracy from the minority apartheid regime in South

Africa faced a classic political economy problem. Both sides understood that once the African

National Congress (ANC) obtained power, it would come under strong pressure from the black

majority it represented to expropriate (or at least severely tax) the white elite. For the latter to

accede to political reform, it had to have credible guarantees against expropriation. In view of

the international sanctions and the economic decline they faced, the elites would have been

better off under democracy ‐‐ but only provided that moderate future taxation could be

assured. In the absence of such guarantees, it remained in the elites’ interest to keep

suppressing the black majority even at substantial economic cost to themselves and the

country.

       Nelson Mandela was keenly aware of the problem: “Especially in the first few years of

the democratic government,” he said in 1991 (as quoted in Inman and Rubinfeld 2012, p. 784) ,

“we may have to do something to show that the system has got an inbuilt mechanism which

makes it impossible for one group to suppress the other.” In the run‐up to the democratic

transition of 1994, South Africa’s federal institutions were specifically designed to prevent the

expropriation of the rich white minority by the poor black majority. Two key provisions were
                                                  ‐20‐


critical. First, critical redistributive services were left in the hands of provincial authorities.

Second, borders ensured at least one important province (Western Cape) would remain in the

hands of the white minority. Inman and Rubinfeld (2012) argue these two arrangements

together created a “hostage game” in which the incentives of a black national government to

tax the white elites were moderated by the implicit threat of the local authorities in the Western

Cape to respond by reducing service provision to the blacks in their province. Creative

manipulation of the rules enabled both a political transition and a movement closer to the

efficiency frontier.



Other Examples

        One can greatly multiply these examples. During the 1980s and 1990s, reformist

technocrats in Latin America overcame opposition from powerful insider groups by packaging

liberalization and privatization (with strong redistributive effects) along with disinflation

programs perceived by most ‐‐ elites included ‐‐ as inevitable and necessary (Rodrik 1994). In

the United States, Trade Adjustment Assistance and other measures that operate as social

insurance and compensation are the usual sweeteners offered to labor groups to buy their

support for international trade agreements (Destler 2005). The U.S. Congress relented on

allowing the auction of radio frequencies only when political strings were devised – limiting the

auctions to commercial wireless services and granting special rights to specific groups (women,

minorities, small businesses) ‐‐ to ensure that Congressional members would derive specific

advantages from the move. Leighton and López (2013, p. 147) write that “in the end, everyone
                                                ‐21‐


with a decision making role in Congress got something, either more revenues or more political

oversight.”

     These strategies represent innovations that shift the political transformation frontier out.

They enable the capture of efficiency gains in ways that conserve the power of insiders and

elites and protect their rents. Sometimes they enable radical political change, as in the South

African case. At other times, they are designed to preclude political change, as in China. And

even though I have focused on large‐scale policy innovations that changed the course of

nations, one can easily come up with a long list of others that are less revolutionary: the income

tax, old‐age pensions, the most‐favored nation (MFN) principle in international trade, bank

deposit insurance, work requirements for welfare recipients, conditional cash transfers, central

bank independence, marketable pollution trading. What these all have in common is that they

unblock resistance to change to allow society to move closer to the efficient frontier.



Where Do Policy Ideas Come From?



       What determines the development and use of innovative political strategies? Why are

some political systems blessed with a greater abundance of political innovations? What explains

the timing of their emergence? Just as in the case of technological innovation, we might not be

able to provide full answers to such questions. Innovation occurs in large part as a result of

serendipity, as fundamental scientific discoveries yield unanticipated practical benefits or as

experimentation and trial‐and‐error result in new products and processes. Similarly, we must

presume there is a strong idiosyncratic element in political leadership and political creativity.
                                                ‐22‐


Nevertheless, as the economic literature on research and development and endogenous growth

indicates, certain systematic elements are also in play (Segerstrom, Anant, and Dinopoulos,

1990; Aghion and Howitt, 1998). For example, technological innovation responds to market

incentives – the pursuit of monopoly profits through the acquisition of temporary advantages

over competitors. Likewise, policy ideas that relax political constraints can be thought of as the

consequence of both idiosyncratic processes and purposive behavior. Taking political ideas

seriously opens up an interesting new line of research. Here I sketch in broad outlines some

sources of new ideas that may be amenable to systematic analysis.



Political Entrepreneurship

       Inefficiency creates opportunities for political entrepreneurship. As long as there are

unexploited efficiency gains to be had, political agents have some incentive to engage in such

search, regardless of the specific motives animating them. Economists, for example, develop

proposals that they think will enhance economic performance. Sometimes (though not always,

as Acemoglu and Robinson 2013 emphasize), these proposals take political feasibility into

account. But ultimately, political entrepreneurs are the ones who arbitrage between academic

ideas and political inefficiencies. It would be nice to know the circumstances under which such

arbitrage actually takes place and political entrepreneurs are actually able to implement their

policy innovations; for now, there seems to be little research addressing this question.

       In their recent book, Leighton and López (2013) place special emphasis on political

entrepreneurship in making policy reform possible. For new ideas to overcome vested interests,

they write, it must be the case that “entrepreneurs notice and exploit those loose spots in the
                                                ‐23‐


structure of ideas, institutions, and incentives” (p. 134). They provide four case studies of this

process: spectrum license auctions, airline deregulation, welfare reform, and housing finance.

In their words (p. 178): “[T]he public face of political change may be that of a madman, an

intellectual, or an academic scribbler. But whatever form these leaders may take, they are

political entrepreneurs— people whose ideas and actions are focused on producing change.” As

these authors stress, political entrepreneurship can often be socially harmful, as when the

pursuit of individual rents comes at the expense of overall inefficiency. But the returns from

shifting the political transformation frontier out can be very large as well.



Learning‐By‐Doing

       Entrepreneurship is linked to learning. Just as firms travel down their cost curves as a

result of accumulated experience, public organizations such as bureaucracies can learn about

opportunities to reap efficiency gains. A large literature examines the potential trade‐off

between learning and obsolescence as organizations age (Sørensen and Stuart 2000). Similarly,

politicians might learn from their past successes and failures. The evolutionary approach to

economics, based on trial‐and‐error by boundedly‐rational agents, provides a useful

complementary perspective on learning, which also remains unexploited in political economy

(Nelson and Winter 2002).

        Technological learning often spills over to other firms, depressing the incentives for

technological innovation. An interesting possibility is that political learning‐by‐doing is

characterized by a similar externality. Political incumbents may be deterred from

experimentation because they will bear the full cost of failed policy experiments, but will share
                                               ‐24‐


the rents resulting from any successes with potential challengers who act as copy cats. In this

framework, more contestable political systems, allowing freer entry, may have ambiguous

effects on political ideas. More competition means more entrepreneurs vying for new ideas.

But it also means more copy cats – political opponents waiting in the wings – reducing the

incentive for experimentation and learning about the strategies that relax political constraints.



Policy Mutations

       By “policy mutation,” I refer to unplanned policy experimentation that arises along the

margins of existing policies. Such experimentation often results from the inability of policy

makers to implement prevailing rules to the letter, for administrative or other reasons. As with

random mutations, these variations on generally expected practice can generate new and

improved policies by demonstrating better practical results. For example, the idea for dual‐track

policies in China arose not from the planners themselves, but from black markets in the Chinese

countryside where farmers sold grain illegally. Planners were simply wise enough to understand

that these markets‐at‐the‐margin enriched farmers without harming the state, as long as the

plan quotas themselves were enforced, and then to build public policy on that understanding.

Similarly, experiments with “supersaver fares” in California and Texas greatly facilitated US

airline deregulation during the 1970s by revealing the sizable price benefits of greater

competition and freer entry (Leighton and López 2013, 155‐56).

       Leitzel (2003) has written insightfully on the reformist consequences of what he calls

“rule evasion.” As he notes, “evasive behavior in essence presents an experiment, an alternative

way of arranging society” (p. 23). Leitzel discusses two reasons why rule evasion paves the
                                                 ‐25‐


ground for new policies. First, the evasion typically becomes common knowledge and conveys a

sense that the existing policy is a failure. Second, it creates incentives for reform either by

suggesting an alternative to current policy (say, legalizing black markets) or creating a

constituency for the reform. In terms of the argument in this paper, it is a source of ideas for

policy makers about what can work better within political constraints.



Crises

         Times of crises are occasions for reconsidering existing policies. This is both because

prevailing interests may lose some of their legitimacy and because incumbents may be open to

trying new remedies. The need for a new narrative is greater, and so is the willingness to

experiment. “In moments of uncertainty,” writes Blyth (2007, p. 762), “crisis‐defining ideas not

only tell agents ‘what has gone wrong’ but also ‘what is to be done’.”

    In the United States, the Great Depression proved a veritable laboratory for novel

institutional arrangements. Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) uttered a famous call for “bold,

persistent experimentation:” “It is common sense to take a method and try it: If it fails, admit it

frankly and try another. But above all, try something.” To a much lesser extent, the inflationary

crisis of the 1970s played a similar role, preparing the groundwork for new ideas in

macroeconomics such as rational expectations and central bank independence. The recent

financial crisis has made taxation and control of international capital flows more palatable,

although the extent to which financial interests have been weakened remains debated.

         While the association between crises and new ideas seems plausible, much remains to

be explained. Why are some crises much more prone to new ideas? What explains the type of
                                               ‐26‐


ideas that take hold? The Great Depression spawned the New Deal in the United States, fascism

in some parts of Europe, and socialism in some other parts of Europe. Were these outcomes

pre‐ordained by the structure of interests? To what extent did political entrepreneurship and

ideas play an autonomous role?



Emulation

       Perhaps the single most important source of ideas and policy innovation are practices

that prevail elsewhere. The fact that a policy has worked – or at least is perceived to have

worked – somewhere can be a powerful reason to copy it. Social security privatization in Chile,

microfinance in Bangladesh, conditional cash grants in Mexico, and special economic zones

China are some examples of policy innovation that gained adherents around the world following

implementation in their native settings. Much legal and regulatory reform in the developing

world is modeled after existing models in North America or Western Europe. The appeal of

“imported ideas” is clear. Ready‐made policies eliminate or reduce the cost of home‐grown

innovation and experimentation. The perception of their success elsewhere can also act as a

counterweight to powerful vested interests at home.

       Of course, there is no guarantee that policy emulation will result in success. Context

matters. Imported ideas can backfire because of ill fit with either the economic or political

landscape locally. Furthermore, emulation can be driven by bad motives as well as good ones. It

may be used to provide aid donors with cover in case of failure, as a signal for new governments

that they are the “good guys,” and by domestic lobbies to legitimize their own self‐interested

agenda (Weyland 2008). DiMaggio and Powell (1983) have coined the term “isomorphic
                                                ‐27‐


mimicry” to denote the pressures that organizations face to become similar, even as they

struggle to change. Andrews (2013) documents how reform in poor countries through

“isomorphic mimicry” results in the semblance of change, with little real progress achieved: a

bureaucracy gets reorganized to look like those from advanced countries, but bureaucratic

efficiency hardly improves. Mukand and Rodrik (2005) develop a formal model of the incentives

for governments to mimic other countries’ policies: implementing policies with a poor fit is

costly, but so is experimentation—and an imperfectly informed electorate may be more likely to

interpret domestic experimentation as an attempt at rent seeking, while being willing to accept

emulation.



Conclusion: What Do Economists and Policy Analysts Gain By Considering The Role Of Ideas?

       The main argument of this paper is that, for all the emphasis placed on them in

contemporary models of political economy, vested interests play a considerably less

determining role than appears at first sight. Indeed, because of their neglect of ideas, political

economy models often do a poor job of accounting for policy change. There is frequently a

post‐hoc feel to this brand of theorizing: If reform happens despite vested interests, it must be

because those interests were not sufficiently well‐entrenched to begin with or reform didn’t

hurt them. Conventional models of policy stasis are incomplete if they sidestep the ideas that

political agents have about strategies they can pursue. And they cannot fully shed light on

reform when it does occur.

       It is instructive to contrast my argument with that of Acemoglu and Robinson (2013),

who argue in this journal that well‐meaning reforms often fail or produce unintended
                                                 ‐28‐


consequences because they overlook the changes in political equilibrium the reforms generate.

In much of policy advice, they write, politics is “largely absent from the scene” (p. 1). Acemoglu

and Robinson maintain that “economic analysis needs to identify, theoretically and empirically,

conditions under which politics and economics run into conflict, and then evaluate policy

proposals taking this conflict and the potential backlashes it creates into account” (p. 2). I agree

with them on the need to take politics into account. But Acemoglu and Robinson take vested

interests largely as given, and as a result, they are rather pessimistic about what policy can

achieve. In contrast, I have argued that successful policy ideas work precisely because they take

politics into account. I suggest that it is possible to do better than simply avoid political

conflicts; ideas can be useful to relax political constraints. Just as ill‐conceived economic ideas

can produce disastrous political effects, politically well‐informed ideas can move us closer to

the efficiency frontier in a manner that is consistent with underlying political realities.

       Taking ideas seriously renders the notion of interests slippery and ephemeral. From the

conventional political‐economy standpoint, it is puzzling to observe instances in which elites

resist reforms strenuously until the change actually happens, and then benefit from the

reforms. The Korean military dictator President Park Chung‐Hee threw the country’s leading

businessmen in jail when he came to power in 1961; they were released only after Park

extracted promises from them that they would each undertake specific industrial investments.

Given how the Korean economy prospered, these businessmen were hardly worse off for those

investments. Similarly, the Chinese Communist leadership was among the main beneficiaries of

the dual‐pricing regime and other market‐oriented policy innovations that it had refused to

consider until Mao’s death. The critical change in these instances was not a transformation in
                                                 ‐29‐


the structure of power, but the implementation of new ideas by those in power. Indeed,

reform often happens not when vested interests are defeated, but when different strategies

are used to pursue those interests, or when interests themselves are redefined.

       Raising the profile of ideas in political economy models would also help alleviate the

tension that exists today between political economy, on the one hand, and normative

economics and policy analysis, on the other. Political economy seeks to explain political‐

economic outcomes. However, if policy outcomes are pinned down by the structure of

interests, it is futile to make policy recommendations: there will be no takers for the

recommendations and such recommendations will be of no consequence. At best, they will

constitute ideological fodder for vested interests, used to sweeten their exercise of naked power

before the general public. When political economy becomes too enamored of vested interests

at the expense of ideas, social science squeezes normative policy analysis out of useful

existence. An explicit consideration of the role of ideas would free up some space for policy

analysis.

       Finally, a focus on ideas provides us with a new perspective on vested interests too. As

social constructivists like to put it, “interests are an idea.” Even if economic actors are driven

purely by interests, they often have only a limited and preconceived idea of where their

interests lie. This may be true in general, of course, but it is especially true in politics, where

preferences are tightly linked to people’s sense of identity and new strategies can always be

invented. What the economist typically treats as immutable self‐interest is too often an artifact

of ideas – about who we are, how the world works, and what actions are available.
                                               ‐30‐


REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, "Why Not a Political Coase Theorem? Social Conflict,Commitment, and
     Politics." Journal of Comparative Economics 31 (4), 2003, 620‐652.

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson, "Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective."
     The American Political Science Review 100 (1), 2006, 115‐131.

Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, and Muhamet Yildiz, “Fragility of Asymptotic
     Agreement under Bayesian Learning,” unpublished paper, February 2009.

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson, Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity,
     and Poverty, Crown, New York, 2012.

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson, “Economics versus Politics: Pitfalls of Policy Advice,”
     NBER Working Paper 18921, March 2013 (forthcoming in Journal of Economic
     Perspectives).

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       1998.

Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton, "Economics and Identity." Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 115 (3), 2000, 715‐753.

Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton, "Identity and the Economics of Organizations." The
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (1), 2005, 9‐32.

Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal. Partisan Politics, Divided Government, and the
       Economy. Cambridge University Press, 1995.

Alesina, Alberto, Guido Cozzi, and Noemi Mantovan, "The Evolution of Ideology, Fairness and
       Redistribution." The Economic Journal 122 (565), 2012, 1244‐1261.

Andrews, Matt. The Limits of Institutional Reform in Development. Cambridge University Press,
      2013.

Atran, Scott, and Jeremy Ginges, “Religious and Sacred Imperatives in Human Conflict,” Science
        336, 855, 2012.

Bates, Robert H., Markets and States in Tropical Africa, University of California Press, Berkeley,
        1981.

Beland, Daniel, and Robert Henry Cox, Ideas and Politics in Social Science Research, Oxford
       University Press, 2011.
                                               ‐31‐



Blyth, Mark. “Institutions and Ideas” in Dave Marsh and Gerry Stoker (eds.) Theory and
        Methods in Political Science. London: Macmillan 2002, pp. 292‐311.

Blyth, Mark, “Powering, Puzzling, or Presuading? The Mechanisms of Building Institutional
        Orders,” International Studies Quarterly, vol. 51, 2007, 761‐777.

Blyth, Mark, “Ideas, Uncertainty, and Evolution,” in Béland, Daniel, and Robert Henry Cox. Ideas
        and Politics in Social Science Research. Oxford University Press, 2011.

Della Vigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan, "The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting," The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 2007, 1187‐1234.

Denzau, Arthur T., and Douglass C. North, "Shared Mental Models: Ideologies and Institutions."
      Kyklos 47 (1), 1994, 3‐31.

Dixit, Avinash K. The Making of Economic Policy: A Transaction‐Cost Politics Perspective.
        Cambridge, MA and London: The MIT Press, 1996.

Dixit, Avinash K., and Jörgen Weibull, “Political Polarization.” Proceedings of the National
        Academy of Sciences of the United States 104(18), 2007, 7351‐7356.

Elster, Jon, "Rational Choice History: A Case of Excessive Ambition." The American Political
         Science Review 94 (3), 2000, 685‐695.

Destler, I. M. American Trade Politics. 4th Edition, Peterson Institute, Washington, D.C. 2005.

DiMaggio, Paul J., and Walter W. Powell, "The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism
      and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields." American Sociological Review 48 (2),
      1983, 147‐160.

Fernandez, Raquel, and Dani Rodrik, "Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the Presence of
      Individual‐Specific Uncertainty," American Economic Review 81(5), December 1991.

Goldsmith, Jack L., and Eric A. Posner, The Limits of International Law, Oxford University Press,
      Oxford and New York, 2005.

Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman, “Protection for Sale,” The American Economic Review,
      vol. 84, no.4, September 1994.

Hammond, Peter J. “Straightforward Individual Incentive Compatibility in Large Economies,”
     The Review of Economic Studies 46(2). April 1979, 263‐282.
                                              ‐32‐


Hay, Colin, “Ideas and the Construction of Interests,” in Béland, Daniel, and Robert Henry Cox.
       Ideas and Politics in Social Science Research. Oxford University Press, 2011.

Howse, Robert. “Thucydides and Just War: How to Begin to Read Walzer’s Just and Unjust
      Wars,” The European Journal of International Law, Vol. 24 no. 1, 2013.

Inman, Robert P., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, “Federal Institutions and the Democratic Transition:
       Learning from South Africa,” The Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, Vol. 28, No.
       4, 2012.

Johnson, Simon, and James Kwak,13 Bankers: The Wall Street Takeover and the Next Financial
      Meltdown, New York, Pantheon Books, 2010.

Krueger, Anne O., “The Political Economy of the Rent‐Seeking Society,” The American Economic
      Review, Vol. 64, No. 3, June 1974, pp. 291‐303.

Krueger, Anne O., “Trade Policy and Economic Development: How We Learn,” The American
      Economic Review, 87:1, March 1997, 1‐22.

Laffont, Jean‐Jacques and Jean Tirole, “The Politics of Government Decision Making: A Theory
       of Regulatory Capture,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 1089–1127, 1991.

Lau, Lawrence, J., Yingyi Qian, and Gerard Roland. “Reform Without Losers: An Interpretation of
       China's Dual‐Track Approach to Transition.” The Journal of Political Economy 108.1
       (2000): 120‐43.

Leitzel, Jim, The Political Economy of Rule Evasion and Policy Reform, Routledge, London and
         New York, 2003.

Leighton, Wayne, and López, Edward. Madmen, Intellectuals, and Academic Scribblers: The
       Economic Engine of Political Change, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA 2013.

Mehta, Pratap Bhanu, and Michael Walton, “India’s Political Settlement and Development
      Path,” unpublished paper, December 2012.

Mukand, Sharun, and Dani Rodrik, “In Search of the Holy Grail: Policy Convergence,
     Experimentation, and Economic Performance,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 95,
     No. 1, March 2005, 374‐383.

Nelson, Richard R., and Sidney G. Winter, “Evolutionary Theorizing in Economics,” The Journal
       of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 2, Spring 2002, 23‐46.

Olson, Mancur, “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development,” The American Political Science
       Review, Vol. 87, No. 3, September 1993, pp. 567‐576.
                                              ‐33‐



Pande, Rohini, "Can Informed Voters Enforce Better Governance? Experiments in Low‐Income
       Democracies,” Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 3, September 2011, 215‐237.

Peltzman, Sam, “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation,” Journal of Law and Economics,
      Vol. 19, no. 2, 1976, 211‐240.

Rodrik, Dani, "The Rush to Free Trade in the Developing World: Why So Late? Why Now? Will It
        Last?" in S. Haggard and S. Webb (eds.), Voting for Reform: Democracy, Political
        Liberalization, and Economic Adjustment, New York, Oxford University Press, 1994.

Rodrik, Dani, “The Political Economy of Trade Policy,” in G. Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds.),
        Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, Amsterdam, North‐Holland, 1995.

Roosevelt, Franklin D., Oglethorpe University Commencement Address, 22 May 1932.

Ruggie, John Gerard. “What Makes the World Hang Together? Neo‐Utilitarianism and the Social
       Constructivist Challenge.” International Organization 52, no. 4 (October 1, 1998): 855–
       885.

Schultz, Theodore W., Transforming Traditional Agriculture, New Haven: Yale University Press,
       1964.

Sen, Amartya. Identity and Violence: The Illusion of Destiny. New York: W.W. Norton, 2006.

Segerstrom, Paul S., T. C. A. Anant, and Elias Dinopoulos, “A Schumpeterian Model of the
       Product Life,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 5 (Dec., 1990), pp. 1077‐
       1091.

Sørensen, Jesper B., and Toby E. Stuart, “Aging, Obsolescence, and Organizational Innovation,”
      Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 45, No. 1, March 2000, 81‐112.

Stigler, George J., “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” The Bell Journal of Economics and
         Management Science, vol. 2, No. 1, Spring, 1971, pp. 3‐21.

Wendt, Alexander. Social Theory of International Politics. Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Weyland, Kurt, "Toward a New Theory of Institutional Change." World Politics 60 (02), 2008,
      281‐314.

Yanagizawa‐Drott, David, “Propaganda and Conflict: Theory and Evidence from the Rwandan
       Genocide.”Harvard Kennedy School, 2012.
                                                    ‐34‐




elites E

                                              A




                                                                       B
                    status quo, S



                                                                              C
                                                                                        P
            “golden eggs” effect         “political replacement”
                                         effect (AR)
        P                                                                         E
                                                                                            citizens
    Figure 1: Redistribution, inefficiency, and the political transformation frontier
