NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF TRANSPORTATION CARBON POLICIES:
LAND-USE, EMISSIONS, AND INNOVATION
Stephen P. Holland
Jonathan E. Hughes
Christopher R. Knittel
Nathan C. Parker
Working Paper 19636
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19636

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

The authors thank Soren Anderson, Severin Borenstein, Meghan Busse, Garth Heutel, Mark Jacobsen,
Randall Walsh, Catherine Wolfram and seminar participants at the Heartland Environmental and Resource
Economics Conference, Iowa State University, the NBER Environmental and Energy Economics spring
meeting, the University of California Energy Institute, the University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
the University of Texas, the Colorado School of Mines and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
for helpful comments. Knittel gratefully acknowledges support from the Institute of Transportation
Studies at UC Davis. A portion of the paper was written while Knittel was a visitor at the Energy Institute
at Haas. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19636.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Stephen P. Holland, Jonathan E. Hughes, Christopher R. Knittel, and Nathan C. Parker.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Unintended Consequences of Transportation Carbon Policies: Land-Use, Emissions, and Innovation
Stephen P. Holland, Jonathan E. Hughes, Christopher R. Knittel, and Nathan C. Parker
NBER Working Paper No. 19636
November 2013
JEL No. H4,Q2,Q4,Q5
ABSTRACT
Renewable fuel standards, low carbon fuel standards, and ethanol subsidies are popular policies to
incentivize ethanol production and reduce emissions from transportation. Compared to carbon trading,
these policies lead to large shifts in agricultural activity and unexpected social costs. We simulate
the 2022 Federal Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) and find that energy crop production increases by
39 million acres. Land- use costs from erosion and habitat loss are between $277 and $693 million.
A low carbon fuel standard (LCFS) and ethanol subsidies have similar effects while costs under an
equivalent cap and trade (CAT) system are essentially zero. In addition, the alternatives to CAT magnify
errors in assigning emissions rates to fuels and can over or under-incentivize innovation. These results
highlight the potential negative efficiency effects of the RFS, LCFS and subsidies, effects that would
be less severe under a CAT policy.

Stephen P. Holland
Bryan School of Business and Economics
University of North Carolina, Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
sphollan@uncg.edu
Jonathan E. Hughes
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
0256 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309
jonathan.e.hughes@colorado.edu

Christopher R. Knittel
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-513
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
knittel@mit.edu
Nathan C. Parker
Institute of Transportation Studies
University of California, Davis
ncparker@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

Policy makers have pursued a variety of policies to lower carbon emissions from transportation fuels. A number of studies have shown that renewable fuel standards (RFS) or mandates,
low carbon fuel standards (LCFS) and direct subsidies are inefficient instruments for achieving emissions reductions relative to cap and trade (CAT) or carbon pricing (Cui et al., 2011;
de Gorter and Just, 2010; Holland, Hughes, and Knittel, 2009; Holland et al., 2013; Lapan
and Moschini, 2012; Khanna, Ando, and Taheripour, 2008; Chen et al., 2011). Despite these
well-documented inefficiencies, the inefficient policies persist and there is little political support to replace them with more efficient policies.1 Unfortunately, these inefficient policies
can also have unintended consequences. For example, a policy which leads to more agricultural production from intensive cultivation will lead to more erosion and habitat loss than a
policy which leads to an equivalent carbon reduction but less intensive agricultural production. We ask whether unintended consequences associated with ethanol blending, land-use
changes, uncontrolled emissions, and innovation incentives increase or decrease the relative
inefficiencies of the different policies. Our results highlight the potential negative effects of
current transportation sector carbon policies, effects that would be less severe under a CAT
policy.
To assess these unintended consequences, we simulate long-run equilibrium outcomes for
two existing policies: ethanol subsidies and the 2022 US RFS; and for two policies currently
under consideration: a national LCFS and a CAT system. To increase comparability across
the policies, we calibrate the LCFS and CAT to achieve the same reduction in carbon
emissions as the RFS. Our simulations exploit engineering models of ethanol production and
detailed data on agricultural production and waste biomass resources to construct countylevel supply curves for corn ethanol and six cellulosic ethanol fuels. Based on these supply
curves, we estimate emissions, ethanol production, energy crop and biomass consumption,
land-use, and related externalities under each policy.
We find that, as intended, carbon emissions fall under each of the policies: by 10.2
percent for the RFS (and LCFS and CAT) and by 6.9 percent for the subsidies. However,
these emissions reductions are achieved by dramatically different processes. In particular,
annual ethanol production increases substantially under the RFS, LCFS, and subsidies by
14.9 to 18.5 billion gasoline gallon equivalents (gge), relative to our business as usual scenario.
Under CAT, the increase is much more modest at approximately 3.8 billion gge.
1

Holland et al. (2013) provide evidence that the skewed gains from the inefficient policies may partially
explain to popularity of inefficient policies.

2

The inefficient policies, by requiring substantially more ethanol production, have several
unintended consequences. First, the existing vehicle fleet may not be able to use the vast
amounts of ethanol required under these policies. The existing vehicle fleet can safely utilize
approximately a 10 percent ethanol blend by volume (the “blend wall”).2 We estimate
that the inefficient policies would require substantially more ethanol than can currently be
blended, whereas CAT would not.
Second, because some ethanol is produced from energy crops, the policies would require
shifts in agricultural activity. We estimate that under the RFS, LCFS and subsidies, between
27.6 and 39.0 million additional acres of land are used for energy crop production, or between
6 and 9 percent of existing US crop land. Under CAT, only 1.2 million additional acres are
required. These large shifts in agricultural activity create social costs from habitat loss and
increased erosion. We estimate land-use related costs between $147 million and $693 million
for the RFS, LCFS, and subsidies. Under CAT, these costs are essentially zero.
A third unintended consequence arises due to the impossibility of precisely measuring
lifecycle carbon emissions from biofuels. This implies that regulated emissions intensities may
reflect political considerations as well as imprecise scientific estimates. Thus, large increases
in ethanol production can lead to “uncontrolled” emissions above or below the level intended
by policy makers. Because the alternatives to CAT require more ethanol production, these
policies are much more sensitive to errors in assigning emissions intensities. If the emissions
rate for corn ethanol is 10 percentage points higher than expected, we estimate between $174
million and $308 in damages from uncontrolled emissions under the RFS, LCFS or subsidies.
Under CAT, damages from uncontrolled emissions are only $30 million.
Finally, because cellulosic or “second-generation” ethanol fuels cannot yet be produced
at commercial scale, the innovation incentives of any carbon policy are crucial. We analyze
the incentives for developing cellulosic ethanol, reducing its costs, and lowering fuel emission
intensities across the different policies. We first estimate the social gains from innovation
across the policies. Under CAT, we find that social gains from innovation are positive and
substantial. However, the social gains under the inefficient policies are surprising. Social
gains depend on both the amount each policy relies on ethanol and on whether increased
ethanol use increases or decreased the inefficiency of the policy. Surprisingly, in some cases,
this latter effect can dominate. In fact, we estimate that social gains from innovation can be
negative for the inefficient policies.
2

While the US EPA has enacted partial waivers to allow recent production automobiles to operate on
ethanol blends as high as 15 percent, automakers have challenged these decisions citing possible engine
damage.

3

We also investigate the distribution of gains from innovation across consumers and the
different types of firms under the policies. Private incentives for innovation can be too large
or too small depending on whether surplus gains to ethanol producers are larger or smaller
than social gains. We find that under CAT, incentives for innovation are generally too small
when ignoring carbon market revenue because some gains accrue to consumers. However,
we estimate that carbon market revenue would be sufficient to compensate producers fully
for efficient innovation expenditures. Under the inefficient policies, the gains to ethanol
producers can lead to very inefficient incentives. For example, under subsidies, we estimate
that gains to producers are substantially greater than social gains. Under the RFS and
LCFS, private incentives for innovation can be too large, too small or negative. Under the
LCFS and CAT, corn producers are harmed by innovation that leads to the development
of cellulosic ethanol, lowers cellulosic costs or reduces cellulosic emissions. In general, the
different types of innovation lower energy prices, increase consumer surplus, and reduce
carbon abatement costs.
Our work contributes to a large literature on the agricultural and land use impacts
of US carbon and biofuel policies. Recent studies focus primarily on the US RFS and
combinations of the RFS with ethanol subsidies or carbon taxes (Bento, Klotz, and Landry,
2012; Chakravorty et al., 2013; Keeney and Hertel, 2009; Chen et al., 2011). Consistent
with our results, these studies find large increases in corn and total agricultural acreage
under the RFS. Shifts in farming can lead to large food price effects, on the order of 17 to
20 percent (Chakravorty et al., 2013; Roberts and Schlenker, 2013).3 A major contribution
of our work is to contrast these effects across the RFS and alternate policies that achieve
the same environmental goal. In addition, we estimate non-carbon costs related to land-use
changes across policies.
A second literature estimates indirect land use effects of US biofuel policies. Dumortier
et al. (2011) and Keeney and Hertel (2009) show that the magnitudes of these effects are
highly uncertain and depend on modelers’ assumptions about yields, trade responses and the
availability of idle cropland. Our analysis of uncontrolled emissions suggests carbon policies
which rely more heavily on ethanol production magnify the effects of these uncertainties.
Finally, while a large theoretical literate has explored incentives for innovation, few studies have quantified gains from innovation across different policies.4 We estimate these effects
3
Zilberman et al. (2013) provide a recent review of estimates of the effect of biofuel mandates on food
prices.
4
Examples of the later include Johnstone, Haščič, and Popp (2010) who study patent applications under
various policies and Jaffe and Stavins (1995) who study the effect of taxes, standards and subsidies on the
adoption of energy efficient building technologies.

4

for CAT, the LCFS and ethanol subsidies. Much of the literature has focused on abatement
costs (Milliman and Prince, 1989; Jung, Krutilla, and Boyd, 1996; Fischer, Parry, and Pizer,
2003). We also consider effects in the output market and estimate both the total gains from
innovation and the private gains to producers.5 This distinction is important as the private
gains to cellulosic ethanol producers under the LCFS and subsidies are much larger than the
social benefits from innovation.
Overall, we show that transportation sector carbon policies vary along a number of important dimensions. The alternatives to CAT create different fuel mixes, land use patterns,
and incentives for innovation. These differences can increase social costs substantially. This
highlights the important trade-offs faced by policy makers in evaluating approaches for reducing carbon emissions in transportation.

2

Biofuel policies

We begin by illustrating the incentives created by each biofuel policy. We consider four alternatives, renewable fuel standards (RFS), low carbon fuel standards (LCFS), a carbon cap
and trade system (CAT), and ethanol subsidies (SUBS). Our modeling approach is similar
to Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2009) and Holland et al. (2013). A single, representative,
price taking firm produces quantities q1 , q2 . . . qn−1 of different ethanol fuels and qn gallons
of gasoline.6 Let mci (qi ) be the marginal cost of producing fuel i with mc0i (qi ) ≥ 0 and with
carbon emissions rate βi . We assume the fuels are perfect substitutes, once adjusted for volumetric energy content, such that all fuel trades at a common price p. The firm maximizes
profit subject to the constraints or incentives created by each policy.
Carbon emissions rates of biofuels are notoriously difficult to measure. Emissions must be
determined on a life-cycle basis, which requires calculating a number of difficult parameters
such as indirect land use effects. Nonetheless, for a carbon policy, regulators must determine
how much carbon is emitted from each fuel. This determination, which may be based on
politics as much as science, will determine the resulting equilibrium under each policy. The
5

Milliman and Prince (1989) and Jung, Krutilla, and Boyd (1996), argue that market based mechanisms
provide greater incentives for innovation compared to command and control policies. Emissions taxes and
auctioned permits provide greater incentives than free permits when innovators appropriate a fixed fraction
of gains. However, in a competitive setting Fischer, Parry, and Pizer (2003) show that the relative welfare
ranking of market based instruments depends on innovation spillovers, costs and environmental benefits.
Allowing for imperfect competition in permit and output markets, Montero (2002) shows that incentives for
innovation can be greater under standards than under market based policies.
6
Our simulations adjust for differences in the energy content of fuels. All quantities are expressed in units
of gasoline gallon equivalents (gge).

5

βi ’s in this section are the “regulated” carbon emissions rates rather than the “true” carbon
emissions rates. Ideally, the regulated and true carbon emissions rates would be the same.
Our analysis of uncontrolled emissions studies differences between the regulated and true
carbon emissions rates.

2.1

Renewable fuel standard

The US Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) was first created under the Energy Policy Act
of 2005. It was subsequently updated under the Energy Independence and Security Act
of 2007 (U.S. Congress, 2007). The RFS sets volumetric targets for ethanol production
in three categories, cellulosic (cell), advanced (adv) and total (tot) renewable fuels. The
categories roughly capture the carbon emissions of each fuel type (e.g., βcell < βadv < βtot )
but do not differentiate within category. The categories are additive such that cellulosic
production counts towards both the advanced and total renewable fuel requirements and
advanced renewable fuels count towards the total requirement. In 2022, the RFS requires 36
billion gallons (24 billion gge) per year of renewable fuel including 21 billion and 16 billion
gallons of advanced and cellulosic fuels.
The RFS is implemented using ratios that translate the volumetric targets into proporq
tional targets based on projected gasoline demand. Specifically, the RFS ratio σRF Sj = qnj
requires σRF Sj gallons of ethanol of type j for every gallon of gasoline produced. To allow ethanol production by the least cost firms, tradable Renewable Identification Numbers
(RINs) are created by producing each type of ethanol and are used by firms to demonstrate
compliance. Because firms can sell RINs, they act as a subsidy to ethanol production. The
first-order conditions for ethanol are:
p = mcj (qj ) − pRIN j ,

(1)

where, pRIN j is the price of a RIN of type j with j ∈ {cell, adv, tot}. The RFS also acts
as an implicit tax on gasoline because producing additional gasoline increases the ethanol
(RIN) procurement obligation. The first-order condition for gasoline production is:
p = mcn (qn ) + pRIN cell σcell + pRIN adv (σadv − σcell ) + pRIN tot (σtot − σadv )

(2)

where the σ terms reflect the fact that additional gasoline production raises the ethanol
procurement obligation and that the three ethanol categories are additive. For example,
an additional gallon of gasoline requires σcell additional gges of cellulosic ethanol or cellu6

losic RINs which costs pRIN cell σcell . For advanced ethanol, cellulosic fuel is counted toward
the obligation such that the additional cost for advanced ethanol is pRIN adv (σadv − σcell ).
Similarly for the total requirement, the additional cost taking into account advanced fuel is
pRIN tot (σtot − σadv ). For more details see Holland et al. (2013).

2.2

Low carbon fuel standard

Low carbon fuel standards (LCFSs) set average carbon intensity requirements for transportation fuels. This approach has been influential at both the state and federal levels. In 2009,
California adopted an LCFS requiring the state reduce the average carbon intensity of transportation fuel 10 percent by 2020 (State of California, 2010). Oregon has adopted a policy
similar to the California LCFS.7 Washington and two consortia of Midwest, Northeast and
mid-Atlantic states have also considered implementing LCFSs.8 At the federal level, lawmakers have considered adoption of a national LCFS based on the California policy. Most
recently, early versions of the Waxman-Markey cap and trade bill included provisions for a
national LCFS.9
Under an LCFS, a firm’s quantity weighted average emissions intensity for transportation
fuel may not exceed the standard σLCF S . Using the notation above, the LCFS constraint is:
β1 q1 + β2 q2 + · · · + βn qn
≤ σLCF S
q1 + q2 + · · · + qn

(3)

Firms adjust total fuel output and the relative quantities of fuel produced to comply with
the regulation. The first-order condition for fuel i is:
p = mci (qi ) + λLCF S (βi − σLCF S )

(4)

where λLCF S is the shadow value of the LCFS constraint. Notice that for high carbon fuels,
βi > σLCF S , the last term in equation 4 is positive and the policy acts like an implicit tax
on production. For low carbon fuels, βi < σLCF S , the policy acts like an implicit subsidy.
7

See http://www.deq.state.or.us/aq/committees/docs/lcfs/reportFinal.pdf
See http://www.ecy.wa.gov/climatechange/fuelstandards.htm,
http://www.midwesterngovernors.org/Publications/LCFPagDoc.pdf and
http://www.ct.gov/deep/lib/deep/air/climatechange/lcfs mou govs 12-30-09.pdf
9
For example see http://www.feinstein.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/press-releases?ID=a4499663-9559b897-f40b-7b3ba9c94fcd,
http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/edg/media/Obama New Energy 0804.pdf and
http://democrats.energycommerce.house.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Transcript-FC-HR-2454ACES-2009-5-18.pdf
8

7

Note that like the RFS, an LCFS creates strong incentives for fuel substitution via implicit
subsidies for lower carbon fuels.10

2.3

Carbon trading

In 2009 the U.S. House of Representatives passed the “American Clean Energy and Security
Act,” H.R. 2454 otherwise known as the “Waxman-Markey” bill. This legislation, though
never approved by the Senate, would have established a broad national carbon trading system
including transportation fuels.11
Under a transportation sector carbon trading system, total emissions summed over all
fuels produced must not exceed the cap (σCAT ), formally:
β1 q1 + β2 q2 + · · · + βn qn ≤ σCAT ,

(5)

The first-order conditions of the firm’s profit maximization problem are:
p = mci (qi ) + λCAT βi ,

(6)

where λCAT is the shadow price of the carbon constraint or equivalently, the price of a carbon
permit. Note that each carbon-emitting fuel is taxed in proportion to its carbon emissions.
While CAT does provide incentives for substitution by taxing dirtier fuels more, it also
provides a greater incentive for reducing fuel consumption due to higher fuel prices.12 Because
producer prices for all fuel increase, equilibrium prices under CAT are larger compared with
policies that implicitly or explicitly subsidize ethanol.

2.4

Ethanol subsidies

There is a long history of direct subsidies for ethanol production in the US. Until December
2011, ethanol producers received a federal tax credit of 45 cents per gallon under the Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax Credit (VEETC).13 In addition, small volume producers with
10

Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2009) investigate firm incentives under an LCFS and show that, under
very general conditions, an LCFS cannot achieve the efficient allocation of emissions and energy production.
11
Holland et al. (2013) investigate the political economy of transportation sector carbon policy as a possible
explanation of why H.R. 2454 was unsuccessful.
12
See Table 2.
13
Beginning in 1978 ethanol sales were exempt from federal fuel excise taxes. The VEETC, established in
2004, replaced this exemption with a 51 cent per gallon tax credit. The rate was lowered in 2008 to 45 cents
per gallon. After several renewals, the VEETC was allowed to expire on December 31, 2011.

8

less than 60 million gallon capacity also qualify for the Small Ethanol Producer Tax Credit
of 10 cents per gallon. For cellulosic ethanol, the 2008 farm bill established a tax credit of
101 cents per gallon, less any applicable VEETC credit. Finally, a number of states provide
their own ethanol subsidies or excise tax exemptions.14
Modeling ethanol subsidies is straightforward. Under the assumptions above, a profit
maximizing firm produces until marginal cost, less the subsidy si , equals the market clearing
price. The firm’s first-order conditions for ethanol production are:
p = mci (qi ) − si ,

(7)

for each ethanol fuel i. For gasoline, the firm produces until marginal cost equals price.
Similar to the RFS and LCFS, direct subsidies provide a large incentive for fuel substitution.
Our simulations below assume gasoline supply is perfectly elastic. As a consequence, ethanol
subsidies do not change the equilibrium fuel price and therefore, provide no incentive for
reduced fuel consumption.

3

Innovation

Without new technologies for producing low-carbon fuels, reducing carbon emissions will
be quite costly. Thus, one of the key features of any carbon policy will be how well it
provides incentives for innovation. Overall, the importance of innovation is highlighted by
the fact that the primary low-carbon fuels analyzed in this paper, cellulosic ethanols, are
not currently produced on a commercial scale.
Innovation is an important area of public concern due to market failures associated with
innovation. In order for innovation incentives to match the social gains from innovation,
all the benefits would need to accrue to the innovator. Unfortunately this is rarely the
case. First, innovation may result in lower prices. If these consumer surplus gains are not
captured by the innovator, e.g., if the innovator cannot perfectly price discriminate, then
innovation incentives can be too small. Second, knowledge is a public good. If an innovator
discovers a process which reduces the costs of other firms, these spillover benefits would not
accrue to the innovator and innovation incentives would be too small. Finally, innovation
incentives can be too large if there is “business stealing” whereby the innovator merely
receives profits which would have accrued to another firm without increasing social surplus.
14

For examples see http://www.afdc.energy.gov/laws/state.

9

These market failures have led to substantial public involvement in innovation including
the patent system, support for innovation through federal tax credits, and direct public
investment in research. Innovation in energy receives particular attention, for example,
through Department of Energy funding and the national laboratories.
We analyze three different types of innovation: new technologies, cost reducing innovation, and carbon reducing innovation. The new technologies we analyze are cellulosic ethanol
from the various feedstocks. Currently, cellulosic ethanol is not produced at commercial scale
and a suite of innovations will be required to produce cellulosic ethanol commercially. To
analyze the benefits of the entire suite of innovations necessary to allow production of cellulosic ethanol, we simply compare the market equilibria with and without supply from the
cellulosic ethanol feedstocks. Next, to analyze cost reducing innovation, we compare the
market equilibria with and without a shift in the cellulosic supply curves (marginal cost
curves). Our supply curves are based on engineers’ projections for future technologies after
years of research and development (R&D). Actual R&D could be less than expected leading
to higher costs. To investigate gains from reducing costs, we analyze a counterfactual where
cellulosic ethanol costs are 20 percent higher than our preferred supply curves. Finally, to
analyze emissions reducing innovation, we compare the market equilibria with higher and
lower carbon emissions rates, βi ’s. Fuel carbon intensities might be reduced, for example,
through the use of new agricultural or production processes.
For each type of innovation and for the different carbon policies, we calculate several
measures of gains. First, we calculate the social surplus gain, which is found by simply
comparing the social surplus with and without innovation. The social surplus gain is the
social willingness to pay for the innovation and captures and gains or losses to consumers
as well as any increases or decreases in producer profits. The social surplus gain is the
benefit measure which would be used in a benefit-cost analysis of a policy which fostered the
innovation. Second, we calculate the distributions of the gains across consumers, cellulosic
ethanol producers, and corn ethanol producers.15 The distribution of gains tells us whether
the innovators’ incentives are too weak, too strong, or exactly matches the social gains. For
example, if the gains to the cellulosic ethanol producers exceed the social gain under a certain
policy, then the private innovation incentive is too strong. The distribution of gains also tells
us whether we might expect groups to lobby for or against policies supporting that type of
innovation. For example, if lowering the costs of cellulosic ethanol leads to large consumer
surplus gains under a CAT, but not under the RFS, then we might expect consumers to be
more supportive of cost reducing innovation under a CAT than under the RFS. Third, we
15

By construction, gasoline producers receive no rents.

10

calculate the marginal incentives to innovate by improving emissions rates. This marginal
incentive measures the gains a price-taking firm could expect from a marginal innovation
under each of the policies. This marginal incentive can be compared to the social marginal
incentive and may be too large or too small.
The marginal incentives may differ from the social marginal incentive and may differ
from the gains to cellulosic producers since the gains include equilibrium effects. To illustrate, consider the marginal incentives and equilibrium effects under CAT and the LCFS for
innovation in emissions rates.16 The social planner’s problem is :
max U (qi ) − C(qi ) − τ βi qi ,
qi

(8)

where, τ is the social cost of carbon. U (qi ) captures the benefits of consumption of fuel i.
As before, βi is the emission rate of fuel i and C(qi ) are costs. By the envelope theorem,
= τ qi∗ . Under CAT,
the social marginal incentive for innovation in emissions rate is ∂L
∂β
Equation 6 implies that the incentive to reduce the carbon emissions rate is λCAT qi , again
by the envelope theorem. If the carbon cap if set optimally, λCAT = τ , the efficient incentive
is obtained. Under the LCFS, the incentive to reduce the carbon emissions rate is λLCF S qi ,
which can be too large or too small.17 Using these results, we calculate producers’ marginal
incentives to improve emissions rates for each of the fuels in our simulation.18
These marginal effects represent a producer’s private gains from reducing fuel carbon
intensity marginally. If the innovation is widespread, e.g., if the firm is large or if the
innovation spills over to other firms, then the innovation may affect prices and output. To
see this, first consider the firm’s constrained profit maximization problem under CAT. For
exposition, we focus on one fuel i, such that:
π = pqi − ci (qi ) − λCAT βi qi ,

(9)

where λCAT is the price of a carbon permit under CAT. Taking the total derivative with
respect to the emission rate βi and grouping terms yields:
∂qi
∂p
∂λCAT
dπ
= [p − mci (qi ) − λCAT βi )]
+ qi [
− βi
] − λCAT qi .
dβi
∂βi
∂βi
∂βi
16

(10)

Because the RFS and subsidies do not explicitly consider carbon, there is no incentive for firms to reduce
emissions under these policies.
17
See Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2009) for a further discussion of incentives under the LCFS.
18
Montero (2002) shows that pollution taxes and permits provide equal incentives for innovation when
output and permit markets are competitive.

11

If innovation does not affect prices and output, then Equation 10 collapses to the last term,
which is equal to the private incentive above (λCAT qi ). If innovation does affect prices and
output, then the first term in Equation 10 captures the change in profit from βi ’s effect on
output, and the second term captures the marginal effects of βi on prices. Therefore, the
overall effect of innovation on firm’s profits depends not only λCAT qi but also on how changes
in βi affects quantities and prices.
Equations 11 and 12 are the analogous expressions for the LCFS. The firm’s profit maximization problem for fuel i is:
π = pqi − ci (qq ) − λLCF S (βi − σ)qi ,

(11)

Where λLCF S is the price of a carbon permit under the LCFS. Taking the total derivative
with respect to βi yields:
∂qi
∂p
∂λLCF S
dπ
= [p − mci (qi ) + λLCF S (σ − βi )]
+ qi [
+
(σ − βi )] − λLCF S qi .
dβi
∂βi
∂βi
∂βi

(12)

To explore gains and loses from innovation in fuel emissions, Section 5.4 focus on counterfactuals where the emission rates of corn and cellulosic ethanol are 10 percentage points higher
than our preferred estimates.

4

Simulation methodology

To understand the impact of biofuel policies on agricultural production, land-use and emissions, we combine detailed data on agricultural resources with engineering models for ethanol
production. We construct county-level supply curves for corn ethanol and six different types
of cellulosic ethanol. From these relationships we estimate county-level biomass consumption and land-use as well as aggregate carbon emissions and land-use related externalities.
We simulate equilibrium outcomes under a business as usual scenario (BAU) and under a
RFS, an LCFS, CAT, and direct subsidies (SUBS). We follow the approach in Holland et al.
(2013). Here, we briefly summarize the main assumptions and methods used in our analysis.

4.1

Supply curves

We construct supply curves for corn ethanol and six different cellulosic ethanol fuels produced
from agricultural residues, forest waste, municipal solid waste, orchard and vineyard waste
12

and herbaceous energy crops. The supply curves are based on engineering models for ethanol
production costs and use detailed county-level data on agricultural production and waste
resources. The industry is modeled as a set of profit-maximizing, price-taking firms with
perfect information. See Parker (2011) and Parker (2012) for more details.
We begin by discussing the biomass resource data. County-level estimates for corn production are based on the aggregate relationship between corn prices and harvests. We
forecast total US corn production based on projections from United States Department of
Agriculture (2010). Each county’s share of total production is proportional to its share of
historical production as reported by National Agricultural Statistics Service (2009). Total
corn ethanol production is constrained at 15 billion gallons per year in compliance with the
RFS.
Biomass resources for cellulosic ethanol production are obtained from a variety of sources
including energy crops and wastes. For energy crops, we focus on herbaceous energy crops
(switchgrass) and farmed trees. We assume herbaceous energy crops may only be grown on
marginal lands, defined as idle cropland or cropland used for pasture. Switchgrass resources
are estimated by multiplying the amount of marginal land within a county, based on the
2007 Census of Agriculture (National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2009), by estimated
switchgrass production yields from Wullschleger et al. (2010). Farmed tree supply is based
on recent US Forest Service estimates for pulpwood production.19
We also consider orchard and vineyard waste and two types of agricultural residues: corn
stover and wheat straw, that are by-products of grain production. Recently, agronomists
have estimated the collection costs and availability of a variety of biomass resources based on
historical yields, land areas, and production practices. Our wheat straw, orchard and vineyard resource estimates are from Nelson (2010). The corn stover data are from Graham et al.
(2007). Finally, we consider the possibility of converting municipal solid waste to ethanol.
We estimate the available resource using state-level per capita waste production statistics
(Simmons et al., 2006), the composition of wastes currently landfilled (U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 2007), transportation, and waste sorting costs.
Ethanol production costs are based on engineering models for three technologies. Corn
ethanol is produced by either wet-mill or dry-mill processes. Production costs for corn
ethanol are taken from Gallagher, Brubaker, and Shapouri (2005), Gallagher and Shapouri
(2005), and Butzen and Hobbs (2002). We assume all existing plants continue to operate
and take their locations as fixed (Renewable Fuels Association, 2009). In addition to existing
19

Obtained via personal communication with Ken Skog at the USFS.

13

plants, our optimization model sites new plants based on energy prices, feedstock and transportation costs. Due to the relative costs of the technologies, we assume all new facilities
are dry mill plants. Energy crops and waste feedstocks are converted to ethanol using a dilute acid enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation technology. Production costs for cellulosic
ethanol are modeled using Wooley et al. (1999); Hamelinck, Hooijdonk, and Faaij (2005);
Aden et al. (2002); McAloon et al. (2000). Because cellulosic ethanol technology is not
currently at production scale, cost estimates are based on future projections and represent
significant advances from the current state of the industry.
The model combines these data in a mixed integer linear programming model which
maximizes firm profits by choosing plant location, production technology and output conditional on fuel price, biomass resources, conversion and transportation costs. Re-optimizing
the model for a range of fuel prices yields county-level supply curve estimates for each fuel
which we then aggregate to the national level. The resulting supply curves are shown in
Figure 1. Note that different prices correspond to different levels of plant production as well
as different industry configurations in terms of the number, size and location of production
facilities. Because these parameters are variable, the supply curves represent estimates of
long-run biofuel supply.

4.2

GHG emissions intensities

Quantifying the emissions intensities of each fuel poses several challenges. First, because biofuels are produced from crops which remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, estimating
emissions requires modeling the fuel “life-cycle” impacts from cultivation to production to
combustion. Second, emissions impacts are more uncertain if one considers “indirect land-use
effects” where increased cultivation of energy crops leads to new or displaced production on
previously fallow lands. While indirect effects are controversial, recent work by Searchinger
et al. (2008); California Air Resources Board (2009); Fargione et al. (2009); Hertel et al.
(2010); Dumortier et al. (2011) suggests that large amounts of sequestered carbon may be
released when new lands are put into production. Indirect emissions from corn and cellulosic
ethanol production could add between 44% and 98% to the emissions intensities of these fuels (California Air Resources Board, 2009). Third, carbon emissions for cellulosic pathways
may change as the industry matures.
Because of these challenges, there is no simple accounting of carbon intensities for the
different ethanol fuels. Instead, we rely on estimates from life-cycle analyses. Table 1
summarizes estimates from recent studies. We present emissions rates normalized by the
14

emissions intensity of gasoline. For example, an emissions intensity of 0.90 implies emissions
10 percent lower than gasoline. We see that there is substantial variation across the estimates.
For ethanol produced from municipal solid waste, estimated emissions intensities range from
0.04 (Zhang, Joshi, and MacLean, 2010) to 0.35 (Kalogo et al., 2007). For agricultural
residues, estimates range from -0.29 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2010) to 0.16
(Spatari, Zhang, and MacLean, 2007).20 Even in the case for the relatively more established
corn ethanol production process, estimates vary substantially with intensities ranging from
0.79 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2010), a 21 percent reduction in emissions, to
1.04 (California Air Resources Board, 2009), a 4 percent increase in emissions relative to
gasoline.
Our approach in dealing with this uncertainty is twofold. First, our simulations assume
emissions intensities for each fuel that fall conservatively in the range of those reported in
the literature. We use 0.80 for corn based ethanol and 0.25 and 0.20 for ethanol produced
from herbaceous energy crops and waste biomass. Then, in a series of robustness checks
reported in Appendix B, we verify that our results do not depend on these assumptions.

4.3

Land use calculations

In our data, the feedstocks with the largest potential for large land-use shifts are corn and
herbaceous energy crops. We assume that there are no land use effects associated with the
use of waste biomass for ethanol production.21 This assumption seems reasonable given
collection costs and the relatively small quantity of waste biomass available.
Each ethanol supply curve is based on production at discrete plants optimally sited across
the U.S. by our linear optimization model. The quantity of biomass required to produce a
gallon of ethanol is determined by ethanol conversion efficiency factors assigned to each
production technology described above. For each ethanol plant and each fuel type, the total
quantity of biomass consumed is known for every point on the supply curve. To calculate
the total amount of land required to supply biomass to each plant, we use county-level crop
yield data to convert biomass tons to acres planted.
Corn yields are estimated by increasing the current county level yields (National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2009) uniformly at the rate projected for the national average
(United States Department of Agriculture, 2010). Switchgrass yields were modeled by Oak
20

Negative emissions intensities occur when fuels are credited for electricity co-generation at ethanol plants.
For example, farmers that sell orchard and vineyard waste to ethanol plants do not expand their orchards
as a result of the reduced cost of waste disposal.
21

15

Ridge National Laboratory for both lowland and upland varieties of switchgrass. To approximate yields for switchgrass grown on marginal lands, our calculations use upland yields.
Pulpwood yields are from the US Forest Service.
We calculate both the total area used in energy crop production and the “land-use intensity” under each policy. We define land use intensity as the total number of acres used in
energy crop production divided by total land area in a given county. This approach provides
a consistent basis for comparison across counties and highlights the regions where land use
shifts are occurring. Using total land area as the basis for comparison also illustrates the
tradeoffs that occur when marginal lands are put into production.22
We calculate land areas and intensities for all energy crops, corn plus switchgrass and
farmed trees, and for corn alone. This distinction is useful for two reasons. First, farmland
used for corn production is a substitute for land used for food crops. Herbaceous energy
crops and pulpwood are assumed to be grown on land not used for production of food or
other cultivated crops. Therefore, one would expect food price and indirect land use effects
from corn to be larger than for crops grown on marginal land. Second, corn may be raised
using more intensive farming practices leading to more fertilizer use, irrigation, erosion, etc.,
compared to herbaceous crops and trees. Below we show both the changes in land areas for
each crop category as well the the geographic distribution of energy crop intensity.

4.4

Simulating transportation carbon policies

We simulate long-run equilibrium outcomes under each of the different carbon policies and
in a business as usual scenario with no carbon policy. Ethanol production is characterized by
our seven supply curves. We model long-run gasoline supply as perfectly elastic at a price of
$2.75 per gallon.23 This assumption seems reasonable given that the carbon policies reduce
gasoline production, suggesting refinery capacity constraints are unlikely to be a factor in the
long-run. However, this assumption would be violated if long-run average costs are upward
sloping, for instance due to heterogeneity in refineries’ access to inputs or demand. Total
fuel demand is modeled as constant elasticity, with an elasticity of 0.5 and calibrated to US
EIA projected fuel consumption of 140 billion gge per year at our baseline price of $2.75 per
gge.24 We assume the fuels are perfect substitutes after taking into account the volumetric
22

As opposed to comparisons based on the number of arable acres within the county, for example.
I.e. the assumption of perfectly elastic supply implies that gasoline production is determined by the
demand for transportation fuel and the total level of ethanol production under each policy.
24
We assume excise taxes are constant throughout the period at $0.48 per gallon and are applied to both
gasoline and ethanol. We assume distribution and retail costs of $0.15 per gallon for both fuels.
23

16

energy densities of gasoline and ethanol.
For each of the policies described in Section 2 and the BAU scenario we calculate the
equilibrium consumer and producer prices that equate supply and demand. Under BAU,
the equilibrium price is determined by the long-run supply of gasoline at $2.75. For the
RFS, we calculate the producer prices that satisfy the three different RFS constraints and
equate total fuel supply and demand. We design the LCFS and CAT policies to achieve
the same total reduction in carbon emissions as the RFS. Specifically, the LCFS producer
price vector includes a carbon price that reflects the emissions intensity of each fuel and the
intensity target. We adjust the intensity target until overall carbon emissions match the
RFS. Under CAT, we simply set the carbon cap at the RFS level. For ethanol subsidies, the
consumer price is the marginal cost of gasoline. Producer prices for ethanol are adjusted by
the subsidy amounts. We use the recent VEETC ($0.45 per gallon) and cellulosic ($1.01 per
gallon) subsidy levels rather than targeting the same emissions reduction as the RFS.
Because our ethanol supply curves are discontinuous, we solve for equilibrium under each
policy using a numerical simulation algorithm. In the BAU case, ethanol production is
determined by price and the ethanol supply curves. Gasoline production is the amount of
additional fuel required to clear the market. Under the RFS, the simulation consists of two
separate search algorithms. The first set determines the RFS ratios that satisfy the three
volumetric mandates. The second set calculates the RIN prices that satisfy the RFS ratios
for each fuel. Gasoline production again fills the residual demand. The LCFS simulation
loops over the LCFS shadow price λLCF S until the LCFS constraint is satisfied. On outer
loop solves for the LCFS constraint the matches carbon emissions to the RFS level. For
CAT, the carbon price is adjusted until total emissions equal the cap, where again the cap
equals emissions under the RFS.

5

Results

We begin by comparing prices, emissions and ethanol production under each policy. Next,
we compare land use changes and investigate the distribution of energy crop production
across counties. Because we have information on the type of land used, we also report this
separately for cultivated and uncultivated lands. Given prior estimates of costs associated
with land use changes, we calculate what these changes imply for non-GHG externalities. We
also report land use externalities on a per GHG-abated basis allowing the reader to compare
these costs with estimates of the social cost of carbon. We investigate the robustness of each
17

policy to errors in assigning carbon emission intensities to each fuel, and quantify the cost
of any uncontrolled carbon emissions. Finally, we calculate incentives for innovation.

5.1

Ethanol production and the Blend Wall

Table 2 shows energy prices, fuel production, and emissions under each policy. The 2022 RFS
leads to a 10.2 percent reduction in carbon emissions compared with BAU. By design, the
LCFS and CAT systems achieve the same reduction. However, the reduction mechanisms
differ across policies. Energy prices are substantially higher under CAT at $3.23 per gge.
Because demand is downward sloping, higher prices imply less fuel is consumed under CAT,
129.1 billion gge, compared to the other policies, 135 to 140 billion gge. This means with
CAT, less ethanol is required to achieve the same reduction in emissions. Across policies,
we see ethanol quantity increases by 3.8 billion gge under CAT compared with 14.9 to 18.5
billion under the alternatives.25
Greater substitution to ethanol under the alternatives to CAT creates inefficiency in
terms of higher abatement costs. To see this, Figure 2 shows marginal abatement costs
and emissions reduction mechanisms for CAT and a LCFS when we vary abatement levels.
The heavy black line shows the marginal abatement cost under each policy calculated by
running our simulation model for range of carbon prices and determining the level of carbon
emissions. The light line depicts marginal abatement costs assuming zero fuel substitution.26
For a 10.2% reduction in emissions, the marginal abatement costs under CAT and the LCFS
are $40.83 per MTCO2 e and $189.70 per MTCO2 e, respectively. Under CAT, a substantially
larger portion of the emissions reduction comes from reduced fuel demand. Under the LCFS,
a much larger share of abatement comes from fuel substitution, i.e. the horizontal distance
between the light and heavy curves in Figure 2. This finding highlights the main difference
between CAT and the other policies under consideration, namely that emissions reductions
under CAT come from reduced fuel consumption while direct subsidies, the RFS and LCFS
result in more substitution towards ethanol.
Higher ethanol production raises concerns about whether or not the ethanol can be
effectively utilized by the existing vehicle fleet. Conventional vehicles can safely use ethanolgasoline blends of up to 10 percent (E10). Using substantially higher ethanol blends requires
25

These large shifts in fuel production translate into large changes in resource consumption. We summarize
biomass feedstock consumption under the different policies in Appendix A.
26
We calculate this curve by assuming ethanol has the same emissions intensity as gasoline. In this
case, carbon reductions come only from reductions in fuel consumption due to increased fuel prices and the
elasticity of fuel demand.

18

a “flex-fuel vehicle” with a modified fuel system to efficiently combust the higher ethanol
blends. Although flex-fuel vehicles are becoming more common, the current vehicle fleet
limits the amount of ethanol that can be used. This percentage, called the “blend wall,”
depends on the existing vehicle fleet and is approximately 10 to 12 percent.
The different policies require blending different proportions of ethanol. These ethanol
blend percentages are presented in Table 2. Under the RFS, LCFS, and subsidies, the
blends range from E21 to E24. These percentages are currently outside the blend wall and
would require a substantial change in the vehicle fleet in order to utilize that much ethanol.27
On the other hand, under CAT the quantities correspond to an effective blend of 10 percent
ethanol by volume (E10). Thus, ethanol production under CAT is likely within the blend
wall and would not require changes to the existing vehicle fleet, but other policies could
require substantial changes to the vehicle fleet.
Production of the different types of ethanol also varies considerably across policies. Under
the RFS and subsidies, corn ethanol production increases by 8 to 9 billion gge per year relative
to BAU. Under the LCFS, the increase is roughly half as much. Under CAT, no additional
corn ethanol is produced. The RFS, LCFS, and subsidy policies all result in large increases
in cellulosic ethanol production from energy crops and waste feedstocks. Under CAT, the
majority of new ethanol production comes from waste resources. Overall, the large increases
in ethanol production from energy crops suggests large shifts in agricultural activity and
land-use under the alternatives to CAT.

5.2

Land-Use Changes

Land intensities for energy crops are illustrated in Figures 3 and 4. Figure 3 shows intensities
for all energy crops, i.e corn, switchgrass and pulpwood, under the 2022 RFS, LCFS, CAT
and subsidies. Energy crop production under CAT is modest and concentrated primarily in
the Midwest. In stark contrast, the LCFS and RFS result in substantial amounts of land
dedicated to energy crop production. Intensities under direct subsidies are quite similar
to the RFS, though the emissions reduction is considerable smaller. Figure 4 shows land
intensities for corn under each policy. Effects under the RFS are large with many Midwest
counties devoting large land fractions to corn production. The LCFS also results in large
increases in corn production. In contrast, the CAT system leads to relatively small changes
in corn land intensity.
27

Below we assume that producers in 2022 are not constrained by the current “blend wall”. This could
substantially underestimate the costs of any policy which requires ethanol blends beyond this limit.

19

Table 3 summarizes the distribution of county-level land-use intensity across policies. We
define energy-crop counties as those counties that would produce some energy crops—either
corn or a cellulosic feedstock—in our model at the highest estimated cost.28 Under this
definition, 2,670 counties of the 3,137 counties in the United States are energy-crop counties.
Table 3 summarizes the distributions across energy-crop counties. Under BAU, very little
ethanol is produced and thus very few counties have any energy crop production. In fact,
over 95 percent of energy-crop counties produce no energy crops under BAU and energy-crop
production is concentrated in a few counties one of which devotes 50 percent of the total
land area for energy-crop production. Under the RFS, the distribution is quite different. In
one county 62 percent of the land area is used for energy-crop production. Five percent of
energy-crop counties devote over 26 percent of land area to energy-crop production and 10
percent of counties use over 12 percent. Under subsidies, the distribution is quite similar
with intensities of 9.3 percent and 25.4 percent at the 90th and 95th percentiles, respectively.
Under the LCFS, intensities are somewhat less, but still substantial, with intensities in 5
percent of counties greater than 14.4 percent. In contrast, the distribution under CAT is
more like BAU and less than 5 percent of energy-crop counties have any meaningful energy
crop acreage.
These high intensities under the RFS, LCFS and subsidies lead to large changes in acreage
for energy crop production. Table 4 summarizes total land-use changes, relative to BAU,
under each policy. Under CAT, total changes in land-use are modest. Area for energy crops
increases 1.2 million acres relative to BAU. There is essentially zero increase in corn acreage.
Land-use changes under the LCFS are larger with approximately 14.7 million additional
corn acres and 27.6 more total acres relative to BAU. The effects are largest under the RFS
which results in 39.0 million additional acres of energy crop production. Approximately
27.7 million additional acres are used for corn production.29 Under subsidies, the land use
changes are quite similar at 37.7 million addition total acres and 25.7 additional corn acres
relative to BAU. To put these numbers in perspective, the total increase in agricultural
production under the RFS would occupy and area equal to approximately 9 percent of total
US agricultural land (Lubowski et al. (2006)). If this land were a state, it would be ranked
the 24th largest in size ahead of Georgia, Illinois, Iowa and New York.
To understand the environmental costs associated with these large land shifts, we rely on
28

The highest estimated cost is $6.13 per gge, which corresponds to a maximum wholesale price of $5.50
per gge plus $0.63 due to taxes, distribution and retail as described in Section 4.
29
Our estimates for the land-use effects of the RFS fall in the range of other recent estimates. Chen et al.
(2011) find the 2022 RFS increases total acres by 16.95 million and corn acres by 11.47 million. Chakravorty
et al. (2013) find the RFS increases US land used for energy crop production by 148 million acres. However,
there is no net increase in total cultivated land due to offsetting increases in food production elsewhere.

20

the results of previous studies. Because it is difficult to obtain estimates for the wide range
of environmental effects that may occur, we focus on erosion and habitat loss. Hansen (2007)
estimates imply costs from erosion and habitat loss between $36 and $80 per acre. For corn,
we assume each new acre of production increases total US agricultural land by .3 acres.30
Based on these studies, we use a range of land-related environmental costs between $10 and
$25 per additional acre of corn production. We conservatively assume that production of
herbaceous energy crops and pulpwood have no net environmental impact.31 Additional
information on the calculation of these costs is discussed in the Appendix. Finally, we
convert costs to dollars per ton of CO2 e in order to compare with estimates of the social cost
of carbon.
Table 5 summarizes costs due to non-carbon externalities stemming from changes in corn
production under the various policies. The differences in costs across policies are significant.
Under CAT, land use change costs are approximately zero. Under the RFS, LCFS, and
subsidies systems, costs range between $147 and $277 million for the low cost scenario and
$368 and $693 million for the high cost scenario. Per ton of carbon abatement, these costs
fall between $0.89 and $2.31 per MTCO2 e for the low cost scenario and between $2.22 and
$5.77 per MTCO2 e for the high cost scenario. To put these effects in perspective, under
the RFS and subsidies, social costs due to land use changes amount to between 6 percent
and 16 percent of the social cost of carbon.32 Under the LCFS, these costs are between 3
percent and 8 percent of the social cost of carbon. Thus non-carbon externality costs can
be substantial under the RFS, LCFS or subsidies, but are negligible under the CAT.

5.3

Uncontrolled emissions

As discussed above, the life-cycle emissions of advanced ethanol production technologies
are difficult if not impossible to calculate. In particular, carbon emissions associated with
direct and indirect land use changes resulting from shifts in agriculture are highly uncertain
(Dumortier et al., 2011; Keeney and Hertel, 2009). This creates the possibility of errors
in estimating the carbon intensities of different ethanol pathways. Furthermore, emissions
30

This takes into account yield increases and substitution away from other crops. Our value is consistent
with recent estimates by Searchinger et al. (2008) who find 0.29 additional acres per new corn acre and
Hertel et al. (2010) who find 0.27 additional acres per corn acre.
31
Our supply curves assume switchgrass is grown on marginal lands without irrigation of chemical fertilizers. Further, we assume production does not substantially increase erosion and switchgrass offers similar
wildlife habitat to the land being replaced.
32
Assuming a value of $26.3 per MTCO2 e per Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton (2011) for 2020 with a
3 percent discount rate.

21

intensities under any transportation sector carbon policy are likely to be set as part of a
political process. In light of this, we investigate the sensitivity of actual emissions under
each policy to errors in the regulated emissions intensity. In particular, we are agnostic
about whether the “errors” arise through a higher than expected shock to ex post emissions
intensities relative to the regulated emissions intensities which must be set ex ante or through
a political process which results in the regulated emissions intensities being lower than the
true emissions intensities, e.g., by a political decision to ignore indirect land use effects.33
We focus on the emissions related to corn ethanol production and the associated land
use changes. Imagine a scenario in which the true emissions intensity of corn ethanol is
10 percentage points larger than the regulated intensity, i.e., the true emissions intensity
is σcorn = 0.90 compared to the regulated emissions intensity of σcorn = 0.80. The equilibrium will be determined by the the regulated emissions intensity, but the welfare effects
are calculated from the true emissions intensity. Note that this error could have dramatic
effects under some policies. For example, it could mean that corn receives an implicit subsidy
(instead of a tax) under the LCFS.
Table 6 summarizes carbon emissions under each scenario. We define uncontrolled emissions as the additional carbon emitted because the true emissions intensity is larger than
the regulated emissions intensity specified by policy makers. An intuitive metric of environmental effectiveness is the quantity of uncontrolled emissions as a fraction of the stated
reduction in carbon. The effect of the error in emissions intensity is smallest under CAT at
approximately 0.7 percent. Under the RFS, LCFS, and subsidies the effects are 7.1 percent,
4.0 percent, and 9.9 percent, respectively.
These effects are economically significant. We estimate the additional carbon damages
due to uncontrolled emissions by adopting the central estimate of the Greenstone, Kopits,
and Wolverton (2011). At a carbon cost of $26.3 per MTCO2 e, damages due to uncontrolled
emissions range from approximately $30 million per year under CAT to over $307.7 million
per year under the RFS. In summary, errors in the true greenhouse gas content of biofuels
relative to the regulated content are magnified under the RFS, LCFS, and subsidies, but are
negligible under CAT.
33

For simplicity we imagine a regulated intensity which understates true emissions. From a welfare perspective, an overstatement could also be costly if it resulted in a level of ethanol production that was inefficiently
too low. However, given the existence of other negative externalities associated with land use changes, the
welfare implications are likely to be asymmetric.

22

5.4

Gains from innovation

We now consider gains from innovation under each policy following the framework developed
in Section 3. We begin with gains from the development of cellulosic ethanol. Table 7 shows
surplus with and without the six types of cellulosic ethanol under BAU, LCFS, CAT, and
subsidies.34,35 For a given policy, the gains to society from developing cellulosic ethanol
depend on two factors. First, gains will be larger the more a policy relies on cellulosic
ethanol. For example, BAU does not require much cellulosic ethanol, and hence the gains
from developing cellulosic ethanol are modest: $0.91 billion. The other policies rely much
more on cellulosic ethanol. CAT in particular relies most heavily on cellulosic ethanol (almost
no corn ethanol is produced under CAT) and hence the social gains under CAT are large:
$4.38 billion. Second, gains can be larger or smaller depending on whether cellulosic ethanol
worsens or improves the efficiency of a given policy. For example, under the subsidy policy
cellulosic ethanol receives substantial subsidies. By developing cellulosic ethanol technology
some low-cost cellulosic ethanol is produced. However, the subsidies also induce substantial
cellulosic ethanol to be produced which is more costly than the alternatives. Thus developing
cellulosic technology worsens the efficiency of the subsidies. In fact, Table 7 shows that the
social surplus gain from developing cellulosic ethanol is negative with subsidies. In other
words, society would be better off without cellulosic ethanol under the subsidy policy. The
LCFS lies somewhere between the two extremes of CAT and the subsidy policy: the LCFS
relies heavily on cellulosic ethanol but is an inefficient policy.
We now turn to the distribution of the gains across the policies. The incentives for
developing cellulosic ethanol can be insufficient or excessive depending on whether or not
the surplus gains to the cellulosic ethanol producers match the social gains. Under BAU,
the incentives align since gasoline is the marginal fuel, prices are not changed by developing
cellulosic ethanol, and cellulosic ethanol producers capture the entire social gains. However,
this is the exception rather than the rule. For example, in CAT, the fuel price does not
increase as much with innovation, thus consumers gain and cellulosic ethanol producers
capture only $3.31 billion of the $4.38 billion social surplus gains from innovation. In this
case, cellulosic producers would not be willing to undertake innovation that costs more than
$3.31 billion, even though that innovation might be socially beneficial, i.e., might cost less
than $4.38 billion.36
34

We cannot analyze the RFS since the RFS explicitly requires production of cellulosic ethanol.
Each of the LCFS and CAT simulations—with and without the innovation—is designed to achieve the
same carbon emissions as the RFS baseline.
36
In CAT, there is also extensive carbon market revenue. This carbon market revenue is smaller with
innovation but still would be substantial enough ($59.35 billion) to finance efficient innovation.
35

23

For the LCFS and subsidies, the interaction between innovation and the efficiency of
the policies makes for inefficient incentives and clear winners and losers. Under the subsidy
policy, the fuel price is unchanged so the entire subsidy of $21.72 billion comes from the
government. But these transfers result in only $17.29 billion in profit for the cellulosic
producers, thus resulting in a deadweight loss of $4.43 billion. In this case the cellulosic
producer’s profits vastly exceed the social gains from innovation, which are negative. This
implies cellulosic producers would be willing to undertake socially inefficient innovation just
to capture additional subsidy dollars.
Under the LCFS, innovation prevents the fuel price from rising as high, so consumers
benefit from the innovation. However, corn ethanol producers are harmed by cellulosic
innovation under the LCFS. Recall that the LCFS has an implicit subsidy to fuels with
relatively low carbon intensities. In the absence of innovation in cellulosic ethanol, corn
ethanol is the low carbon fuel and as such receives a subsidy. Corn ethanol loses this subsidy
when cellulosic ethanol is commercialized.37 Much of the corn producer’s lost surplus is
captured by the cellulosic ethanol producers so that their gains are quite substantial: $20.56
billion. Note that this implies cellulosic ethanol producers would be willing to pay (e.g., in
licensing fees) more than the entire social benefit from innovation ($2.61 billion). Thus the
private innovation incentives under the LCFS are too large and could result in investment
beyond the socially efficient level.38
Finally, the development of cellulosic ethanol lowers costs of carbon reductions under the
LCFS, CAT, and subsidies. We define average abatement cost as the total change in private
surplus, net of carbon market revenues or subsidy payments, divided by carbon abatement.
Average abatement costs under the LCFS fall from $58.87 per MTCO2 e to $48.58 and from
$40.54 per MTCO2 e to $19.52 under CAT with the development of cellulosic ethanol. Under
subsidies, average abatement costs fall from $194.45 to $82.30 per MTCO2 e.
Next, we consider gains from a reduction in ethanol costs. Table 8 compares equilibrium
under our preferred supply curves (with innovation) to the equilibrium under the counterfactual where cellulosic ethanol costs are 20 percent higher (without innovation).39 As before,
the gains from innovation depend on how heavily the policy relies upon cellulosic ethanol
and on how innovation interacts with existing distortions.
37

Note that corn ethanol producers gain under the LCFS even with innovation they just don’t gain as
much as they would have in the absence of innovation.
38
This result is akin to the business-stealing effect which can lead to excess entry beyond the socially
optimal level of entry.
39
Because we assume all producers realize the same percentage costs reductions from innovation, this can
be thought of as publicly provided innovation or as innovation with complete spillovers.

24

For BAU and CAT, the social gains from decreasing cellulosic costs are straightforward.
BAU does not rely heavily on cellulosic ethanol and thus the gains from lowering its costs
are modest and less than the full gains from developing cellulosic ethanol. Moreover, the
gains accrue entirely to the cellulosic ethanol producers, and the innovation incentives are
efficient. Under CAT, the gains are more substantial, since CAT relies more heavily on
cellulosic ethanol. However, the innovation incentives are not efficient since a proportion of
the gains are captured by consumers. Note that the gains from lowering costs are less than
the full gains from developing cellulosic ethanol.
As above, the interaction between cost-reducing innovation and the efficiency of the
other policies makes for inefficient incentives and clear winners and losers. Under subsidies,
cost-reducing innovation increases surplus by lowering the cost of the inframarginal cellulosic
ethanol, on one hand, but decreases surplus by causing additional high-cost cellulosic ethanol
to be produced, on the other.40 Table 8 shows that these effects result in a net social
gain from the cost-reducing innovation of $3.91 billion. As above, this yields an excessive
incentive for innovation since the ethanol producers’ gains exceed the social gains. Note
also the odd comparison of the results in Table 7 and Table 8. Under the subsidy, it is not
socially beneficial to develop cellulosic ethanol, but once it is developed (and has substantial
inframarginal production) it is socially beneficial to reduce its costs.
For the LCFS, the social benefits from cost-reducing innovation are quite substantial and
exceed the gains to cellulosic producers implying that the innovation incentive is insufficient.
This social surplus gain from cost-reducing innovation arises because reducing the costs of
inframarginal cellulosic ethanol production increases surplus by more than the additional
cellulosic ethanol production decreases surplus. As with the subsidy, the results in Table 7
and Table 8 yield an odd comparison: it is more socially beneficial to reduce costs of cellulosic
ethanol by 20% than it is to develop it.41
The gains to cost-reducing innovation under the RFS are interesting. Since the RFS
mandates a specific amount of cellulosic ethanol, the social gains to reducing its costs are
large. However, since the ethanol producers are required to produce and must be sufficiently
compensated through the RIN market, the cellulosic ethanol producers are largely indifferent
to cost reductions which primarily benefit consumers. In fact, the results of Table 8 show
40

Intuitively, subsidies create deadweight loss when the marginal private cost of production exceeds
marginal private benefits. Without innovation, marginal private costs are higher and deadweight loss is
less. Higher costs in this case reduce the inefficiency of the subsidy in the same way as would a tax on
production.
41
We explore this result further in Appendix Table 7. Since developing cellulosic ethanol is a limiting case
of reducing cellulosic ethanol costs, we analyze more extreme cost reductions in Appendix Table 7 and show
that they smoothly approach the results in Table 7.

25

that cellulosic ethanol producers could actually be harmed by the cost-reducing innovation
and thus might not only have an insufficient incentive to reduce costs, but may even have
an incentive to increase costs.42 Across policies, innovation lowers average abatement costs
between $10.74 and $29.94 per MTCO2 e.
Next, we investigate innovation in fuel emission intensities. Since the equilibria under
the RFS and subsidies don’t depend on the emissions intensities, we focus on the LCFS
and CAT.43 We consider both the marginal private incentives for improving fuel emissions
rates and social gains from carbon reducing innovation. Beginning with the marginal incentives, from Section 3 we know the marginal incentive to reduce carbon emissions from fuel
i under the LCFS is λLCF S qi .44 The marginal social benefit from reducing emissions is τ qi .
Therefore, whether the LCFS provides the correct marginal incentive depends on whether
λLCF S is larger or smaller than the social cost of carbon τ . Under an LCFS that reduces
carbon emissions by 10.2%, λLCF S = $189.70, compared with a carbon price of λCAT =
$40.83 under CAT (Figure 2). Given recent estimates for the social cost of carbon of $26.3
per MTCO2 e Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton (2011), the marginal incentive for carbon
reducing innovation under the LCFS is too large. We note that while CAT can provide the
correct marginal incentives, at this level of abatement the marginal incentive under CAT
also appears too large. However, from Figure 2 we see that even at abatement levels where
CAT incentives are correct (about 6%), the marginal incentive under the LCFS is still several times larger. Of course, larger incentives under the LCFS or subsidies may help offset
other market failures such as innovation spillovers. Because the magnitude of innovation
spillovers in ethanol production is unknown, it is impossible to say whether these incentives
are too large or too small. In general, it is unlikely that these policies will provide the correct
incentives, and targeting spillovers directly with R&D subsidies or strengthened intellectual
property may lead to lower economic inefficiencies.
Table 9 presents the social gains and the distribution of gains from carbon-reducing
innovation. The columns labeled “corn” show a counterfactual where the emission rate
of corn ethanol is 10 percentage points higher than our preferred estimates. The columns
labelled “cell.” use a counterfactual where cellulosic emissions are 10 percentage points higher
42

These producer surplus loses come from our assumption that innovation leads to a 20 percent reduction
in costs for all producers. In this case, the price reduction (which is determined by the marginal producer) is
larger than the cost reduction of the inframarginal producers, which implies lost profit. If instead innovation
caused costs for all producers to fall by a constant dollar amount per gge, gains to cellulosic producers would
be exactly zero.
43
Improving emissions intensities under the RFS and subsidies would result in less carbon, so the social
benefit would be the benefit of the carbon reduction. Here we hold the carbon reduction constant.
44
If a firm appropriated all the gains from innovation, the marginal private incentive for reducing the cost
to produce fuel i would be qi , which is larger under the RFS, LCFS and subsidies compared with CAT.

26

than our preferred estimates. Overall, the effects of innovation are more modest than in the
other scenarios. Under CAT, social gains from innovation are straightforward. Consumers
gain from innovation by way of lower fuel prices. Carbon market revenue decreases from
carbon-reducing innovation. Overall, social gains are positive.
Under the LCFS, the results are more interesting. Social gains from reducing corn ethanol
emissions are negative. Lower corn emissions increases corn production but lowers the implicit subsidy for all ethanol producers. As a result, large producer surplus decreases outweigh
consumer gains. Social gains from innovation that reduces cellulosic emission are positive.
However, both corn and cellulosic producers are worse off. With cleaner cellulosic ethanol,
producers receive a smaller implicit subsidy and less ethanol is required to meet the LCFS
standard. In this case, the LCFS provides no private incentive for reducing cellulosic carbon
intensity.

6

Discussion

There are a number of options for reducing greenhouse gas emissions from transportation
fuels. If substitution towards ethanol is a major outcome of US policy, then a number of
additional social costs beyond carbon merit consideration. Intuitively, polices that result in
larger shifts in ethanol production will yield larger land-use and indirect emissions effects.
Here, we show these effects can be quite large. For example, costs related to erosion and
habitat loss are $277 to $693 million larger under the RFS compared to CAT. Similarly, costs
from uncontrolled emissions can be large. For relatively small errors in emissions intensities,
10 percentage points in our example, costs due to uncontrolled emissions are nearly $150
million greater under the LCFS compared to CAT.45
Proponents of transportation carbon policies often use innovation incentives as justification for these policies. We investigate gains from developing cellulosic ethanol, reducing costs
and lowering fuel emissions intensities. Across the policies, social gains from the different
types of innovation are in general positive. However, social gains are negative for developing
cellulosic ethanol under subsidies and for reducing corn ethanol emissions under the LCFS.
Private incentives for innovation under the alternatives to CAT can be too large or too
small. In some cases, these policies lead to perverse incentives. Under the RFS, innovation
the lowers cellulosic costs decreases cellulosic profits. Similarly, under the LCFS innovation
that reduces cellulosic emissions decreases producer profits.
45

As discussed previously, 10 percentage points is well-within the range of uncertainly for estimates of corn
ethanol emissions rates.

27

Overall, there are many challenges to policies such as the RFS, LCFS or ethanol subsidies.
While several authors have highlighted desirable features of these approaches in a second-best
setting (de Gorter and Just, 2010; Holland, 2012; Lapan and Moschini, 2012), a combination
of first-best instruments would have lower efficiency costs. In terms of carbon abatement,
there is growing evidence that the alternatives to CAT are quite costly.46 Given the additional
costs we estimate here, one must further question the wisdom of policies such as the RFS,
LCFS and subsidies.

46
For example, Holland et al. (2013) find average abatement costs of carbon are 2.5 to 4 times higher
under the RFS, LCFS and subsidies compared with CAT.

28

References
Aden, A., M. Ruth, K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan, B. Wallace, L. Montague,
and A. Slayton. 2002. “Lignocellulosic biomass to ethanol process design and economics
utilizing co-current dilute acid prehydrolysis and enzymatic hydrolysis for corn stover.”
Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-510-32438, National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Bento, Antonio M., Richard Klotz, and Joel Landry. 2012. “Are There Carbon Savings from
US Biofuel Policies? The Critical Importance of Accounting for Leakage in Land and Fuel
Markets.” Working paper, Cornell University.
Butzen, S. and T. Hobbs. 2002. “Corn processing III. Wet milling.” Crop Insights 12:1–6.
California Air Resources Board. 2009. “Proposed Regulation to Implement the Low Carbon
Fuel Standard: Volume I.” Tech. rep.
Chakravorty, Ujjayant, Marie-Hlne Hubert, Michel Moreaux, and Linda Nstbakken. 2013.
“The Long Run Impact of Biofuels on Food Prices.” Working Paper 3876, CESifo Group
Munich.
Chen, Xiaoguang, Haixiao Huang, Madhu Khanna, and Hayri Onal. 2011. “Meeting the
Mandate for Biofuels: Implications for Land Use, Food and Fuel Prices.” Working Paper
16697, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cui, Jingbo, Harvey Lapan, GianCarlo Moschini, and Joseph Cooper. 2011. “Welfare Impacts of Alternative Biofuel and Energy Policies.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 93 (5):1235–1256.
de Gorter, Harry and David R. Just. 2010. “The Social Costs and Benefits of Biofuels:
The Intersection of Environmental, Energy and Agricultural Policy.” Applied Economic
Perspectives and Policy 32 (1):4–32.
Dumortier, Jerome, Dermot J. Hayes, Miguel Carriquiry, Fengxia Dong, Xiaodong Du,
Amani Elobeid, Jacinto F. Fabiosa, and Simla Tokgoz. 2011. “Sensitivity of Carbon
Emission Estimates from Indirect Land-Use Change.” Applied Economic Perspectives and
Policy 33 (3):428–448.
Fargione, Joseph, Jason Hill, David Tilman, Stephen Polasky, and Peter Hawthorne. 2009.
“Land Clearing and the Biofuel Carbon Debt.” Science 326 (5952):527–528.

29

Fischer, Carolyn, Ian WH Parry, and William A Pizer. 2003. “Instrument choice for environmental protection when technological innovation is endogenous.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 45 (3):523–545.
Gallagher, P. W., H. Brubaker, and H. Shapouri. 2005. “Plant size: capital cost relationships
in the dry mill ethanol industry.” Biomass and Bioenergy 28 (6):565–571.
Gallagher, P. W. and H. Shapouri. 2005. “USDA’s 2002 Ethanol Cost-of-Production Survey.”
Tech. Rep. 841, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the Chief Economist.
Gardner, Bruce. 2007. “Fuel Ethanol Subsidies and Farm Price Support.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Industrial Organization 5 (4):1–20.
Graham, R. L., R. Nelson, J. Sheehan, R. D. Perlack, and L. L. Wright. 2007. “Current and
Potential U.S. Corn Stover Supplies.” Agronomy Journal 99 (1):1.
Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits, and Ann Wolverton. 2011. “Estimating the Social
Cost of Carbon for Use in U.S. Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and Interpretation.”
Working Paper 16913, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hamelinck, Carlo N., Geertje van Hooijdonk, and Andr? P. C. Faaij. 2005. “Ethanol from
lignocellulosic biomass: techno-economic performance in short-, middle- and long-term.”
Biomass and Bioenergy 28 (4):384–410.
Hansen, LeRoy. 2007. “Conservation Reserve Program: Environmental Benefits Update.”
Agricultural and Resource Economics Review 36 (2):267–280.
Hertel, Thomas W, Alla A Golub, Andrew D Jones, Michael O’Hare, Richard J Plevin, and
Daniel M Kammen. 2010. “Effects of US maize ethanol on global land use and greenhouse
gas emissions: estimating market-mediated responses.” BioScience 60 (3):223–231.
Holland, Stephen P. 2012. “Emissions taxes versus intensity standards: Second-best environmental policies with incomplete regulation.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 63 (3):375 – 387.
Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel. 2009. “Greenhouse
Gas Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (1):106–46.
Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, Christopher R. Knittel, and Nathan C. Parker.
2013. “Some Inconvenient Truths About Climate Change Policy: The Distributional
Impacts of Transportation Policies.” Working paper, University of Colorado.
30

Jaffe, Adam B and Robert N Stavins. 1995. “Dynamic incentives of environmental regulations: The effects of alternative policy instruments on technology diffusion.” Journal of
environmental economics and management 29 (3):S43–S63.
Johnstone, Nick, Ivan Haščič, and David Popp. 2010. “Renewable energy policies and technological innovation: Evidence based on patent counts.” Environmental and Resource
Economics 45 (1):133–155.
Jung, Chulho, Kerry Krutilla, and Roy Boyd. 1996. “Incentives for advanced pollution
abatement technology at the industry level: An evaluation of policy alternatives.” Journal
of environmental economics and management 30 (1):95–111.
Kalogo, Youssouf, Shiva Habibi, Heather L. MacLean, and Satish Joshi. 2007. “Environmental Implications of Municipal Solid Waste-Derived Ethanol.” Environmental Science
and Technology 41 (1):35–41.
Keeney, Roman and Thomas W. Hertel. 2009. “The Indirect Land Use Impacts of United
States Biofuel Policies: The Importance of Acreage, Yield, and Bilateral Trade Responses.”
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 91 (4):895–909.
Khanna, Madhu, Amy W. Ando, and Farzad Taheripour. 2008. “Welfare Effects and Unintended Consequences of Ethanol Subsidies.” Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy
30 (3):411–421.
Lapan, Harvey and GianCarlo Moschini. 2012. “Second-best biofuel policies and the welfare
effects of quantity mandates and subsidies.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 63 (2):224 – 241.
Lubowski, Ruben N., Marlow Vesterby, Shawn Bucholtz, Alba Baez, and Michael J. Roberts.
2006. “Major Uses of Land in the United States, 2002.” Tech. rep., U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
McAloon, A., F. Taylor, W. Yee, K. Ibsen, and R. Wooley. 2000. “Determining the cost of
producing ethanol from corn starch and lignocellulosic feedstocks.” Tech. Rep. NREL/TP580-28893, National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Milliman, Scott R and Raymond Prince. 1989. “Firm incentives to promote technological change in pollution control.” Journal of Environmental economics and Management
17 (3):247–265.

31

Montero, Juan-Pablo. 2002. “Permits, standards, and technology innovation.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 44 (1):23–44.
National Agricultural Statistics Service. 2009. “2007 Census of Agriculture.” URL http:
//www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2007/index.php. Accessed February 1, 2009.
Nelson, Richard. 2010. “National Biomass Resource Assessment and Supply Analysis.”
Parker, Nathan C. 2011. Modeling Future Biofuel Supply Chains using Spatially Explicit
Infrastructure Optimization. Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Davis.
———. 2012. “Spatially Explicit Projection of Biofuel Supply for Meeting Renewable Fuel
Standard.” Journal of the Transportation Research Board (2287):72–79.
Renewable Fuels Association. 2009.
“Biorefinery Locations.”
URL http://www.
ethanolrfa.org/bio-refinery-locations/. Accessed December 3, 2009.
Roberts, Michael J. and Wolfram Schlenker. 2013. “Identifying Supply and Demand Elasticities of Agricultural Commodities: Implications for the US Ethanol Mandate.” American
Economic Review forthcoming.
Searchinger, Timothy, Ralph Heimlich, R. A. Houghton, Fengxia Dong, Amani Elobeid,
Jacinto Fabiosa, Simla Tokgoz, Dermot Hayes, and Tun-Hsiang Yu. 2008. “Use of U.S.
Croplands for Biofuels Increases Greenhouse Gases Through Emissions From Land-Use
Change.” Science 319 (5900):1238–1240.
Simmons, P., N. Goldstein, S. Kaufman, N. Themelis, and J. Thompson Jr. 2006. “The
State of Garbage in America.” BioCycle 47 (3):26–43.
Spatari, Sabrina, Yimin Zhang, and Heather L. MacLean. 2007. “Life Cycle Assessment
of Switchgrass- and Corn Stover-Derived Ethanol-Fueled Automobiles.” Environmental
Science and Technology 39 (24):9750–9758.
State of California. 2010. “Low Carbon Fuel Standard.” In California Code of Regulations,
Title 17, Subchapter 10, Article 4, Subarticle 7.
United States Department of Agriculture. 2010. “Office of the Chief Economist, World
Agricultural Outlook Board, USDA Agricultural Projections to 2019.” Tech. Rep. OCE2010-1.
U.S. Congress. 2007. “Energy Independence and Security Act, H.R. 6.” In Public Law No:
110-140.
32

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2007. “2006 MSW Characterization Report.” URL
http://www.epa.gov/osw/nonhaz/municipal/pubs/06data.pdf. Accessed December 1,
2009.
———. 2010. “Renewable Fuel Standard Program (RFS2) Regulatory Impact Analysis.”
Tech. rep.
Wooley, R., M. Ruth, J. Sheehan, K. Ibsen, H. Majdeski, and A. Galvez. 1999. “Lignocellulosic biomass to ethanol process design and economics utilizing co-current dilute acid
prehydrolysis and enzymatic hydrolysis current and futuristic scenarios.” Tech. rep., National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Wullschleger, E. B., E. B. Davis, M. E. Borsuk, C. A. Gunderson, and L. R. Lynd. 2010.
“Biomass Production in Switchgrass across the United States: Database Description and
Determinants of Yield.” Agronomy Journal 102:1158–1168.
Zhang, Yimin, Satish Joshi, and Heather L. MacLean. 2010. “Can ethanol alone meet Californias low carbon fuel standard? An evaluation of feedstock and conversion alternatives.”
Environmental Research Letters (5):1–14.
Zilberman, David, Gal Hochman, Deepak Rajagopal, Steve Sexton, and Govinda Timilsina.
2013. “The Impact of Biofuels on Commodity Food Prices: Assessment of Findings.”
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 95 (2):275–281.

33

7

Figures

1

2

Retail Price ($/gge)
3
4
5

6

Figure 1: Supply curves for corn and cellulosic ethanol fuels.

0

2
AgRes
MSW

4
6
Ethanol (billion gge)
Corn
MSW food

34

8
Forest
Orch

10
HEC

Figure 2: Marginal abatement cost curves and emissions reduction mechanisms for CAT
and LCFS systems.

Reduced	  Fuel	  
Consump/on	  

Fuel	  
Subs/tu/on	  

λ =	  $190/MTCO2e	  

Reduced	  Fuel	  
Consump/on	  

Fuel	  
Subs/tu/on	  

λ =	  $41/MTCO2e	  

35

36

Land	  Intensity	  

RFS	  

CAT	  

SUBS	  

LCFS	  

Figure 3: Total energy crop land intensity (percent of total land) used in ethanol production from corn, switchgrass and
farmed trees under CAT, a LCFS, the 2022 RFS and subsidies.

37

Land	  Intensity	  

RFS	  

CAT	  

SUBS	  

LCFS	  

Figure 4: Corn land intensity (percent of total land) used in ethanol production from corn under CAT, a LCFS, the 2022 RFS
and subsidies.

8

Tables

Table 1: Lifecycle GHG emission estimates for corn and cellulosic ethanol pathways.

Corn

CARB (2009)

EPA (2010)

Zhang et al. (2010)

0.91 to 1.04

0.79

1.04

Herb. Energy Crops
Waste Biomass
Ag. Residues
Orchard and Vineyard
Forest
Muni. Solid Waste

Kalogo et al. (2007) Spatari et al. (2005)

-0.10

0.24

-0.29

-0.09 to 0.16

0.02 to 0.22

-0.06 to 0.19
0.042

38

0.16

0.16 to 0.35

Table 2: Fuel prices, quantities and emissions under BAU, RFS, LCFS, CAT and subsidies.

BAU

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS.

Fuel Price ($/gge)

$2.75

$2.94

$2.96

$3.23

$2.75

Fuel Quantity (bn. gge)

140.0

- 4.7

- 5.0

- 10.9

- 0.0

5.2

+ 18.5

+ 14.9

+ 3.8

+ 18.2

Corn Ethanol

0.96

+ 8.9

+ 4.6

+ 0.0

+ 8.3

Herb. Energy Crops

0.09

+ 4.3

+ 4.5

+ 0.5

+ 4.5

Waste Feedstocks

4.11

+ 5.3

+ 5.8

+ 3.3

+ 5.5

E6

E24

E21

E10

E23

1619

- 10.2%

- 10.2%

- 10.2%

- 6.9%

Ethanol Quantity (bn. gge)

Volumetric Ethanol Blend Ratio
Emissions (MMTCO2e)

Notes: For the RFS, LCFS, CAT and SUBS policies a "+" or "-" indicates an increase or decrease in
each quantity relative to BAU.

Table 3: Points on the distributions of county-level total energy crop intensity across
policies.
BAU
RFS
LCFS
CAT
SUBS
Mean
0.32%
3.95%
2.82%
0.42%
3.84%
Minimum
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
25th Percentile
0%
0.41%
0.53%
0%
0.48%
Median
0%
0.94%
1.05%
0%
1.03%
75th Percentile
0%
1.97%
1.84%
0%
2.01%
90th Percentile
0%
12.55%
3.73%
0.11%
9.31%
95th Percentile
0%
26.24%
14.35%
0.99%
25.39%
Maximum
50.97%
61.97%
60.19%
50.97%
61.97%
Notes: Distributions are conditional on energy-crop counties which are the 2,670 counties that
would produce some energy crops in our model at a sufficiently high fuel price of $6.13 per gge.

39

Table 4: Land-use changes under alternate policies.

Corn Acres
Herb. Energy Crop Acres
Farmed Trees Acres
Total Acres (1000s of Acres)

BAU

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS.

2,892

+ 27,708

+ 14,708

+8

+ 25,708

225

+ 10,075

+ 10,675

+ 1,044

+ 10,475

4

+ 1,208

+ 2,176

+ 106

+ 1,557

3,121

+ 38,991

+ 27,559

+ 1,158

+ 37,739

Notes: For the RFS, LCFS, CAT and SUBS policies a "+" indicates an increase in acreage relative
to BAU. Land areas are measured in 1000s of acres.

Table 5: Non-carbon land use costs for corn production under alternate policies.

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS.

Low Scenario ($10 per corn acre)
Land-Use Cost ($ mil.)
Land-Use Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Percentage of Social Cost of Carbon

$277.08
$1.68
6%

$147.08
$0.89
3%

$0.08
< $0.01
0%

$257.08
$2.31
9%

High Scenario ($25 per corn acre)
Land-Use Cost ($ mil.)
Land-Use Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Percentage of Social Cost of Carbon

$692.69
$4.19
16%

$367.69
$2.22
8%

$0.20
< $0.01
0%

$642.69
$5.77
22%

Notes: Assuming a SCC of $26.3 per ton per Greentone et. al. (2011) for 2020 with a 3%
discount rate.

40

Table 6: Uncontrolled emissions due to errors in estimating carbon intensity.
RFS
LCFS
CAT
SUBS
Regulated Emissions (MMTCO2e)
1454
1454
1454
1508
True Emissions (MMTCO2e)
1465
1460
1455
1519
Uncontrolled as % of stated reduction
7.1%
4.0%
0.7%
9.9%
Additional carbon damages ($ mil.)
$307.76
$174.20
$29.96
$288.50
Notes: "Regulated emissions" assumes regulators set the emissions intensity for corn ethanol to
σreg.= 0.80. "True emissions" assumes corn emissions are actually σact.= 0.90. The difference
between regulated and true emissions results in "uncontrolled emissions" above the level
targeted by the policy. Additional carbon damages of uncontrolled emissions are calculated
using the Interagency Working Group (2011) central estimate for the SCC in 2020
of $26/MTCO2e

Table 7: Incentives for development of cellulosic ethanol under alternate policies.
BAU
Δ Social Surplus ($ bn.)
Δ	  CS
Δ PS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS

$0.91

$2.61

$4.38

-$4.43

$0.00

$67.08

$43.44

$0.00

$0.91

-$64.47

$3.24

$17.29

Δ PS (Corn Ethanol)

$0.00

-$85.03

-$0.07

$0.00

Δ PS (Cellulosic Ethanol)

$0.91

$20.56

$3.31

$17.29

-$42.30

$21.72

Δ Carbon Mkt. Rev. or Sub. Payments ($ bn.)
Fuel Price ($/gge)
Without Innovation

$2.75

$3.48

$3.58

$2.75

With Innovation

$2.75

$2.96

$3.23

$2.75

Without Innovation

$58.87

$40.54

$194.45

With Innovation

$48.58

$19.52

$82.30

Average Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)

Notes: The change in surplus is the additional surplus from including our six types of cellulosic
ethanol (With Innovation) relative to the counterfactual which excludes cellulosic ethanol
(Without Innovation). Surplus is calculated as PS + CS + Carbon Market Revenue - Subsidy
Payments.

41

Table 8: Incentives for reducing cellulosic ethanol costs under alternate policies.
BAU
Δ Social Surplus ($ bn.)

RFS

$0.81

$7.03

Δ	  CS

$0.00

Δ PS

$0.81

Δ PS (Corn Ethanol)
Δ PS (Cellulosic Ethanol)

LCFS

CAT

SUBS

$5.75

$2.58

$10.00

$2.97

$16.71

$0.00

-$2.97

$2.79

$1.89

$6.39

$0.00

$0.00

-$0.40

-$0.03

$0.00

$0.81

-$2.97

$3.18

$1.91

$6.39

-$16.02

$2.48

Δ Carbon Mkt. Rev. or Sub. Payments ($ bn.)

$3.91

Fuel Price ($/gge)
Without Innovation

$2.75

$3.02

$2.98

$3.37

$2.75

With Innovation

$2.75

$2.94

$2.96

$3.23

$2.75

Without Innovation

$72.07

$78.52

$30.26

$93.99

With Innovation

$57.90

$48.58

$19.52

$82.30

Average Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)

Notes: The change in surplus is the additional surplus from technology that reduces costs of cellulosic
ethanol (With Innovation) to our base cost levels relative to the counterfactual where cellulosic ethanol
costs are 20 percent higher (Without Innovation). Surplus is calculated as PS + CS + Carbon Market
Revenue - Subsidy Payments.

42

Table 9: Incentives for reducing ethanol emission intensities under alternate policies.
CAT
Corn
Δ Social Surplus ($ bn.)

LCFS
Cell.

Corn

Cell.

$0.04

$0.40

-$0.61

$1.37

Δ CS

$0.49

$5.85

$4.02

$6.12

Δ PS

$0.02

$0.12

-$4.63

-$4.75

Δ PS (Corn Ethanol)
Δ PS (Cellulosic Ethanol)
Δ Carbon Mkt. Rev. ($ bn.)

$0.05

-$0.01

$0.64

-$0.87

-$0.02

$0.13

-$5.27

-$3.88

-$0.47

-$5.57

Fuel Price ($/gge)
Without Innovation

$3.24

$3.28

$2.99

$3.00

With Innovation

$3.23

$3.23

$2.96

$2.96

Without Innovation

$19.80

$21.96

$44.91

$56.86

With Innovation

$19.52

$19.52

$48.58

$48.58

Average Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)

Notes: The change in surplus is the additional surplus from technology that reduces emissions
of corn and cellulosic ethanol (With Innovation) to our base levels relative to the counterfactual
where emissions rates are 10 percent higher (Without Innovation). Surplus is calculated as PS
+ CS + Carbon Market Revenue - Subsidy Payments.

43

Appendices
A

Resource consumption

For each of the ethanol feedstocks in our model, Appendix Table 1 reports the total quantity
of biomass consumed under each policy. Changes in total biomass consumption range from
approximately 79 million tons per year under CAT, to approximately 352 million tons per
year under subsidies. These changes are substantial compared with the approximately 85
million tons per year consumed under BAU. Corn is by far the largest input to ethanol
production under the RFS and subsidy policies. Under the RFS, an additional 135 million
tons, or 5.4 billion bushels, are consumed annually. To put this number in perspective, this
exceeds the current combined output of Iowa, Illinois, and Indiana.47
In terms of cellulosic feedstocks, herbaceous energy crops represent a large share of feedstock consumption under the RFS, LCFS, and subsidies policies. Agricultural residues,
municipal waste and other waste feedstocks contribute between 143 and 213 million tons
annually to ethanol production. However, under the RFS and subsidy policies, wastes represent less than half of total biomass consumed. Under the LCFS, the waste share of total tons
is approximately 55 percent. Under CAT, approximately 87 percent of total tons come from
waste. This suggests that while wastes are important biofuel feedstocks, the alternatives to
CAT will also require high levels of energy crop production.

B

Robustness

We investigate the robustness of our results along several dimensions. Specifically, we explore
our assumptions about baseline fuel prices, emissions intensities and demand elasticities. In
addition, we allow corn prices and therefore our corn ethanol supply curve to vary based on
changes in corn consumption. We begin with the fuel price scenarios.
Our preferred results assume a baseline fuel price of $2.75 per gallon. Given our assumption of perfectly elastic gasoline supply, higher (lower) baseline fuel prices imply more (less)
ethanol is produced under BAU. Therefore, land-use changes under each policy also depend
on this assumption. We rerun our simulations for two alternate baseline prices, $2.25 per
47

See http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/feed-grains-database/ for detailed data on US corn production.

44

gge and $3.25 per gge. Results for these cases are presented alongside our preferred results
in Appendix Table 2. At the lower price, less switchgrass is produced resulting in fewer
acres devoted to energy crop production under BAU. At the higher price, substantially more
acreage is devoted to corn production under BAU. Higher prices move production onto the
elastic portion of the corn ethanol supply curve resulting in a large increase in land use,
compared with our main results. That said, looking across the policies, the RFS, LCFS
and SUBS each still result in large additional increases in acreage. Under CAT, though the
change in acreage is higher at $3.25 baseline price, the increase relative to BAU is still quite
small compared to the other policies.
Next, we investigate the robustness of our results to different emissions intensities. Appendix Table 3 shows our preferred emissions parameters as well as several alternate scenarios. The “High-Indirect Land Use” scenario assumes the indirect emissions of expanding
energy crop production are larger than expected. We increase the corn and herbaceous
energy crop intensities to 1.00 and 0.40, respectively. The “Waste-Zero” scenario assumes
ethanol from waste biomass results in zero net carbon emissions. Finally, the “Existing
Corn” scenario assumes new corn ethanol plants have emissions profiles similar to current
technology plants.48 We use 0.90 for corn ethanol, but leave the other parameters at their
base levels. We re-run our simulation model under each of these scenarios. Results of this
exercise are presented in Appendix Table 4. Changing emissions parameters has no effect on
land use in the BAU case or under the RFS or SUBS because these policies don’t explicitly
consider the carbon emissions of fuels.49 Under the LCFS and CAT, scenarios with higher
corn emissions make corn ethanol a less attractive substitute for gasoline. This results in
smaller land use shifts under the LCFS relative to BAU. However, land-use changes under
CAT are still substantially less than under the LCFS.
Appendix Table 5 presents simulation results for different price elasticities of gasoline
demand. Our preferred simulations use a price elasticity of -0.50. Here, we simulate less
elastic and more elastic demand assuming elasticities of -0.30 and -0.70. The land-use change
estimates are very similar to our base results. Because we update the RFS ratios to meet
the overall quantity mandates, the RFS estimates are identical across the three elasticity
scenarios. Under subsidies, our assumption of perfectly elastic gasoline implies fuel prices
do not change, and varying the demand elasticity does not affect fuel consumption. For the
LCFS and CAT policies, more elastic demand means less ethanol is required to meet a given
48

I.e. there is no additional innovation in emissions for corn ethanol technology.
We assume that changing the emissions intensities of fuels doesn’t change the classifications of fuels, i.e.
advanced versus cellulosic, under the RFS.
49

45

carbon reduction.50 This reduces land-use changes relative to BAU, though, this effect is
quite small.
Our corn ethanol supply curves take corn price as fixed. Corn represents a substantial
fraction of the cost of producing corn ethanol, in our simulations approximately $2.00 per
gasoline gallon equivalent. We set corn prices under the 2022 RFS to $3.64 per bushel, consistent with production of 10 billion gge per year of corn ethanol (United States Department
of Agriculture, 2010). This approach is reasonable for evaluating the land-use effects of the
RFS. However, substantially less corn ethanol is produced under BAU and CAT, which may
lower corn prices. To gauge the sensitivity of our results to this assumption, we use an elasticity of corn prices with respect to corn consumption of 0.12 (Gardner, 2007) to adjust our
supply curve for corn price effects. We then re-run our simulation model using the adjusted
supply curve. Appendix Table 6 shows the results of this exercise. Lower marginal costs for
modest levels of corn ethanol production (compared with the RFS) mean that more corn
acreage is used for the LCFS, CAT and SUBS, relative to our base case. However, these
effects are again small and the relative differences in land-use across policies remains large.

C

Environmental costs per acre of cropland

Land-use changes have important implications for indirect carbon emissions, food prices,
run-off, erosion and habitat loss. Because different transportation carbon policies are likely
to result in vastly different land-use changes, we consider these costs an important part of
any policy evaluation. We incorporate indirect carbon emissions directly in our baseline
emissions intensity parameters. However, increased ethanol production may result in other
land-use related externalities such as erosion or habitat loss.
One of the potential benefits of herbaceous energy crops, such as switchgrass, are the
low environmental costs of cultivation. Our supply curves assume switchgrass is grown
on marginal agricultural lands without irrigation or application of chemical fertilizers. We
imagine that these farming practices do not substantially increase, and potentially reduce,
erosion. Furthermore, we assume that when land is converted to switchgrass farming, these
fields offer similar wildlife habitat to the fallow land being replaced. Under these circumstances, we conservatively estimate the environmental costs of additional lands devoted to
herbaceous energy crop production as zero. Similarly, we assume farmed trees do not result
in additional environmental costs per acre.
50

Because a greater share of emissions reductions come from reduced fuel consumption.

46

Cultivated crops such as corn on the other hand may have more serious environmental costs. Land used for increased corn production comes from a combination of existing
agricultural land previously used for other cultivated crops, and new lands being brought
into production. To a first approximation, we assume the environmental costs of corn and
other cultivated crops are similar. Therefore, we ignore the fraction of land coming from
crop substitution. To model new lands, we assume any additional acres come from the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). Hansen (2007), studies the benefits of CRP in terms of
reduced erosion and habitat preservation. He estimates an annual benefit of approximately
$1.3 billion for the approximately 36 million acres in CRP for an average annual benefit of
approximately $36 per acre per year. Benefits vary substantially by region. In the nation’s
corn belt, Hansen (2007) estimates CRP benefits of over $80 per acre. We use $36 per acre
and $80 per acre as lower and upper bounds on the range of potential costs.
To estimate the fraction of new acres per additional acre of corn produced we refer to
previous work on land use changes from biofuel production. Searchinger et al. (2008) model
global land-use changes under the Federal RFS. The authors find that a 56 billion liter (15
billion gallon) increase in U.S. corn ethanol production, increases corn acreage by 7.9 million
hectares (19.5 million acres). Total cropland increases by 2.2 million hectares (29%). Hertel
et al. (2010) find increased ethanol production requires an additional 6 million hectares
(14.8 million acres) of coarse grain production with an increase of 1.6 million hectares (27%)
overall. Therefore, we assume that each additional corn acre increases total US agricultural
acreage by 0.3 acres. Based on these assumptions, we use a range of environmental costs
from land-use change between $10 and $25 per additional acre of corn production.

D

Innovation and a range of cellulosic cost reductions

Appendix Table 7 shows gains from innovation under a range of reductions in cellulosic
ethanol costs. Results are shown for the LCFS, CAT and subsidies. As discussed in Section
5.4, social benefits from innovation under the LCFS are larger for small cost reductions
compared with R&D that leads to the development of cellulosic ethanol. The intuition for
this result is illustrated in the top half of Appendix Table 7. Consumers gain from innovation
that lowers cellulosic costs or leads to the introduction of cellulosic ethanol. Moving from
left to right in Appendix Table 7, the gains grow larger with the magnitude of the cost
reduction. For relatively small cost reductions, 20%, 50%, 75%, and 150%, the gains from
innovation to cellulosic producers outweigh loses to corn ethanol producers. However, with
more innovation, loses to corn ethanol producers outweigh gains to cellulosic producers and
47

eventually reduce overall social surplus gains. Overall, incentives for innovation under the
LCFS, vary substantially depending on how much R&D lowers costs. However, producer
incentives are always smaller than social benefits from innovation.
Under CAT, without innovation that leads to large reductions in costs, no cellulosic
ethanol is produced. We see this in Appendix Table 7 where no cellulosic ethanol is produced
in any counterfactual where costs are 75 percent greater than our base estimates. In each of
these cases, the gains from innovation are the same because cellulosic production goes from
zero to the base level of approximately 8 billion gge per year. Overall, innovation in cellulosic
costs lowers energy prices, increases consumer surplus and cellulosic producer surplus while
modestly decreasing corn ethanol producer surplus.
Finally, with subsidies social gains from innovation are positive when cost reductions are
small. For larger cost reductions, or for the development of cellulosic ethanol, innovation
leads to substantial increases in subsidy payments which outweigh increases in producer
surplus. Intuitively, innovation generates deadweight loss when the marginal private costs
of production exceed marginal private benefits. When costs are high, these loses are small.
Innovation lowers these costs and increases the inefficiency of subsidies. Under subsidies, no
cellulosic ethanol is produced in any counterfactual where cellulosic costs are 150 percent
greater than our base estimates.

48

Appendix tables
Table 1: Biomass feedstock consumption under BAU, RFS, LCFS, CAT and subsidies.

BAU
Corn

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS.

16,400 + 134,600 + 70,200

+ 0 + 125,600

Herbaceous Energy Crops

1,771 + 85,429 + 89,029

+ 9,829 + 88,129

Agricultural Residues

6,745 + 61,855 + 62,355 + 40,755 + 62,255

Farmed Trees

25,400 + 21,700 + 29,000 + 10,600 + 24,300

Municipal Solid Waste

32,900 + 44,400 + 44,600 + 16,100 + 44,500

Municipal Food Waste

1,392

+ 2,475

+ 3,019

+ 919

+ 2,713

Orchard and Vineyard Waste

6,478

+ 1,450

+ 1,450

+ 1,211

+ 1,450

Total Biomass Consumed (1000s of Tons)

84,608 + 351,909 + 299,653 + 79,414 + 348,948

Notes: For the RFS, LCFS, CAT and SUBS policies a "+" indicates an increase in biomass
consumption relative to BAU. Biomass quantities are measured in 1000s of tons.

49

Table 2: Land-use changes under different baseline fuel prices.

BAU

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS

Corn (1000s of Acres)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25

2,892 + 27,708
+ 78
2,892 + 27,708 + 14,708
19,100 + 11,500 + 10,700

+0
+ 56
+ 8 + 25,708
+ 200 + 12,200

HEC (1000s of Acres)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25

5 + 10,295 + 11,195
225 + 10,075 + 10,675
2,687 + 7,613 + 7,613

+ 222 + 8,764
+ 1,044 + 10,475
+ 2,968 + 8,513

Farmed Trees (1000s of Acres)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25
Total (1000s of Acres)
Low Fuel Price: $2.25
Base Case: $2.75
High Fuel Price: $3.25

0
4
170

+ 1,212
+ 1,208
+ 1,042

+ 3,285
+ 2,176
+ 1,128

2,897 + 39,215 + 14,558
3,121 + 38,991 + 27,559
21,957 + 20,154 + 19,440

+6
+ 106
+ 128

+ 676
+ 1,557
+ 2,460

+ 227 + 9,496
+ 1,158 + 37,739
+ 3,296 + 23,173

Notes: For the RFS, LCFS, CAT and SUBS policies a "+" indicates an increase in acreage
relative to BAU. Land areas are measured in 1000s of acres.

50

Table 3: Baseline emissions intensities and emissions scenario parameters.

Base Case High Indirect Waste Zero Existing Corn
Land use
Emissions
Corn

0.80

1.00

0.80

0.90

Herb. Energy Crops

0.25

0.40

0.25

0.25

0.00

0.20

Waste Biomass
0.20
0.20
Notes: Emission intensities are relative to gasoline.

Table 4: Land-use changes under different emission intensities.

BAU

RFS

LCFS

Corn (1000s of Acres)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn

2,892
2,892
2,892
2,892

HEC (1000s of Acres)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn

225
225
225
225

+ 10,075
+ 10,075
+ 10,075
+ 10,075

4
4
4
4

3,121
3,121
3,121
3,121

Farmed Trees (1000s of Acres)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn
Total (1000s of Acres)
Base Case
High Indirect Land use
Waste Zero Emissions
Existing Corn

+ 27,708 + 14,708
+ 27,708
+0
+ 27,708 + 11,808
+ 27,708
+ 174

CAT

SUBS

+8
+0
+8
+0

+ 25,708
+ 25,708
+ 25,708
+ 25,708

+ 10,675
+ 10,075
+ 10,375
+ 10,775

+ 1,044
+ 502
+ 1,037
+ 912

+ 10,475
+ 10,475
+ 10,475
+ 10,475

+ 1,208
+ 1,208
+ 1,208
+ 1,208

+ 2,176
+ 2,202
+ 2,482
+ 2,407

+ 106
+ 76
+ 156
+ 94

+ 1,557
+ 1,557
+ 1,557
+ 1,557

+ 38,991
+ 38,991
+ 38,991
+ 38,991

+ 27,559
+ 12,277
+ 24,665
+ 13,357

+ 1,158
+ 578
+ 1,200
+ 1,006

+ 37,739
+ 37,739
+ 37,739
+ 37,739

Notes: For the RFS, LCFS, CAT and SUBS policies a "+" indicates an increase in acreage
relative to BAU. Land areas are measured in 1000s of acres.

51

Table 5: Land-use changes under different demand elasticities.

BAU

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS

Corn (1000s of Acres)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

2,892
2,892
2,892

+ 27,708 + 15,108
+ 27,708 + 14,708
+ 27,708 + 14,408

+ 21 + 25,708
+ 8 + 25,708
+ 2 + 25,708

HEC (1000s of Acres)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

225
225
225

+ 10,075 + 10,675
+ 10,075 + 10,675
+ 10,075 + 10,675

+ 1,955 + 10,475
+ 1,044 + 10,475
+ 792 + 10,475

Farmed Trees (1000s of Acres)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

4
4
4

Total (1000s of Acres)
Less Elastic: Elast. = -0.30
Base Case: Elast. = -0.50
More Elastic: Elast. = -0.70

3,121
3,121
3,121

+ 1,208
+ 1,208
+ 1,208

+ 2,253
+ 2,176
+ 2,131

+ 38,991 + 28,036
+ 38,991 + 27,559
+ 38,991 + 27,213

+ 164
+ 106
+ 83

+ 1,557
+ 1,557
+ 1,557

+ 2,140 + 37,739
+ 1,158 + 37,739
+ 877 + 37,739

Notes: For the RFS, LCFS, CAT and SUBS policies a "+" indicates an increase in acreage
relative to BAU. Land areas are measured in 1000s of acres.

52

Table 6: Equilibrium outcomes under carbon policies incorporating corn price effects.

BAU
Corn (1000s of Acres)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices
HEC (1000s of Acres)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices
Farmed Trees (1000s of Acres)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices
Total (1000s of Acres)
Base Case
Endogenous Corn Prices

RFS

LCFS

CAT

SUBS

2,892
3,018

+ 27,708
+ 27,582

+ 14,708
+ 16,182

+8
+ 2,009

+ 25,708
+ 26,082

225
225

+ 10,075
+ 10,075

+ 10,675
+ 10,675

+ 1,044
+ 1,022

+ 10,475
+ 10,475

4
4

+ 1,208
+ 1,208

+ 2,176
+ 2,090

+ 106
+ 104

+ 1,557
+ 1,557

+ 38,991
+ 38,865

+ 27,559
+ 28,947

+ 1,158
+ 3,135

+ 37,739
+ 38,113

3,121
3,247

Notes: For the RFS, LCFS, CAT and SUBS policies a "+" indicates an increase in acreage
relative to BAU. Land areas are measured in 1000s of acres.

53

Table 7: Incentives for different innovation levels that reduce cellulosic ethanol costs under
the LCFS and CAT.
20%
$5.75
$2.97
$2.79
-$0.40
$3.18

50%
$13.09
$7.40
$5.69
-$1.11
$6.80

75%
$17.92
$10.95
$6.97
-$1.98
$8.94

150%
$26.28
$21.97
$4.31
-$5.81
$10.11

LCFS
300%
$35.32
$34.63
$0.69
-$12.50
$13.20

500%
$38.77
$44.75
-$5.98
-$21.26
$15.28

1000%
$33.13
$57.10
-$23.97
-$41.96
$17.99

$2.98
$2.96

$3.01
$2.96

$3.04
$2.96

$3.12
$2.96

$3.22
$2.96

$3.30
$2.96

$3.40
$2.96

$3.46
$2.96

$3.48
$2.96

$78.52
$48.58

$122.29
$48.58

$151.51
$48.58

$202.11
$48.58

$256.76
$48.58

$277.65
$48.58

$243.53
$48.58

$105.03
$48.58

$58.87
$48.58

20%
$2.58
$16.71
$1.89
-$0.03
$1.91
-$16.02

50%
$4.16
$37.54
$3.05
-$0.06
$3.11
-$36.43

75%
$4.35
$42.44
$3.22
-$0.06
$3.28
-$41.31

150%
$4.38
$43.44
$3.24
-$0.07
$3.31
-$42.30

CAT
300%
$4.38
$43.44
$3.24
-$0.07
$3.31
-$42.30

500%
$4.38
$43.44
$3.24
-$0.07
$3.31
-$42.30

1000%
$4.38
$43.44
$3.24
-$0.07
$3.31
-$42.30

2000% No Cell.
$4.38
$4.38
$43.44
$43.44
$3.24
$3.24
-$0.07
-$0.07
$3.31
$3.31
-$42.30
-$42.30

$3.37
$3.23

$3.53
$3.23

$3.57
$3.23

$3.58
$3.23

$3.58
$3.23

$3.58
$3.23

$3.58
$3.23

$3.58
$3.23

$3.58
$3.23

Average Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Without Innovation
With Innovation

$30.26
$19.52

$39.21
$19.52

$40.36
$19.52

$40.54
$19.52

$40.54
$19.52

$40.54
$19.52

$40.54
$19.52

$40.54
$19.52

$40.54
$19.52

Δ Social Surplus ($ bn.)
Δ	  CS
Δ PS
Δ PS (Corn Ethanol)
Δ PS (Cellulosic Ethanol)
Δ Carbon Mkt. Rev. or Sub. Payments ($ bn.)

20%
$3.91
$0.00
$6.39
$0.00
$6.39
$2.48

50%
$2.84
$0.00
$13.12
$0.00
$13.12
$10.29

75%
$0.16
$0.00
$15.92
$0.00
$15.92
$15.76

150%
-$4.34
$0.00
$17.29
$0.00
$17.29
$21.63

SUBS
300%
-$4.43
$0.00
$17.29
$0.00
$17.29
$21.72

500%
-$4.43
$0.00
$17.29
$0.00
$17.29
$21.72

1000%
-$4.43
$0.00
$17.29
$0.00
$17.29
$21.72

$2.75
$2.75

$2.75
$2.75

$2.75
$2.75

$2.75
$2.75

$2.75
$2.75

$2.75
$2.75

$2.75
$2.75

$2.75
$2.75

$2.75
$2.75

$93.99
$82.30

$123.30
$82.30

$149.00
$82.30

$193.34
$82.30

$194.45
$82.30

$194.45
$82.30

$194.45
$82.30

$194.45
$82.30

$194.45
$82.30

Δ Social Surplus ($ bn.)
Δ	  CS
Δ PS
Δ PS (Corn Ethanol)
Δ PS (Cellulosic Ethanol)
Fuel Price ($/gge)
Without Innovation
With Innovation
Average Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Without Innovation
With Innovation

Δ Social Surplus ($ bn.)
Δ	  CS
Δ PS
Δ PS (Corn Ethanol)
Δ PS (Cellulosic Ethanol)
Δ Carbon Mkt. Rev. or Sub. Payments ($ bn.)
Fuel Price ($/gge)
Without Innovation
With Innovation

Fuel Price ($/gge)
Without Innovation
With Innovation
Average Abatement Cost ($/MTCO2e)
Without Innovation
With Innovation

2000% No Cell.
$10.24
$2.61
$65.63
$67.08
-$55.40
-$64.47
-$75.43
-$85.03
$20.03
$20.56

2000% No Cell.
-$4.43
-$4.43
$0.00
$0.00
$17.29
$17.29
$0.00
$0.00
$17.29
$17.29
$21.72
$21.72

Notes: The change in surplus is the additional surplus from technology that reduces costs of cellulosic ethanol (With Innovation) to our base cost
levels relative to counterfactuals where cellulosic ethanol costs are higher (Without Innovation). The columns show counterfactuals where
cellulosic costs without innovation range from 20 percent to 2000 percent higher. The final column is the case where cellulosic ethanol is not
developed. Surplus is calculated as PS + CS + Carbon Market Revenue - Subsidy Payments.

54

