                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PATENT VALUE AND CITATIONS:
               CREATIVE DESTRUCTION OR STRATEGIC DISRUPTION?

                                       David S. Abrams
                                         Ufuk Akcigit
                                        Jillian Grennan

                                     Working Paper 19647
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w19647


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                        November 2013, Revised December 2018




We thank seminar and conference participants at the NBER Summer Institute IO and Intellectual
Property Policy and Innovation group meetings, University of Pennsylvania Law School,
Wharton, IP Scholars Conference (New York), American Law and Economics Association
Conference (Nashville), Understanding Entrepreneurship Conference (Israel), Patent Conference
(Chicago), and Works in Progress Intellectual Property Conference (Newark). Salomé Baslandze
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by David S. Abrams, Ufuk Akcigit, and Jillian Grennan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patent Value and Citations: Creative Destruction or Strategic Disruption?
David S. Abrams, Ufuk Akcigit, and Jillian Grennan
NBER Working Paper No. 19647
November 2013, Revised December 2018
JEL No. K1,L2,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Prior work suggests that more valuable patents are cited more. Using novel revenue data for tens
of thousands of patents held by non-practicing entities (NPEs), we find that the relationship
between citations and value forms an inverted-U, with fewer citations at the high end of value
than in the middle. We explain the inverted-U with a model of innovation that has productive and
strategic patents. Empirically, we observe more strategic patents where the model predicts:
among inventors in fields of rapid development and where divisional applications are employed.
These findings have important implications for our understanding of growth, innovation,
intellectual property policy, and patent valuation.

David S. Abrams                                 Jillian Grennan
University of Pennsylvania                      Duke University
Law School                                      Fuqua School of Business
3501 Sansom Street                              100 Fuqua Drive
Philadelphia, PA 19104                          Durham, NC 27708
dabrams@law.upenn.edu                           jillian.grennan@duke.edu

Ufuk Akcigit
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Saieh Hall, Office 403
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu
Patent Value and Citations


    One of the core questions of economics, both at the micro and macro level, is what leads
to productivity gains. In order to understand what policies impact innovative activity and
ultimately productivity, it is crucial to start with a good metric to value innovation.1 The
importance of such a metric has long been recognized (Scherer (1967), Griliches (1981),
Aghion and Jaravel (2015)), yet few studies have the necessary data to provide external
validation of existing proxies for valuing innovation (Schankerman and Pakes (1986), Hall
and Harhoff (2012)).
    Over the last several decades, a number of pioneering efforts were made to overcome
the challenges inherent in measuring the value of innovation. Given that patent records
contain a wealth of information on each patented invention as well as citations to previous
patents, patent counts and citation-weighted patent counts have become popular proxies
for the value of innovation.2 The intuition is straightforward: ceteris paribus, fields with
greater innovative activity will have more value to protect and will do so by applying for
more patents.3 Weighting patent counts by forward citations4 is a natural augmentation to
simple patent counts, given the well-known fact that patents vary tremendously in value.5
    The use of this measure implicitly assumes that a larger number of citations corresponds
to higher value. Testing this assumption is challenging, given that there are few sources of
patent-level value. Of course, if there were, it would be unnecessary to proxy for it. Several
problems have held back this inquiry: the reluctance of companies to share proprietary patent
data, the lack of generality and sufficient observations from any single patent portfolio,
the fact that only a small portion of the patents that are exchanged have patent-specific
transaction values, and the fact that stock market measures of value reflect expectations
instead of realized value.
   We add to this literature by using novel licensing data from a set of non-practicing entities
(NPEs).6 By using a proprietary data set with licensing revenue for tens of thousands
of patents, we are able to rigorously examine the relationship between patent value and

   1
     Throughout the paper we generally use the term “value” to mean private value, but we do explore social
value as well in Appendix D and discuss it in Section 2.3.1. See Abrams and Sampat (2018) for detailed
discussion about the meaning of value in the innovation context.
   2
     Lerner and Seru (2017) document that academic researchers increased their use of patent citation data
as a proxy for innovation between 2005 and 2017.
   3
     Of course, there is substantial variation in patenting across fields that is unrelated to the value of the
underlying innovation as documented most famously by Levin et al. (1987).
   4
     Forward citations is the number of citations received by a particular patent by subsequent patents.
   5
     Fewer than 10 percent of patents are worth the money spent to secure them (Allison et al. (2009)), but
the most valuable ones are thought to be worth hundreds of millions of dollars (Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg
(2005)).
   6
     An NPE is a company that earns money by licensing, selling, or enforcing patents, but not primarily by
producing products.

                                                      1
                                                                              Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan




                       30    20
               Patent Citations
                       10
                       0




                                  0          50        100           150         200        250
                                                     Patent Revenue ($000s)

                                      Figure 1: Forward Citations and Patent Value
Note. Forward citations are defined as the number of citations a patent receives while
held by a non-practicing entity (NPE). Patent value is the sum of Consumer Price Index
(CPI) deflated annual revenues derived from the NPEs’ licensing agreements. The revenue
data are normalized to a mean annual revenue of $30,000 for confidentiality purposes.

citations. This data set has the major advantage that it allows us to compute patent-level
licensing revenue. But the generality of the findings is limited by the technological fields
represented by the portfolio and the particular selection process used to assemble it.7 While
the patents analyzed are held by NPEs, almost all were originally granted to individual
inventors or those employed by practicing firms.
    This new data suggest that the relationship between forward citations and patent value
is not only non-linear, it is not even monotonic. Figure 1 displays this relationship, com-
puted from tens of thousands of observations.8 There is still an overall positive correlation
between citations and value, similar to what has been found in prior work, but it comes
primarily from lower private value patents. The full citation-value pattern is more complex.
Regression results are consistent with the evidence in this figure. We perform a large number
of specification checks, use different functional forms, examine different subsets of the data,
include an array of controls, all of which support the basic inverted-U relationship.

   7
     We discuss details of the data set in Section 1. Confidentiality agreements limit our ability to disclose
actual revenue numbers or number of observations.
   8
     Further details on the normalization and other aspects of the production of this figure are discussed in
Section 3.

                                                            2
Patent Value and Citations


    To better understand the economic forces behind the result, we introduce a theoretical
model that predicts an inverted-U relation between citations and value due to competing
effects in the generation of citations. The model includes two types of innovative effort,
which we characterize as productive and strategic. Productive innovative effort leads to the
traditional increasing relationship between patent value and citations; strategic innovative
effort, however, leads to a negative relationship. Strategic innovation is aimed at protecting
high-value innovations. This can be achieved through aggressive action in a product market
or strategies such as fencing patents, which seek to expand the area of protection available
to previously granted patents. The intuition is that high value innovations create a greater
incentive to protect them, which deters downstream innovation and leads to a negative
relationship between citations and value above a threshold.9 A key prediction from the
model is that strategic innovative efforts generate the downslope. To test this prediction, we
examine the citation-value relationship using characteristics that proxy for strategic efforts.
First, we focus on parent patents, which are defined as patents that subsequently have follow-
on patent applications via continuation or division. Then, we examine patents in technology
classes with rapid growth as they are likely to generate greater expected profits. Using both
of these proxies for strategic patenting we find evidence that is consistent with the prediction
of the model.
    This paper makes two major contributions to the innovation literature. Using detailed
patent-level revenue data, we empirically demonstrate a non-monotonic relationship between
forward citations and value for a large number of patents. We develop a model to explain
this relationship whereby innovators engage in two types of effort, productive and strategic.
We then test additional predictions of the model and find support for it. The empirical and
theoretical insights may help future work on innovation by providing a more complex and
hopefully more accurate description of the innovative process. For example, our evidence
suggesting that innovators strategically defending against follow-on competitors helps to
explain the high value-low citation patents provide insights for those studying economic
growth, innovation, intellectual property policy, and patent valuation.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1 we provide substantial detail about
the extensive literature we build on, incentives to patent and cite, the business models of
NPEs and further description of the data. Section 2 introduces our model which we believe
captures some of the key elements of innovation and the patenting and citing processes. In
Section 3 we present the main empirical results and a discussion of them. Section 4 concludes

   9
    In Section 2.3.2, we discuss an additional model focused on strategic choices that may be more common
among NPEs. That model also predicts a non-monotonic relationship between forward citations and value
and may be found in Appendix E.

                                                   3
                                                                Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


and makes the point that the goal of this work is not to undermine the large body of work
on innovation that has relied on widely-held assumptions about the patent value-citations
relationship. Rather, we hope that this will help build a more robust literature that informs
some of the central economic issues of our time. Finally, Appendix A contains additional
data descriptions and Appendices C-F contain additional theoretical proofs and derivations.


1       Background and Data Description
1.1       Prior Literature
By examining the relationships between patent value and citations through the lens of theory
and data, we make several contributions to the existing literature. First, this paper illustrates
that the heterogeneous motives individuals and firms have for seeking patent protection can
render the traditional relationship between patent value and citations unrecognizable. While
research indicates that frictions among inventors (Jaravel, Petkova and Bell, 2018; Jaravel,
2018) and in the patent system (Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen, 2013; Williams,
2017) can have meaningful economic consequences, our study quantifies how meaningful
these frictions are for a large number of patents. In particular, we document a key tension:
socially productive investments in innovation that merit high private values are also the
ones that encourage their owners to misuse the patent system by investing in innovation and
applying for patent protection in a strategic manner. To formalize this tension, we provide
a model for how citations accrue to patents. Unlike prior citation models which suggest
citations are a function of obsolescence (Caballero and Jaffe, 1993), our model distinguishes
between productive and strategic investments in innovation. Thus, our model incorporates
real-world aspects of patenting such as sequential innovation (Green and Scotchmer, 1995;
O’Donoghue, Scotchmer and Thisse, 1998) and the precautions taken to avoid imitation
(Gallini, 1992; Lerner, 1995) while recognizing the intrinsic value from breakthrough (Kerr,
2010) and general purpose technologies (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995).
    Given that our findings support the notion that not all patents have a productive role in
technological progress, we contribute to research exploring distortions to effective cumulative
innovation (Williams, 2013; Galasso and Schankerman, 2015; Budish, Roin and Williams,
2015; Sampat and Williams, 2018) as well as theoretical work on strategic patenting (Farrell
and Shapiro, 2008; Noel and Schankerman, 2013) and empirical work (Hall and Ziedonis,
2001; Ziedonis, 2004; Hegde, Mowery and Graham, 2009; Galasso and Schankerman, 2010;
Cockburn and MacGarvie, 2011; Von Graevenitz, Wagner and Harhoff, 2013).10 Generating
 10
      See also Nicholas (2013) for a survey on this topic.

                                                        4
Patent Value and Citations


a strategic patent by assimilating and exploiting existing information from previous R&D
investments also relates to research on innovation and learning (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989;
Geroski, Reenen and Walters, 1997). Strategic patenting has also received a great deal of
attention in the legal literature, which we do not review here. Some have argued that we
have arrived at a point where the patent system is actually detrimental to innovation (Bessen
and Meurer, 2008; Boldrin and Levine, 2013). We capture these observations and intuitions
by modeling strategic patents as ones which do not lead to substantial further work in a
field and in fact may stifle it. Thus, there may be extremely valuable strategic patents that
receive very few citations, leading to a null or negative relationship between forward citations
and revenue.
    By providing a novel test of the efficacy of the relationship between patent value and
citations, we contribute to a large literature on the value of innovation. Our primary find-
ing is that the citation-value relationship has an inverted-U shape instead of the mono-
tonic relationship previously assumed. Trajtenberg (1990) is the first paper to examine the
citation-value relationship. His paper focuses on a relatively small number of patents in the
computed tomography (CT) field, with values imputed from a structural model of the CT
device market and finds an approximately linear relationship between citations and value.
Harhoff et al. (1999) use survey data to test the citation-value relationship and find a positive
but noisy correlation. Their evidence comes from categorical measures of patent value for
772 German patents with a single priority date and all of which renew to full term. Several
studies examine the patent value distribution using the patent renewal decision to infer value
(Pakes (1986), Schankerman and Pakes (1986), Bessen and Meurer (2008)). These papers
find a linear relationship, but the range of patent values they evaluate is on the low-end of
the distribution because of the renewal fee bound.
    Finally, some studies examines patents issued to public firms to estimate patent value
from the firm’s overall valuation. Given that public firms follow significantly different innova-
tion strategies than private firms (Bernstein, 2015), such findings are unlikely to generalize.
As discussed in Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001), the public firm approach originally showed
that patent counts do not add to firm value after R&D is included in a Tobin’s q regres-
sion, but a significant relation exists between citation-weighted patents and firm value. The
market premium associated with citations stems from the high valuation of the upper tail
of cited patents as opposed to a smoother increase in value as citation intensity increases.
More recently, Kogan et al. (2017) employ an event study framework to estimate the ex-
pected value of a granted patent. Their study documents a positive correlation between the
grant-day stock market reaction and citation-weighted patent counts, yet they also show
considerable differences in relation to subsequent realizations of firm growth.

                                               5
                                                                      Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


1.2     NPE Business Model
Since a major impediment to greater understanding of patent value has been the lack of
available data on patent revenues, it is worth discussing the data sources and characteristics
in some detail. The data in this paper was provided by a set of NPEs. The patents held by
NPEs primarily cover the technology sector.11 Our NPEs follow a portfolio business model,
meaning their revenue primarily derives not from producing products based on patented
technology, but from licensing the patents that they acquire (FTC, 2016).12 The incentives
associated with patents within the technology sector encourages licensing (Lerner and Tirole,
2002, 2005), and the number of patents held by NPEs continues to grow rapidly (Shapiro,
2012)).
    This is fortunate for those interested in learning about innovation as NPEs function as
an excellent data source in many ways, and when compared to traditional patent holding
firms, NPE-derived data sets have several advantages. Their portfolios can be substantially
larger than practicing firms, since their capital is almost exclusively employed in assembly
and licensing, rather than production. NPEs are more diversified than practicing firms as
well, since it is often easier to acquire the breadth of expertise necessary to acquire and
license patents in a large array of fields, rather than to practice them. The data available
from NPEs are also likely to be substantially more useful for researchers, as they compute
patent-specific revenues. This is something that few practicing firms do, unless licensing is
a major part of their business. This should come as little surprise, since ultimately most
firms care about overall profit from innovation, not specifically from which patent the profit
derives.
    Our NPEs often acquire patents hundreds at a time through portfolio purchases. As such,
the vast majority of patents represented in the data were not targeted for acquisition, but
“came along for the ride.” Given that these non-random patents are likely the most valuable
patents, when conducting our empirical tests we assess the extent to which the top 1% of top
5% of patents in terms of realized value alter the observed inverted-U relation. Moreover,
reviewing the data from our NPEs, we see no evidence that those patents they target tend to
be particularly different than other patents. Rather their strategy is to accumulate patents in
a broad range of technology areas that they believe may be important, so often the targeted
patents represented a technology area they wanted to expand into. To understand the extent
of selection in our data, we further compare characteristics of the data with the universe of
  11
    See Abrams et al. (2018) for an investigation into the broader impacts of NPEs.
  12
    Other NPEs follow a litigation business model in which infringement lawsuits are filed as a negotiating
tactic for a settlement. Several recent papers explore the implications of the litigation NPE model (Kesan
and Schwartz, 2014; Bessen and Meurer, 2014; Cohen, Gurun and Kominers, 2018; Feng and Jaravel, 2018).

                                                    6
Patent Value and Citations


patents in Section 3.5.
    One concern about the data source may be that our NPEs use patents differently than
practicing entities and as such the revenue data we use may not reflect the value of patents.
In particular, there may be concern that the NPEs behave opportunistically and hold up
individuals and firms that may be infringing by threatening litigation. We discuss and
model this possibility in more detail in Section 2.3.2 and Appendix E. Here it is important
to note that all revenue data we use is derived from licensing, not litigation. In addition,
the NPEs tend to license each patent to multiple customers. Thus, it is far more likely that
the licensing fees paid to the NPEs reflect real value for the licensees. Even if the value that
the NPEs receive may be higher than the value a practicing entity would receive, this may
not be because of holdup. An alternative view is that NPEs as intermediaries reduce search
frictions for knowledge and thus reduce the rate of private obsolescence of knowledge. In
this sense, they are monetizing value that was already there but not being realized because
of search frictions. Additional details about the revenue data may be found in Appendix A.


1.3     Data Description
By characterizing the existing literature on patent value and the business model of the
set of NPEs, the advantageous aspects of our data are clear. The detailed contracts for
many licensing agreements across multiple customers enables us to use the realized value for
individual patents in our empirical analyses. Such data help to accurately characterize the
full distribution of patent value rather than relying on truncated values as with inferences
from renewal decisions or relying on the implicit assumption that stock market investors
rationally price patents at issuance. Moreover, since we have data from a set of NPEs, our
sample size of tens of thousands of patents is much larger than most previous studies and
allows us to include patents issued to government entities, individual inventors, private, and
public firms.
    Before presenting summary statistics, it is important to note additional distinctive char-
acteristics of the data. At the request of the portfolio owners, we have agreed to not report
the exact number of observations beyond noting that there are tens of thousands of patents
in the data set. In the calculation of lifetime patent value (see Appendix A) we have also
normalized the data such that mean annual revenue is $30,000.13 Thus throughout the paper,
all dollar values are subject to this normalization. While absolute values are not accurate,
relative values are and this normalization does not impact our ability to examine the for-
  13
    While the dollar sign on the normalized values is superfluous, we keep it as a reminder to the reader
that the original variables were denominated in dollars.

                                                   7
                                                              Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


ward citation-value relationship or other correlates of value. Appendix A also discusses the
normalization procedure for comparing forward citations across patents of different ages.

    With these points in mind, we present summary statistics for the primary patent and
assignee characteristics in Table 1. We restrict the data to U.S. utility patents, and exclude
design and plant patents. We obtain annual licensing revenues from 2006–2015 for each
patent and calculate lifetime value from this data. Some of the patents expire during this
time period, and some are granted after 2008, but most are active for the full period. If a
patent is never active during this period, it is excluded.

          Table 1: Summary Statistics for NPE and Comparable USPTO Patents
                                       Panel 1: NPE Patents         Panel 2: PTO Patents
 Variables                             Mean Median      Sd          Mean Median      Sd
 Firm Size                              4.82    4.87   2.99          6.68    7.37   2.99
 Individual Inventor                    0.05      0    0.21          0.01      0    0.12
 Lifetime Forward Citations             32.7    11.2   65.0          21.2     7.6   43.5
 Backward Citations                     24.6     9.0   69.6          14.1      7    33.4
 Parent Patent                          0.22      0    0.42          0.14      0    0.34
 Claims                                 12.3      9    10.3          12.4     10     9.9
 Frac Bkwd Cites in Past 3 years        31.3    25.0   29.6          30.1     25    29.6
 Application Year                       2001    2001    5.1          2002    2002    4.5
 Revenue (Thousands of 2010 dollars)    236      48   2099           n/a     n/a    n/a
 Sale Indicator                           1       1      0          0.015      0    0.12

Note. Panel 1: Patent application data from 1987–2014 for all U.S. utility patents granted
in the NPE dataset (2014 application year only has two observations). Revenue data spans
2006–2015. Panel 2: Patent application data from 1987–2014 for all U.S. utility patents
granted and weighted by subcategory. The post-normalization by patent subcategories
was initially introduced in Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001). Individual inventor is one
if there is a single listed inventor and no assignee. Please see the appendix for additional
variable definitions.

   We define patent value as the sum of the normalized annual revenues realized by a patent
while it is held by an NPE. The mean patent value is $235,723 (all figures are 2010 dollars).
Note that the standard deviation of $2.09 million is almost 9 times the mean and more than
40 times the median value of $47,955.

    The high level of dispersion (and skewness) is consistent with prior studies of patent
value. Bessen (2008) uses the patents as options methodology and finds that U.S. patents
issued in 1991 have a mean value of $121,000 and a median of $11,000. A closer comparison
to the current study may be made by focusing on technology categories. Bessen finds a mean-
to-median value ratio of 5.7 for Electrical and Electronic patents and 2.1 for the Computers
and Communications category. The data set under study has a mean-to-median ratio of

                                              8
Patent Value and Citations


approximately 5, in between these two figures. Serrano (2010) determined the average private
value of a patent right to be $90,799 and the median $19,184, which exhibits a similar mean-
to-median ratio as our data.
    One variable of interest, lifetime forward citations, also has a skewed distribution with
a mean of 32.7, standard deviation of 65.0 and median of 11.2. The degree of skewness
in the distribution of forward citations, the very wide range of forward citations, and the
concentration of patents with 1 or fewer citations replicate familiar patterns such as those
reported in Trajtenberg (1990), Harhoff et al. (1999), and Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2005).
We also compare the raw median number of forward citations (not adjusted for patent age) in
our data with that of the entire universe restricted to the same PTO technology categories
and find them to be very similar: 8.75 for our data and 8.0 for the universe. Backward
citations are also skewed, with a mean of 24.6, median of 9.0 and standard deviation of 69.6.
About 30% of backward citations are for patents issued within the prior 3 years. We use
this measure as an indicator of how active or hot a field is.
    Most (67%) patents are original applications and the remainder are divisionals or con-
tinuations. Under U.S. law, inventors may file continuations or divisionals for their patent
applications to cover new improvements to their inventions or to cover different aspects of
their inventions (see Hegde, Mowery and Graham (2009) for more on the use of continuation
patents). The difference between a divisional and continuation patent is that divisional ap-
plications make a distinct, new independent claim not in the parent application. The median
application year is 2001, meaning the median patent had about 7 years of protection left by
the end of our revenue data. Noncorporate inventors account for 14% of the patents, which
is similar to that reported in Bessen (2008).
    Table 2 shows that value and forward citations vary substantially by technology class.14
The most valuable patents are found in the Information Storage category with a mean value
of $623,000 but with only an average of 6.6 citations. At the low end are Optics and Electrical
Devices which average 92 and 74 thousand respectively.


2      Theory of Patent Valuations and Citations
In this section, we offer a new model of innovation, patents, and citations. Our purpose
is to develop a better understanding of the underlying reasons for the observed inverted-U
relationship between citations and patent value. We embed intuitive assumptions into a
structural model, and show that the model fits the observed pattern well.
  14
    These classifications are subcategories from Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001) and have been adopted
by the USPTO

                                                   9
                                                                      Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan



       Table 2: Revenue and citation data for prominent subcategories of NPE patents
                                         Mean Revenue                    Citations while held
        Subcategory                 (Thousands of 2010 dollars)                by NPE
        Communications                         216                               6.08
        Hardware/Software                      282                               9.72
        Computer Peripherals                   278                               6.73
        Information Storage                    623                                6.64
        Information Processing                 236                               13.96
        Electrical Devices                      74                               3.12
        Power Systems                          227                                4.39
        Semiconductors                         152                                3.01
        Misc-Elec.                             117                                3.98
        Optics                                  92                                3.04

Note. Patent revenue and citation data for U.S. utility patents granted in NPE dataset
with at least 500 patents in the technology subcategory initially introduced in Hall, Jaffe
and Trajtenberg (2001).

   In our model, we rely on the Schumpeterian theory of creative destruction (see the survey
by Aghion, Akcigit and Howitt (2014) for more on this topic), where each new innovation
builds on previous technologies, but also makes them obsolete by introducing a better one.
This tension between the incumbent technology owner’s wish to defend its monopoly power
and the future innovator’s wish to utilize the spillovers generated by the current incumbent
helps us rationalize the non-monotonic relationship between patent value and subsequent
entry, identified by forward citations.15 Our model emphasizes the decision to innovate
productively or strategically.
    Our model features two distinct types of innovation efforts – productive and strategic.
The intuition for productive innovation follows the traditional economic view that patents
are offered as a contract between society and the inventor. In return for a limited period
of exclusivity, the inventor agrees to make his invention public rather than keeping it se-
cret. This institutional arrangement promotes the diffusion of ideas (spillover) and economic
growth. New big ideas generate a higher profit for the original inventor and also generate
more spillovers for subsequent innovations. Hence a positive relationship occurs between
patent value and subsequent entry (forward citations).
    However, this is likely not the full story. Therefore, we also introduce the notion of the
strategic innovation, a type of destructive creation. This idea seeks to capture the fact that
  15
    Relatedly, Farrell and Shapiro (2008) emphasize the ability of patent holders, even of weak or less
productive patents, to hold up firms through the threat of infringement. Arora, Ceccagnoli and Cohen (2008)
show conditions under which firm’s with equivalent R&D efforts patent differently; Bloom, Schankerman and
Van Reenen (2013) model negative and positive technology spillovers based on a firms position in technology
and product market spaces.

                                                    10
Patent Value and Citations


when firms and individuals are endowed with an exclusionary right, they may use it strategi-
cally to defend their existing market share in ways that do not serve the original intent of the
legislation that created the right in the first place. Hence a valuable strategic innovation is
one that prevents subsequent entry. This structure generates a negative relationship between
patent value and subsequent entry (forward citations).
    In order to highlight the distinct features and impacts of productive and strategic in-
novations, we introduce the model in two steps: In Section 2.1, we first introduce a model
with productive innovations only. In this version of the model, we abstract from incumbent
innovations and focus only on entrants’ innovations. This assumption is relaxed in the sub-
sequent model in Section 2.2 where we allow incumbent firms to create strategic innovations,
which protect their valuable productive patents and market share. For reasons that we ex-
plain formally below, our model predicts that the link between patent value and citations is
positive for productive innovation efforts and negative for strategic innovation efforts.


2.1    The Case of Productive Innovations
In this section, we introduce a continuous-time model with a representative household. The
household consumes a basket of goods, each of which is produced by a different incumbent
monopolist. The household’s intertemporal consumption/saving decision, which does not
impact the innovation dynamics in this economy, is provided in Appendix C for the interested
readers.16
    The economy features a large number of outside entrepreneurs who invest in productive
innovations. Through these productive innovations, outside entrepreneurs replace existing
incumbents and obtain some market share. The key feature of the productive innovation
model that relates to citations is how new innovations arrive. Specifically, we assume that
new innovations and innovative efforts arrive in clusters and that each new patent cites the
prior art within the same technology cluster. Intuitively, this corresponds to the fact that
certain markets become hot and attract top talent to invest their innovative efforts in that
market. This simple logic leads to clustering of innovations by technology sector over time.
Although this is an assumption of the model, it is one that has empirical support (Jaffe and
Lerner (2004)). In terms of the model, what follows from this logic is an endogenous-citation
dynamic.
   The positive link between citations and patent value comes from the fact that more novel
innovations will have larger mark-ups due to their originality, denoted by the step size of a
  16
   Household’s saving decision pins down the equilibrium interest rate in this model and provided for
completeness.

                                                 11
                                                                       Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


new innovation, which corresponds to larger patent values. At the same time, more novel
innovations generate larger spillovers for subsequent innovations, which will encourage new
investment in innovation by outside entrepreneurs. With more entrepreneurs entering the
market, a natural cluster of innovative effort over time by technology is created. Since a new
innovation must cite the previous related patents upon which it builds, more novel patents
receive more citations on average. Thus, the first simple model of productive innovation
effort leads to the traditional conclusion of a positive correlation between citations and
patent value. Given this intuition for the model of productive innovation, we now turn to
the details.

Basic Environment Consider the following continuous time economy that admits a rep-
resentative household. A unique final good, Yt , is produced using a continuum of varieties
indexed by j ∈ [0, 1] as follows:           Z         1
                                      Yt = exp            ln yjt dj.                            (1)
                                                  0

In this expression, yjt is the quantity of variety j at time t. We normalize the price of the
final good Yt to be 1 in every period without loss of generality. The final good is produced
in a perfectly competitive market.
    Each variety j is produced by a monopolist who owns the latest innovation (patent) in
sector j. The monopolist’s production function takes the following simple form

                                           yjt = qjt ljt                                        (2)

where ljt is the labor employed for production and qjt is the variety-specific labor productivity.
In what follows, new innovations improve labor productivity, which leads to aggregate growth
in the economy. The linear production function implies that the marginal cost (Mjt ) of
producing 1 unit of yjt is simply
                                                  wt
                                           Mjt =
                                                 qjt
where wt is the market wage rate which is taken as given by the firm. Note that all mo-
nopolists hire from the same labor market, hence every monopolist faces the same wage rate
wt .
    Labor productivity qjt is improved through subsequent innovations in each product line
j. Innovations belong to technology clusters. Let n index the order of an innovation in a
technology cluster such that the very first patent that starts a new technology class has
n = 0, the first follow-on innovation in the same technology cluster is indexed by n = 1,
the second follow-on innovation by n = 2, and so on. Each innovation by a new entrant

                                                 12
Patent Value and Citations


into j improves the previous incumbent’s technology by a factor of (1 + ηn ) which is only a
function of the order n of the patent in the technology class and remains constant as long
as the same firm is in charge of production. Consider a product line where productivity at
time t is qjt and a new innovation of step size ηn is received during (t, t + ∆t) . Then the
labor productivity evolves as:
                                    qjt+∆t = (1 + ηn ) qjt .                             (3)

When a new firm innovates and enters into j as the new market leader, the latest innovator
and the previous incumbent compete in prices à la Bertrand.

2.1.1   Static Equilibrium: Production, Pricing and Profits

It is useful to solve the static production and pricing decisions before we describe the in-
novation technology. Consider the final good production in (1) . Because the final good
technology has a Cobb-Douglas form with respect to all varieties, the household will spend
the same amount Yt on each variety j. Hence the demand for each variety j can be expressed
as
                                                 Yt
                                           yjt =                                         (4)
                                                 pjt
where pjt is the price charged by the monopolist j. Note that the Bertrand competition
between the new monopolist and the previous incumbent, together with the unit elastic
demand curve in (4) implies that the monopolist will follow limit pricing and charge a price
that is equal to the marginal cost of the previous incumbent. If the productivity of the
current monopolist in j is qjt and the size of her innovation was ηn , then the marginal cost of
the previous incumbent is simply (1 + ηn ) wt /qjt , which implies that the current monopolist’s
price is simply
                                             (1 + ηn ) wt
                                       pjt =              .
                                                  qjt
Therefore we can express the equilibrium profit of the monopolist j as

                                   πt (qjt ) = [pjt − Mjt ] yjt
                                            = πn Y t                                           (5)

                        ηn
where we define πn ≡ 1+η   n
                             as the normalized profit (= πt (qjt ) /Yt ). This is the first step in
establishing the value of an innovation. Because a new innovation grants patent protection
until another new innovation makes it obsolete through creative destruction, the value of
an innovation (patent) will be the expected sum of future monopoly profits that will be
generated by this innovation.

                                                13
                                                                                       Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


   The following lemma summarizes the rest of the static equilibrium variables Yt and wt .


Lemma 1 The aggregate output in this economy is equal to

                                                   Yt = Q t

where Qt is defined as a productivity index
                              Z   1                         −1         Z   1
                                                 −1                                     qjt
                       Qt ≡            (1 + ηj )        dj         exp           ln          dj.
                               0                                         0            1 + ηj

Moreover, the wage rate is equal to
                                                   Z    1
                                       wt = Qt              (1 + ηj )−1 dj.
                                                    0


Proof. See Appendix F.


2.1.2   R&D and Productive Innovations

The economy has a measure of outside entrepreneurs who try to innovate and replace the
existing incumbents endogenously. Outside entrepreneurs invest in R&D to produce a new
innovation stochastically. When they are successful, they improve upon the prior highest
quality as in (3) . Productive innovations come in clusters as in Akcigit and Kerr (2018). In
particular, new entrants invest in two types of innovations:


  1. radical innovations,

  2. follow-on innovations.


    When a new radical innovation occurs, it starts a new technology cluster with a step
size η0 = η > 0. Alternatively, when a new follow-on innovation occurs, it builds directly
on existing technology and the marginal contribution of the new innovation depends on its
rank in the sequence of follow-on innovations within the same technology cluster. Follow-
on innovations run into diminishing returns within the cluster such that the nth follow-up
innovation has a step size of ηn = ηαn where α ∈ (0, 1). For mathematical convenience, we
assume that after a certain number of follow-on innovations (n > n∗ ), the step size becomes
                            ∗
a constant value ηn = ηαn . In summary, the step size of the n + 1st patent in a given

                                                        14
Patent Value and Citations


technology cluster can be summarized as follows:17
                              
                              
                                       η if radical innovation
                        ηn =   ηα if follow-on innovation and n < n∗ .
                                      n
                                  ∗
                             
                               ηαn if follow-on innovation and n ≥ n∗
                             


Since innovations come in technology clusters and each new innovation utilizes the spillover
from the previous patents from the same technology class, our model generates a natural
interpretation for citations. When there is a major innovation in a technology class with
a step size η, it produces spillovers for the subsequent innovations since the follow-on step
size becomes ηα which encourages new entry into the field. Innovations must cite previous
innovations within the same technology cluster, acknowledging that the patents are tech-
nologically related. Therefore, new patents in a technology cluster will cite the previous
patents that established and developed the cluster. The following illustrates the structure.




Example 1 This example is provided to show the connection between our model and the
data. In particular, we describe how technology clusters emerge and who cites whom in those
clusters. The following chart provides an example of innovation patterns in a single product
line:

                |                      |             |               |
 Step size:         η   ηα ηα2 ηα3         η    ηα       η  ηα ηα2       η
                | |{z} |{z} |{z} |{z} | |{z} |{z} | |{z} |{z} |{z} | |{z} ...
  Patent:          N    N2 N3 N4           N5 N6         N7 N8 N9       N10
                | | 1      {z        } | |   {z    } | |    {z     } | | {z }
  Tech Class:              Tech Class 1               Tech Class 2           Tech Class 3       Tech Class 4
                          An example of a sequence of innovations in a product line


The example starts with a radical innovation N1 which has a step size η. Innovation N2
follows on N1 with a step size ηα. Since N3 is the second follow-on innovation in cluster 1,
it has a step size ηα2 and so on. N5 , N7 and N10 are radical innovations which start new
technology clusters; therefore their step sizes are η. As a result, innovation step sizes follow



  17
    Note that in principle, we can allow the step size ηj to be a function of the sector j. This would not
have any major impact on the inverted-U relationship that our model predicts.

                                                    15
                                                                    Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


cycles. The citing-cited pairs can be summarized as follows:

                         Cited    Citing                   Cited    Citing
                          N1 :   N2 , N3 , N4               N6 :    none
                          N2 :   N3 , N4                    N7 :    N8 , N9
                          N3 :   N4                         N8 :    N9
                          N4 :   none                       N9 :    none
                          N5 :   N6                        N10 :    ...

Consider N2 , for instance. Since it builds only on N1 , N2 cites only N1 . However, there are
two patents (N3 , N4 ) in the cluster that are building on N2 . Hence, N2 receives two citations
from them.



   Now we turn to the value of an innovation. Consider an innovation of step size ηn = ηαn .
Let the aggregate innovation arrival rate of the next follow-on innovation be denoted by z̄n+1
and the next radical innovation by z̄0 . Then the steady-state value of the nth innovation is
summarized by the following continuous time Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation
                                                "                                      #
                       ηn                               (z̄0 ∆t + z̄n+1 ∆t) × 0
             Vnt   =        Yt ∆t + (1 − r∆t)                                              .
                     1 + ηn                         + (1 − z̄0 ∆t − z̄n+1 ∆t) Vnt+∆t

This expression is intuitive. During a small ∆t, the nth innovation in a cluster delivers
              ηn
a profit of 1+η  n
                   Yt ∆t to its owner (see equation (5)). The future period is discounted by
(1 − r∆t). After ∆t, with probability z̄n+1 ∆t there is a new follow-on entry, and with
probability z̄0 ∆t there is a radical entry. In both cases, the incumbent exits the market
because she is replaced by a new entrant and her firm value decreases to 0. With the
remaining probability (1 − z̄0 ∆t − z̄n+1 ∆t) , the incumbent survives the threat of entry and
receives the continuation value Vnt+∆t of being the incumbent. Subtracting (Vnt+∆t − r∆tVnt )
from both sides, dividing through ∆t, and taking the limit ∆t → 0 leads to the following
HJB equation:
                                rVnt − V̇nt = πn Yt − (z̄n+1 + z̄0 ) Vnt .                  (6)
              ηn
where πn ≡   1+ηn
                  .
    In what follows, we will focus on a balanced growth path equilibrium where all aggregate
variables and value functions (i.e., Yt , wt , and Vnt ) grow at the constant rate g. Then the
following lemma provides the exact form of the value function.

                                                16
Patent Value and Citations


Lemma 2 The normalized value of the nth follow-on innovation at time t is equal to

                                          Vnt         πn
                                   vn ≡       =                                                (7)
                                          Yt    ρ + z̄n+1 + z̄0
              ηn
where πn ≡   1+ηn
                  .

    Proof. This result follows from substituting the household’s Euler equation r − g = ρ
into (6). The Euler equation itself is derived in Appendix C equation (13).

    This expression simply says that the value of an innovation depends mainly on four
factors: First, a larger step size ηn implies larger mark-up and therefore higher value of
innovation. Second, larger aggregate output Yt (which can also be interpreted as the size of
the aggregate economy), will lead each variety to receive a larger demand and hence generate
higher per-period profit and innovation value. Third, a higher discount rate (in this case, the
growth rate adjusted interest rate through the household problem in equation 13, ρ = r − g
) decreases present discounted value. Finally, the rate of creative destruction of the next
follow-on innovation z̄n+1 or radical innovation z̄0 lowers the value of the current innovation
due to a decreased expected duration of monopoly power.
    So far, we have determined the value of each innovation vn , as a function of the next
innovation’s arrival rate (z̄n+1 + z̄0 ) . In order to pin down the arrival rate of follow-on inno-
vations and radical innovations, we now turn to the entry problem of outside entrepreneurs.
Let zn denote the innovation rate of an individual entrepreneur and z̄n denote the aggregate
innovation rate of all outside entrepreneurs who are trying to innovate in the same product
line j. We assume that there are congestion externalities such that the individual cost of
innovation K (zn ) is increasing in the aggregate innovation rate such that

                                  K (zn ) = zn ζQt z̄n for n ≥ 0

in terms of the final good and ζ > 0 is some constant. Then the free-entry condition for a
new entrant can be summarized as

                                    max {zn vn Yt − zn ζQt z̄n } .                             (8)
                                     zn


The free-entry condition, together with Lemma 1, pins down the aggregate entry rate as

                                                      vn
                                             z̄n =       .                                     (9)
                                                      ζ

As expected, the entry rate is increasing in the value of a new innovation and decreasing in

                                                 17
                                                                         Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


the cost parameter ζ.
   Now, combining this last expression (9) with (7) gives us the recursive solution of patent
value
                                              πn
                                 vn =                     .
                                      ρ + (v0 + vn+1 ) /ζ
Finally, the limit value of patents with n > n∗ is
                                     s                                     
                                                    2                  
                                    ζ          v0         4            v0 
                             v̄ =          ρ+             + πn ∗   − ρ+       .
                                    2           ζ          ζ            ζ

    This model generates a positive relationship between patent value and average forward
citations (subsequent entry). The following assumption is a sufficient condition to prove this
result formally.

Assumption 1 The model’s parameters satisfy the following inequality,

                                                ζρ2    α
                                                    ≥     .
                                                 η    1−α

   This is a fairly weak assumption that asks for a sufficient level of decreasing returns in
innovation, i.e., sufficiently small α. Again, this assumption is only a sufficient condition to
prove Proposition 1.18 Here are the main results emerging from this model:

Proposition 1 Under Assumption 1, vn decreases in n, and therefore the average number
of forward citations received by an ηn patent during any time interval [t1 , t2 ] decreases in n.

      Proof. See Appendix F.

   Assumption 1 ensures that the patent values are decreasing in n which implies that being
an early inventor in a technology cluster (smaller n) is more profitable. Hence, entrants invest
more aggressively (higher z̄n ) in younger clusters which in turn generate a higher entry rate.
The following theorem follows trivially from Proposition 1.

Theorem 1 In the case of productive patents, patent value and forward citations are posi-
tively correlated.

    The intuition behind this result is straightforward: when a path-breaking innovation
occurs, it creates a new technology cluster which generates spillovers for subsequent innova-
tions. These spillovers generate a large number of entrants which all then cite the prior art
 18
      We verified numerically that Proposition 1 holds for much broader set of parameters.

                                                      18
Patent Value and Citations


in the cluster. Since the path-breaking major innovation also has the largest mark-up (and
value, accordingly), the positive correlation follows.
    Figure 2 illustrates this positive correlation. We simulate the above model for 50,000
patents for 100 years, plotting patent value on the x-axis and forward citations on the y-
axis.


                        Figure 2: Forward Citations and Patent Value
                                                                  Forward Citations vs. Patent Value
                                                   18



                                                   16
                      Lifetime Forward Citations




                                                   14



                                                   12



                                                   10



                                                    8



                                                    6



                                                    4



                                                    2
                                                        0   0.1   0.2     0.3       0.4        0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8
                                                                                Patent Value



Note: Parameters used in this figure: ζ = 1, ρ = 0.02, η = 1, α = 0.9, γ = 0.05, n∗ = 100. Each
circle represents the average number of citations of the patents within the corresponding
patent value percentile.



2.2    The Case of Strategic Innovations
In the previous model, incumbents were passive in terms of protecting their monopoly posi-
tion. In this section, we relax this assumption and introduce the possibility of incumbents
producing strategic innovations in order to secure their position. The idea is that if an in-
cumbent has a high value productive innovation, then she can potentially invest in a strategic
innovation in order to make it harder for the next outside entrepreneur to leapfrog and steal
the high monopoly rents. A strategic patent is one that decreases the likelihood that a prior
productive patent will be improved upon, thereby increasing the value of the prior innova-
tion and decreasing the expected number of citations it receives due to lack of entry. Hence,
we should expect a negative relationship between patent value and citations when we add
strategic patents, as illustrated in Figure 3.
    Formally, upon each productive innovation, an incumbent has the opportunity to produce

                                                                                  19
                                                                Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


a single strategic (defensive) innovation. The technology for strategic innovation is such that
by paying a fixed cost ψ > 0, a new entrant who just invented a productive patent can also
obtain a strategic patent. To simplify the analysis, assume that ψ is high enough that it is
profitable to invest in strategic innovations only for radical inventions (i.e., inventions with
step size η). When a firm engages in strategic innovation, it raises the cost of innovation for
the subsequent innovator by a multiplier m > 1 which is an iid random variable (realized
upon innovation) from a distribution F(m) such that the cost to the next outsider is
                                 (
                                      mz0m ζQt z̄0m for radical inventors
                    K (znm ) =                                             .
                                     mz1m ζQt z̄1m for follow-on inventors

Note that we index the entry rate of a radical inventor z0 and a follow-on inventor z1 by m
since their cost is a function of the height of the fence m of the current incumbent.
                                                                d
    Let us denote the value of an m−type strategic patent by vm    . Since a strategic patent is
produced only by radical inventors, the profit collected in every instant is π0 . Therefore the
                                               d                         d
HJB equation (after drawing m) is simply ρvm      = π0 − (z̄0m + z̄1m ) vm . This value function
is expressed as
                                     d           π0
                                   vm  =                 .                                  (10)
                                         ρ + z̄0m + z̄1m
Now consider the free-entry condition of an outsider who tries to enter after a strategic
patent of size m. For n ∈ {0, 1} the entry problem is simply

                                  max {znm vn − mznm ζ z̄nm }
                                     znm

                 d
where v0 ≡ Em vm   − ψ is the value of becoming a new incumbent through radical innovation.
Note that this is an expected value over all possible values of m since the radical entrant will
pay the fixed cost ψ and produce an additional innovation upon entry. Similarly, v1 denotes
the value to an incumbent that enters into the technology cluster with the first follow-on
innovation. For n ≥ 2, follow-on entry follows the same process as in (8) therefore we do not
repeat it here.
   As a result of the free-entry condition we get

                                                     vn
                                           z̄nm =       .                                  (11)
                                                     ζm

An important result here is that as the cost of innovation increases with m, the entry rate
(and the potential forward citation rate) decreases.
   Next, combining this entry rate with (10) we get the value of a strategic patent of type

                                                20
Patent Value and Citations


m:
                                        d        π0
                                       vm =          +v1 .                                (12)
                                              ρ + v0ζm
Now we have the new results.

Proposition 2 The value from strategic patents increases and the subsequent entry rate
(forward citations) decreases in m.

   Proof. The first part of this proposition follows directly from equation (12) and the
second part follows from equation (11).

     Now we can state the main result of this subsection.

Theorem 2 When strategic patents are allowed, patent value and forward citations are neg-
atively correlated.

   The underlying reason for this negative relationship stems from the fact that the most
successful strategic patents are the ones that increase the cost of entry the most (high m),
which will reduce forward citations due to lower entry. The lower entry rate also allows the
current incumbent to enjoy monopoly power longer, raising the value of being the incumbent.
Hence we get a negative relationship between patent value and citations, as illustrated in
Figure 3. The combination of radical, productive innovation and strategic innovation is very
valuable, but because the strategic innovation alters the entry rate of new entrepreneurs
through the endogenous citation dynamic, forward citations are dramatically reduced. Put
another way, since forward citations enumerate all previous innovations since the most recent
radical innovation, the reduction in citations is not due to less valuable technology, but to a
higher cost of entry for new entrepreneurs.
   Figure 4 illustrates the overall relationship between patent value and citations. The
pattern is a very clear inverted-U, and echoes what we observe empirically in the data.
    Our model suggests that incumbents with high-value patents will rely on strategic patent-
ing to protect their existing market shares. Therefore we should expect the patents on the
decreasing side of the inverted-U to come with greater frequency from large corporations
with big market shares and those in emerging industries with higher profits. Moreover, the
model implies that the strategic patenting is done to protect existing patents of the firm,
so that we should also expect to see more divisional and continuation patents (as opposed
to first-time patents) on the downward sloping side of the inverted-U curve. Section 3 tests
these predictions.

                                              21
                                                                                                                      Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan



                         Figure 3: Forward Citations and Patent Value
                                                                               Forward Citations vs. Patent Value
                                                    18




                                                    16




                       Lifetime Forward Citations
                                                    14




                                                    12




                                                    10




                                                     8




                                                     6




                                                     4
                                                     0.6           0.8            1       1.2       1.4      1.6          1.8         2
                                                                                         Patent Value



Note. Parameters used in this figure: ζ = 1, ρ = 0.02, η = 1, γ = 0.05, m ∼ U [1, 4]. Each circle
represents the average number of citations of the patents within the corresponding patent
value percentile.




                         Figure 4: Forward Citations and Patent Value
                                                                               Forward Citations vs. Patent Value
                                                    18



                                                    16
                       Lifetime Forward Citations




                                                    14



                                                    12



                                                    10



                                                     8



                                                     6



                                                     4



                                                     2
                                                         0   0.2         0.4      0.6   0.8     1     1.2   1.4     1.6         1.8   2
                                                                                         Patent Value



Note. Parameters used in this figure: ζ = 1, ρ = 0.02, η = 1, γ = 0.05, m ∼ U [1, 4]. Each circle
represents the average number of citations of the patents within the corresponding patent
value percentile.



                                                                                              22
Patent Value and Citations


2.3     Extensions
2.3.1   Social Value and Citations

To this point we have concentrated on the relationship between private patent value and
forward citations, which we test empirically in Section 3. The literature has also largely
focused on private patent value, but for policy decisions, it is valuable to consider the social
value of patents as well. We extend the model to consider social value in Appendix D and
show that there is a positive, monotonic relationship between social value and forward cita-
tions, a fact that is borne out by the most prominent empirical study that has examined this
relationship (Trajtenberg (1990)). The intuition of this result is as follows. Forward citations
are indications of subsequent inventive activity. While this could be bad news for an incum-
bent firm (due to shorter expected monopoly duration), such subsequent inventive efforts are
socially valuable because they mean a faster pace of technological progress, no matter who
produces the innovations. Therefore a larger number of citations is associated with higher
social value. An important implication that emerges from this analysis is that the inverted-U
is an indication of strategic use of the patent system, one that causes technological progress
to diverge from its socially optimal level. Firms generate additional profit by using patents
for strategic purposes, but this slows down subsequent technological progress - as indicated
by the negative relationship between private value and citations. It thus may be desirable
to direct policies toward sectors where this negative relationship (strategic behavior) is more
pronounced.


2.3.2   NPEs and Opportunistic Use of Patents

Patents may be used strategically in ways other than to protect valuable innovations, as the
model in Section 2.2 has explored. For example, some NPEs are accused of using the threat
of patent infringement suits even where a finding of infringement is unlikely in an attempt to
extract rents – we call this opportunistic use of patents. Although this scenario in unlikely to
be of substantial impact in our data set, as we mentioned in Section 2, for completeness we
extend our model to consider the opportunistic use of patents (Appendix E ) for interested
readers.
    We show that the opportunistic use of patents by NPEs will also generate a negative
relationship between private value and citations which buttresses our main hypothesis: when
patents are used for productive purposes, the relationship between private value and forward
citations is positive, whereas when patents are produced (Section 2.2) or used (Appendix E)
for strategic purposes, the relationship between private value and citations become negative,

                                              23
                                                               Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


delivering an overall inverted-U relationship.
    The intuition for this result is as follows. When an opportunistic patent appears in a field
that is used to sue some existing firms, the fear of future litigation discourages subsequent
entry which then lowers the forward citations given to the opportunistic patent. The stronger
the opportunistic patent’s power to extract revenues, the lower the incentives for subsequent
entry. In other words, the higher the monetary value of the opportunistic patent, the fewer
citations.
    While opportunistic patenting could lead to the same inverted-U prediction, strategic
(defensive) patenting of Section 2.2 is the much more likely explanation in this data set.
Almost all of the patents are originally granted to practicing companies or individuals and
later sold to one fo the NPEs. In Section 3 we provide strong evidence that the use of
continuation and divisional applications, which are associated with strategic patenting (as
recently documented by Hegde, Mowery and Graham (2009)), are used more prominently
exactly for the most valuable patents. This would be predicted by the strategic patenting
story, but not the opportunistic one.
    The revenue in this data set is also generated from licensing deals, not litigation. The
licensing deals are non-exclusive and each patent is typically licensed to a large number of
counterparties. The licenses also generally cover a portfolio of patents and not simply an
individual patent. All of these facts suggest that the opportunistic hold-up of patentees is
unlikely to explain the inverted-U in the data.


3     Empirical Analysis
We have seen how productive and strategic patents can combine to produce an inverted-U
relationship between citations and patent value. We now expound upon and then expand
upon the empirical results first presented in the introduction to assess the predictions of the
model.


3.1    Inverted-U Results
Figure 1 displays the empirical relationship between forward citations and patent value for
the data set described in Section 1. The figure plots the mean number of citations for each
of 200 quantiles of patent value, with the top 5% trimmed. The figure shows an increasing
relationship between patent value and citations for lower value patents and then a decreasing
relationship for higher value patents: the inverted-U that our model predicts.
    In Table 3 we report results of regressions of citations on a linear or quadratic function

                                                 24
Patent Value and Citations


of patent value. Each column is a separate regression, with no controls, but with robust
standard errors. The two pairs of columns in the table vary the share of the overall data
set that is included, excluding the top 5% and 1% in the first and second pair of columns,
respectively. Such exclusions help to ensure that extremely high value patents do not drive
our statistical inferences. The coefficients show that there is indeed an overall positive
relationship between forward citations and patent value. The even columns show that adding
a quadratic term improves the fit, and the impression of an inverted parabola from Figure 1
is borne out by the statistically significant negative coefficients on the quadratic terms.

                        Table 3: Forward Citations and Patent Value

                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
    Share of Most Valuable Patents Excluded           5%         5%         1%         1%

    Revenue ($100,000s)                             7.002** 17.04**      1.788**    4.804**
                                                    (0.275) (0.630)      (0.201)     (0.309)
    Revenue Squared                                        -5.592**                 -0.149**
                                                            (0.293)                 (0.0107)
    R-squared                                      0.04       0.06         0.04       0.06
                             Robust standard error in parentheses
                                    ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

Note. Separate regressions are reported in each column with robust standard errors
in parentheses. The dependent variable is forward citations while under control of one
of the NPEs. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010
dollars).

    Figure 1 and Table 3 omit potentially relevant covariates, and one may be concerned
that variation of both patent value and forward citations by these covariates drives the
observed relationship. In Figure 5 the residual from a regression of forward citations on a set
of indicator variables for technology category, application year, and NPE-acquisition year is
presented. The same inverted-U relationship in Figure 5 is apparent that was previously seen
in Figure 1. This suggests that there is still evidence for productive and strategic patenting,
even within technology categories and years. Next, we include even more controls in our
regression specifications.

    Table 4 reports the results of regressions of forward citations on a quadratic of patent
value and the following covariates: dummies for individual inventor, whether the patent was a
parent patent, fraction of backward citations within the last three years, self-citations, claims,
originality, and generality (Harhoff, Scherer and Vopel, 2003; Lanjouw and Schankerman,
2004; Moser, Ohmstedt and Rhode, 2018). The regressions also include NPE-acquisition

                                               25
                                                                                            Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan




                            25         20
             Citations while NPE-Owned
             5         10   0  15




                                                    0        50           100         150        200      250
                                                                  Patent Revenue ($000s)



                                            Figure 5: Forward Citation Residuals and Patent Value
Note. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 ($2010). Resid-
uals are from a regression on a set of indicator variables for technology category, ap-
plication year, and NPE-acquisition year.

year, application year, and subcategory fixed effects. The point estimate on the coefficients
for the linear and quadratic value terms vary somewhat by which covariates are included,
but in general consistently indicate an inverted-U shaped relationship between citations and
value. Taken together, our empirical tests suggest a robust, inverted-U relation between
patent value and citations.

    While we document what appears to be an inverted-U relationship both graphically and
through regressions with a quadratic functional form, we want to rule out the possibility that
the significance of the square term is coming from observations outside of the downward
sloping or strategic portion of the curve. To that end, we examine the relation between
citations and value on the strategic portion of the curve (i.e., 75th to 95th percentile of
the value distribution given that we exclude the top 5% of observations). As reported in
Table 5, there is a significantly negative relationship between revenue and citations on the
strategic portion of the curve. The more revenue the patent receives, the fewer citations it
will receive. We also introduce an indicator variable for a patent being in this strategic range
of the value distribution and test the model by interacting our indicator with patent value.
As reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, the interaction term is significant and negative,

                                                                        26
Patent Value and Citations



                        Table 4: Forward Citations and Patent Value

                                                       (1)     (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
 Share of Most Valuable Patents Excluded               5%      5%         5%         5%         5%

 Revenue ($100,000s)                               13.40**    13.28**    11.11**   9.491**     6.856**
                                                   (0.972)    (0.969)    (0.975)    (1.028)    (1.000)
 Revenue Squared                                  -4.398**   -4.366**   -4.095**   -3.404**   -2.428**
                                                   (0.400)    (0.399)    (0.397)    (0.423)    (0.414)
 Individual Inventor                               3.111**    2.962**    3.297**   2.803**     2.199**
                                                   (0.584)    (0.586)    (0.589)    (0.584)    (0.559)
 Parent Patent                                                3.597**    3.754**    3.590**    2.994**
                                                              (0.577)    (0.594)    (0.582)    (0.568)
 Fraction of Backward Citations in Last 3 Years                          1.036**   1.040**     1.165**
                                                                         (0.366)    (0.368)    (0.364)
 Self-Citations                                                          1.350**    1.337**    1.224**
                                                                        (0.0566)   (0.0575)   (0.0601)
 Claims                                                                  0.117**   0.0937**   0.0632**
                                                                        (0.0157)   (0.0159)   (0.0154)
 Originality                                                                                    0.771*
                                                                                               (0.328)
 Generality                                                                                    12.33**
                                                                                               (0.372)
 NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effect                Yes        Yes      Yes   Yes                   Yes
 Application Year Fixed Effect                    Yes        Yes      Yes   Yes                   Yes
 Subcategory Fixed Effects                         No        No       No    Yes                   Yes
 R-squared                                       0.089      0.093    0.147 0.164                 0.205
                               Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                       ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Separate regressions reported in each column, with robust standard errors in paren-
theses. The dependent variable is forward citations while under control of one of the
NPEs. The independent variable is revenue of each patent. The data are normalized so
that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).

confirming that the non-linearity is larger. These findings hold when both controlling for a
host of covariates and when we do not.


3.2    Robustness of Inverted-U
Establishing reliable empirical evidence of an inverted-U shape between patent value and
citations requires careful calculation of the inputs. In our baseline specification presented in
this paper, we do not do any truncation procedure because of its potential to add noise and
the similarity between revenue and citation profiles in our data (see Figure 10). However,
we want to try other methods to assure this is not a spurious correlation.
   In the Appendix, we consider multiple permutations of the data and the regression spec-

                                                  27
                                                                          Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan



            Table 5: Forward Citations and Patent Value Along Strategic Range

                                                       (1)               (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                Strategic Range   Strategic Range   Main Sample   Main Sample
 Range of Valuable Patents Included                75th–95th         75th–95th        0–95th        0–95th
 Revenue ($100,000s)                                -2.141**          -2.863**        8.198**       2.030**
                                                     (0.648)           (0.793)        (0.427)       (0.763)
 Strategic Range                                                                      14.20**       9.583**
                                                                                      (1.009)       (1.074)
 Revenue x Strategic Range                                                           -10.34**      -5.464**
                                                                                      (0.776)       (1.020)
 Individual Inventor                                                   4.840**                      2.730**
                                                                       (1.248)                      (0.583)
 Parent Patent                                                          4.420*                      3.551**
                                                                       (1.762)                      (0.580)
 Fraction of Backward Citations in Last 3 Years                         2.039                       1.021**
                                                                       (1.244)                      (0.367)
 Self-Citations                                                        1.361**                      1.340**
                                                                      (0.0638)                     (0.0576)
 Claims                                                                0.118**                     0.0937**
                                                                      (0.0444)                     (0.0160)
 NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effect                      No               Yes            No            Yes
 Application Year Fixed Effect                          No               Yes            No            Yes
 Subcategory Fixed Effects                              No               Yes            No            Yes
 R-squared                                             0.00              0.19          0.06           0.17
                                      Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                               ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Separate regressions are reported in each column with robust standard errors
in parentheses. The dependent variable is forward citations while under control of one
of the NPEs. “Strategic range” is defined as the 75th–95th percentile of the revenue
distribution while the patent is held by one of the NPEs. The interaction regression
includes 0–95th percentile of the revenue distribution. The data are normalized so that
the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).

ification. To address the issue that forward citations are non-negative, we consider a log
transformation and a Poisson functional form. Appendix Figure 12 shows that in a log-log
setup we would see the same inverted-U relationship. Appendix Table 8 reports regression
evidence when using the log transformation for forward citations. We find a significant nega-
tive coefficient for the quadratic term for revenue, and evidence that suggests the patents in
the strategic range of the patent value distribution are driving the inverted-U shape. Using
a Poisson regression of citations on revenue, we also see similar results and we report those
findings in Appendix Table 9.

    We address remaining concerns about the robustness of our findings through additional
checks on our measures for revenue and citations. Given the well-established skewness in
the patent data, we verify that the inverted-U is not just the result of greater noise in the
tail of the data. Appendix Table 10 shows significant negative coefficients on the quadratic

                                                      28
Patent Value and Citations


term for revenue when we exclude a different portion of the valuable patents (only the top
1%). Second, given that citation counts are inherently truncated, we follow the method
proposed by Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2005) to minimize measurement error. Specifically,
we estimate the shape of the citation-lag distribution in each major technology subcategory
using all U.S. utility patents with an application year between 1987 and 2014, which covers
the scope of our data set, and use these coefficient estimates to generate lifetime citations.
Our baseline specification for patent value as discussed earlier is a simple aggregation of
revenue across licensing agreements while the patent is held by one of the set of NPEs. For
our lifetime adjustments we try both a uniform revenue adjustment (i.e. multiply patents
by the inverse of the proportion of years held by NPE), and a non-parametric model that
estimates lifetime revenue in similar fashion to Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2005) for cita-
tions. Appendix Figures 13 and 14 reveal the same inverted-U relationship for both revenue
adjustment procedures plotted against the lifetime citation measure. We evaluate these life-
time adjustments in Appendix Table 11 and report coefficient estimates that are statistically
significant and consistent with the inverted-U hypothesis. Overall, across a range of data
permutations, the inverted-U shape remains meaningful.


3.3    Strategic Patenting Results
In this section, we look at both the strategic and technological components of the relevant
patents. Figure 6 reports the forward citation-patent value relationship as it relates to the
prevalence of parent patents in the right tail of the revenue distribution. Parent patents
are defined as patents that subsequently have follow-on patent applications via continuation
or division. Using a lot of continuation or divisional applications is likely an indicator of
sophisticated and strategic behavior by the applicant. For example, when a foundational
technology is being applied to specific commercial applications, the priority application will
become subdivided and amended. It is worth noting that this action is taken by the applicant
developing the technology and not the NPEs, which suggests it is not subject to measurement
error associated with NPEs opportunism. As is shown in Figure 6, the parent patents are
more prevalent in the high value/low citation region of the graph. This evidence supports
the prediction from the model that strategic innovative efforts generate the downslope.


    We provide additional empirical support for strategic patenting driving the inverted-U
shape between patent value and citations in Table 6. Using parent patents as our proxy
for strategic patents, we find the interaction between the quadratic term for patent value
and the strategic proxy is negative and statistically significant. This finding holds across

                                             29
                                                                                  Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


                                                 Forward Citations vs. Patent Value




                              40
                 Citations while NPE-Owned
                    10        20
                              0       30




                                             0   50        100           150       200       250
                                                         Patent Revenue ($000s)

                                                             Least      Less
                                                             More       Most

       Figure 6: Forward Citations and Patent Value by Share of Parent Patents
Note. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).
Parents are taken to be patents that have children within patents gathered by one of the
set of NPEs.

a variety of specifications and suggests that the inverted-U shaped relationship between
citations and value is more pronounced for strategic patents. Another patent characteristic
that may influence the likelihood of strategic patenting is the rate of innovative growth in
the field. Consistent with this intuition, areas of rapid innovation are likely to generate
greater expected profits, and thus greater incentives for the patent applicant to engage in
strategic patenting to protect its valuable, productive patents. Our measure for the growth
of innovation is the share of backward citations within the prior three years. Given that
this measure is based on the environment at the time of the application, it is also free from
measurement error associated with NPE opportunism. Using this second, alternative proxy
for strategic patenting, we find additional evidence to support the conjecture that inverted-U
relationship stems from strategic patenting. We report these results in Appendix Table 12.




3.4    Inverted-U Across Technologies

We have noted above that the inverted-U relationship is not driven by differences across tech-
nology categories. We now investigate whether the relationship holds across technologies.
In Table 7, we report results from six regressions of forward citations on patent value and
patent value squared, one for each technology class. We find that the same overall relation-

                                                               30
Patent Value and Citations



           Table 6: Forward Citations and Patent Value with Strategic Proxy
                                                        (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)
 Share of Most Valuable Patents Excluded                5%       5%          5%         5%
 Parent Patent                                         1.185    1.204      1.005      0.897
                                                     (1.286)  (1.286)     (1.327)    (1.308)
 Revenue                                             12.59** 12.47**      11.85**   9.907**
                                                     (0.860)  (0.859)     (0.873)    (0.914)
 Parent x Revenue                                     7.830*   7.506*      7.454*     7.336*
                                                     (3.587)  (3.592)     (3.670)    (3.638)
 Revenue Squared                                    -4.019** -3.975**    -3.732**   -2.884**
                                                     (0.365)  (0.365)     (0.373)    (0.390)
 Parent x Revenue Squared                           -3.824** -3.631*      -3.575*    -3.549*
                                                     (1.475)  (1.479)     (1.510)    (1.495)
 Individual Inventor                                          2.918**     2.670**    2.192**
                                                              (0.588)     (0.589)    (0.584)
 Fraction of Backward Citations in Last 3 Years                            0.272      0.339
                                                                          (0.376)    (0.377)
 Claims                                                                   0.119**   0.0925**
                                                                         (0.0158)   (0.0160)
 NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effect                 Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
 Application Year Fixed Effect                      No        Yes           Yes        Yes
 Subcategory Fixed Effects                          No        No             No        Yes
 R-squared                                        0.093      0.094         0.098      0.117
                          Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                   ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Separate regressions are reported in each column with robust standard errors
in parentheses. The dependent variable is forward citations while under control of one
of the set of NPEs. The independent variable is the revenue of each patent while held
by the NPE. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010
dollars).
ship in each category: the now-familiar inverted-U. The coefficients vary across technologies,
which may result from differences in the use of strategic patenting as well as overall citation
practices and patent values. Figures 7 and 8 show that the inverted-U relationship holds for
software and computer architecture patents. While the pattern is noisier for each technology
category individually, due to smaller number of observations, it is unmistakable both in the
figures and the regression results.


3.5    Discussion
We have now verified several predictions of the model and seen that the inverted-U rela-
tionship between citations and value appears to be robust to various specifications. While
the data under study here have a number of features that make it ideally suited for learning

                                              31
                                                                                                                             Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan



                                       Table 7: Forward Citations and Patent Value by Major Subcategory

                                       (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)                                                                 (5)         (6)
 Technology Subcategory              Comm. Hardware Peripherals Info Storage                                                               Semiconductors   Other
 Revenue                             11.33**   15.81**       5.731        19.26**                                                              7.282**    12.49**
                                     (1.426)    (2.393)     (3.146)        (3.814)                                                             (1.404)     (2.534)
 Revenue Squared                    -4.114** -3.161**        -2.682      -7.881**                                                             -2.741**    -3.640**
                                     (0.654)    (1.177)     (1.497)        (1.573)                                                             (0.580)     (1.162)
 Application Year Fixed Effects        Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes                                                                 Yes         Yes
 NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effects    Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes                                                                 Yes         Yes
 R-squared                            0.100      0.148        0.107         0.129                                                               0.082       0.071
                                     Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                             ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Separate regressions reported in each column, with robust standard errors in paren-
theses. The dependent variable is forward citations while under control of one of the set
of NPEs. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dol-
lars). The patent subcategories reflect those initially introduced in Hall, Jaffe and
Trajtenberg (2001).
                   60




                                                                                                        60
                              50




                                                                                                                   50
    Citations while NPE-Owned




                                                                                         Citations while NPE-Owned
                        40




                                                                                                            40
                 30




                                                                                                     30
        20




                                                                                             20
                   10




                                                                                                        10
                   0




                                                                                                        0




                                   0     50     100           150      200   250                                        0   50     100           150      200   250
                                              Patent Revenue ($000s)                                                             Patent Revenue ($000s)

  Figure 7: Forward Citations and Patent                                                Figure 8: Forward Citations and Patent
           Value, Communication                                                          Value, Hardware & Software Patents

Note. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).


about this relationship, like all data sets, it has limitations. One concern may be that of
representativeness - to what extent are the patents studied representative of the universe?
Clearly, NPEs are in the business of selecting patents that they believe will be most valuable
and thus selection may be a serious concern. That being said, of the tens of thousands
of patents under study, less than 1% were specifically targeted for acquisition. Many were
acquired as part of large portfolios and thus are closer to a random draw.
    To further investigate the role selection might play in these data, we compare features
of our data with the universe of patents in the same technology classes. Figure 9 displays
the relationship between aggregate forward citations and age for our data and a comparable
subset of the universe of patents, matched on age and technology category. While there is

                                                                                   32
Patent Value and Citations


a slight divergence in the last five years of patent life, it is clear that the lifetime profile of
citations is very similar between the patents held by our NPEs and the universe.




                                       40      30
                             Forward Citations
                                   20  10
                                       0




                                                    0   5     10          15   20
                                                              Age

                                                            PTO     NPE



                       Figure 9: Citation Profiles of NPE Vs. USPTO
Note. To match the NPE data set, we use USPTO data through 2015 to calculate citations.

   Still, the pool from which these patents were randomly drawn is particularly focused on
technology patents and to that extent the results in the paper may not hold more broadly.
That being said, we find the basic inverted-U relationship holds across technology categories
within our data set (see e.g. Figures 7 and 8). Further, given that much of the value of
innovation is concentrated in technology, even if it cannot be generalized to all patents, it is
an important area of interest in itself.

   A further concern may be about whether the model we put forth uniquely predicts the
patterns we observe in the data. The basic inverted-U shape could no doubt be generated
by a host of models of the innovative process. We attempt to address this concern in the
previous section by testing further predictions of the model. We have seen that breaking up
the data by parent status and level of innovative activity in a field bolster the view that the
inverted-U is due to a combination of innovative and strategic patents.

    Finally, concerns may remain that the revenues generated are specific to our set of NPEs
and the way they use patents, and may not generalize to patents held by practicing entities.
As discussed in Section 1 there are several reasons to believe the results presented here may
be broader. The data under study come exclusively from licensing revenue, not litigation,
and the licensing agreements are usually made with numerous licensees. Additionally, almost
all of the patents were initially granted to practicing entities, either individuals or firms, and
subsequently sold to one of the set of NPEs. These facts make it more likely that the revenues
studied reflect real patent value.

                                                            33
                                                               Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


4    Conclusion
Given that innovation and the value of innovation are difficult to measure in a consistent,
systematic way, this has limited economists’ ability to make reliable inferences about what
policies are the best for productivity gains and ultimately economic growth. Given that
patent records contain a wealth of information about inventions, patent counts and citation-
weighted patent counts are popular proxies for the value of innovation. This paper brings the
necessary data and theoretical model to external validate these existing proxies for valuing
innovation. Using a new data set with tens of thousands of observations and licensing
revenue from many customers, we show that the relationship between forward citations and
patent value is an inverted-U. While we find evidence that the traditionally posited positive
correlation between citations and value holds at the lower end of the value distribution, the
full pattern is more complex. Once patent value exceeds a certain threshold, the citation-
value relationship becomes negative. Taken together, this forms an inverted-U relationship
between forward citations and patent value.
    We explain this pattern in the data with a new theory of how citations accrue that allows
for two types of innovative effort: productive and strategic. Productive innovations are more
familiar. Innovators that make major, early contributions to a field, earn substantial profits
and their patents are cited frequently by those who come after and make incremental, and
less valuable improvements. This leads to a positive relationship between forward citations
and patent value. In addition to this familiar type of patenting, we add a new type: strate-
gic. Strategic patents have the property of reducing the likelihood that a firm’s patents are
improved upon by a competitor. This has the simultaneous effects of increasing the original
patent value and also making it less likely to be cited. The incentive to invest in strategic
patenting increases with patent value, which leads to a negative relationship between cita-
tions and value for strategic patents. When we allow for both types of innovation, we expect
productive patenting to dominate up to a point, after which strategic patenting becomes
more prevalent, which is why we observe the inverted-U relationship.
    For studies focusing on relatively low value patents, the assumption that citation-weighting
is a good proxy for patent value is a good first approximation. But analyses that focus on
higher value patents, or the full range of patent value, or where there is no good indication
of the likely value distribution, may not be able to use this simple proxy and obtain reliable
results. By testing the reliability of the citation proxies for the value of innovation, we hope
to broaden and deepen our understanding of the innovation process, with an eye ultimately
towards informing policy decisions to better foster it. To that end, the model introduced
here creates the potential to rigorously analyze specific innovation-related policy proposals.

                                              34
Patent Value and Citations


If our understanding of the innovative process is correct, it will be able to guide decisions
on questions such as broadening patent rights and increasing R&D subsidies. There is also
an opportunity to learn a great deal more about the innovation process, by combining the
data introduced here with further information about assignees, such as industry structure
and concentration, corporate structure and history, and more.


References
Abrams, David S., and Bhaven Sampat. 2018. “Drug Patent Citations and Value.”
 Working Paper.

Abrams, David S., Ufuk Akcigit, Gokhan Oz, and Jeremy Pearce. 2018. “The
 Patent Troll: Benign Middleman or Stick-Up Artist?” Working Paper.

Aghion, Philippe, and Xavier Jaravel. 2015. “Knowledge Spillovers, Innovation and
 Growth.” The Economic Journal, 125: 533–573.

Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, and Peter Howitt. 2014. “What Do We Learn from
 Schumpeterian Growth Theory?” In Handbook of Economic Growth. Vol. 2, 515–563.
 Elsevier.

Akcigit, Ufuk, and William R Kerr. 2018. “Growth through heterogeneous innovations.”
 Journal of Political Economy, 126(4): 1374–1443.

Allison, John R., Mark A. Lemley, Kimberly A. Moore, and R. Derek Trunkey.
 2009. “Valuable Patents.” Georgetown Law Journal, 92: 435–479.

Arora, Ashish, Marco Ceccagnoli, and Wesley M Cohen. 2008. “R&D and the Patent
 Premium.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(5): 1153–1179.

Bernstein, Shai. 2015. “Does Going Public Affect Innovation?” The Journal of Finance,
 70(4): 1365–1403.

Bessen, James. 2008. “The Value of US Patents by Owner and Patent Characteristics.”
 Research Policy, 37(5): 932–945.

Bessen, James, and Michael James Meurer. 2008. Patent Failure: How Judges, Bu-
 reaucrats, and Lawyers Put Innovators at Risk. Princeton University Press.

Bessen, James, and Michael J. Meurer. 2014. “The Direct Costs from NPE Disputes.”
 Cornell Law Review, , (99): 387–424.

                                             35
                                                             Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen. 2013. “Identifying
  Technology Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry.” Econometrica, 81(4): 1347–1393.

Boldrin, Michele, and David K. Levine. 2013. “The Case Against Patents.” The Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 3–22.

Bresnahan, Timothy F., and M. Trajtenberg. 1995. “General purpose technologies
 Engines of growth?” Journal of Econometrics, 65(1): 83 – 108.

Budish, Eric, Benjamin Roin, and Heidi Williams. 2015. “Do Firms Underinvest in
 Long-Term Research? Evidence from Cancer Clinical Trials.” American Economic Review,
 , (105): 2044–2085.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Adam B. Jaffe. 1993. “How High are the Giants’ Shoulders:
 An Empirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of
 Economic Growth.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993, Volume 8, 15–86. MIT Press.

Cockburn, Iain M, and Megan J MacGarvie. 2011. “Entry and Patenting in the
 Software Industry.” Management Science, 57(5): 915–933.

Cohen, Lauren, Umit Gurun, and Scott D. Kominers. 2018. “Patent Trolls: Evidence
 from Targeted Firms.” Management Science. forthcoming.

Cohen, Wesley M., and Daniel A. Levinthal. 1989. “Innovation and Learning: The
 Two Faces of R & D.” The Economic Journal, 99(397): 569–596.

Farrell, Joseph, and Carl Shapiro. 2008. “How Strong Are Weak Patents?” American
  Economic Review, 98(4): 1347–1369.

Feng, Joshua, and Xavier Jaravel. 2018. “Crafting Intellectual Property Rights: Impli-
  cations for Patent Assertion Entities, Litigation and Innovation.” unpublished manuscript.

FTC. 2016. “Patent Assertion Entity Activity: An FTC Study.” Federal Trade Commission.

Galasso, Alberto, and Mark Schankerman. 2010. “Patent Thickets, Courts, and the
 Market for Innovation.” RAND Journal of Economics, 41(3): 472–503.

Galasso, Alberto, and Mark Schankerman. 2015. “Patents and Cumulative Innovation:
 Causal Evidence from the Courts.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1): 317–369.

Gallini, Nancy T. 1992. “Patent Policy and Costly Imitation.” The RAND Journal of
 Economics, 23(1): 52–63.

                                            36
Patent Value and Citations


Geroski, P.A., J. Van Reenen, and C.F. Walters. 1997. “How persistently do firms
 innovate?” Research Policy, 26(1): 33–48.

Green, Jerry R., and Suzanne Scotchmer. 1995. “On the Division of Profit in Sequential
 Innovation.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 26(1): 20–33.

Griliches, Zvi. 1981. “Market Value, R&D, and Patents.” Economics Letters, 7(2): 183–
 187.

Hall, Bronwyn H, Adam B Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. “The NBER
 Patent Citation Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools.” National Bureau
 of Economic Research Working Paper 8498.

Hall, Bronwyn H, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2005. “Market Value and
 Patent Citations.” RAND Journal of Economics, 36(1): 16–38.

Hall, Bronwyn H, and Dietmar Harhoff. 2012. “Recent Research on the Economics of
 Patents.” Annual Review of Economics, 4(1): 541–565.

Hall, Bronwyn H, and Rosemarie Ham Ziedonis. 2001. “The Patent Paradox Revis-
 ited: An Empirical Study of Patenting in the US Semiconductor Industry, 1979–1995.”
 RAND Journal of Economics, 32(1): 101–128.

Harhoff, Dietmar, Francis Narin, Frederic M Scherer, and Katrin Vopel. 1999.
 “Citation Frequency and the Value of Patented Inventions.” Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 81(3): 511–515.

Harhoff, Dietmar, Frederic M Scherer, and Katrin Vopel. 2003. “Citations, family
 size, opposition and the value of patent rights.” Research Policy, 32(8): 1343 – 1363.

Hegde, Deepak, David C Mowery, and Stuart J H Graham. 2009. “Pioneering Inven-
 tors or Thicket Builders: Which US Firms Use Continuations in Patenting?” Management
 Science, 55(7): 1214–1226.

Jaffe, Adam B, and Joshua Lerner. 2004. Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our
  Broken Patent System is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What To Do About
  It. Princeton University Press.

Jaravel, Xavier. 2018. “The Unequal Gains from Product Innovations: Evidence from the
  U.S. Retail Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

                                          37
                                                          Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


Jaravel, Xavier, Neviana Petkova, and Alex Bell. 2018. “Team-Specific Capital and
  Innovation.” American Economic Review, 108(4-5): 1034–1073.

Kerr, William R. 2010. “Breakthrough inventions and migrating clusters of innovation.”
 Journal of Urban Economics, 67(1): 46 – 60. Special Issue: Cities and Entrepreneurship.

Kesan, Jay P., and David L. Schwartz. 2014. “Analyzing the Role of Non-Practicing
 Entities in the Patent System.” Cornell Law Review, , (99): 425–456.

Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman. 2017.
 “Technological Innovation, Resource Allocation, and Growth*.” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 132(2): 665–712.

Lanjouw, Jean O, and Mark Schankerman. 2004. “Patent Quality and Research
  Productivity: Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators.” Economic Journal,
  114(495): 441–465.

Lerner, Josh. 1995. “Patenting in the Shadow of Competitors.” The Journal of Law &
  Economics, 38(2): 463–495.

Lerner, Josh, and Amit Seru. 2017. “The Use and Misuse of Patent Data: Issues for
  Corporate Finance and Beyond.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  24053.

Lerner, Joshua, and Jean Tirole. 2002. “Some Simple Economics of Open Source.”
  Journal of Industrial Economics, 50(2): 197–234.

Lerner, Joshua, and Jean Tirole. 2005. “The Scope of Open Source Licensing.” Journal
  of Law, Economics, and Organization, 21(1): 20–56.

Levin, Richard C, Alvin K Klevorick, Richard R Nelson, Sidney G Winter,
  Richard Gilbert, and Zvi Griliches. 1987. “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial
  Research and Development.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 18(3): 783–831.

Moser, Petra, Joerg Ohmstedt, and Paul W. Rhode. 2018. “Patent CitationsAn
 Analysis of Quality Differences and Citing Practices in Hybrid Corn.” Management Sci-
 ence, 64(4): 1926–1940.

Nicholas, Tom. 2013. “Are Patents Creative or Destructive?” Harvard Business School
 Working Paper.

                                          38
Patent Value and Citations


Noel, Michael, and Mark Schankerman. 2013. “Strategic Patenting and Software In-
 novation.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 61(3): 481–520.

O’Donoghue, Ted, Suzanne Scotchmer, and Jacques-Franois Thisse. 1998. “Patent
 Breadth, Patent Life, and the Pace of Technological Progress.” Journal of Economics &
 Management Strategy, 7(1): 1–32.

Pakes, Ariel. 1986. “Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European
 Patent Stocks.” Econometrica, 54(4): 755–784.

Sampat, Bhaven, and Heidi Williams. 2018. “How Do Patents Affect Follow-On Inno-
  vation? Evidence from the Human Genome.” American Economic Review.

Schankerman, Mark, and Ariel Pakes. 1986. “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights
  in European Countries During the Post-1950 Period.” Economic Journal, 96(384): 1052–
  1076.

Scherer, Frederic M. 1967. “Market Structure and the Employment of Scientists and
  Engineers.” American Economic Review, 57(3): 524–531.

Serrano, Carlos J. 2010. “The Dynamics of the Transfer and Renewal of Patents.” RAND
  Journal of Economics, 41(4): 686–708.

Shapiro, Carl. 2012. “Patent Assertion Entities: Effective Monetizers, Tax on Innova-
  tion, or Both?” Transcript from United States Department of Justice, Antitrust Division
  Workshop on Patent Assertion Entities.

Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1990. “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value
  of Innovations.” RAND Journal of Economics, 21(1): 172–187.

Von Graevenitz, Georg, Stefan Wagner, and Dietmar Harhoff. 2013. “Incidence and
 Growth of Patent Thickets-The Impact of Technological Opportunities and Complexity.”
 Journal of Industrial Economics, 61(3): 521–563.

Williams, Heidi L. 2013. “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the
 Human Genome.” Journal of Political Economy, 121(1): 1–27.

Williams, Heidi L. 2017. “How Do Patents Affect Research Investments?” Annual Review
 of Economics, 9(1): 441–469.

Ziedonis, Rosemarie Ham. 2004. “Don’t Fence Me In: Fragmented Markets for Technol-
  ogy and the Patent Acquisition Strategies of Firms.” Management Science, 50(6): 804–820.
                                             39
                                                             Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan




                             Online Appendix
A     Variable Normalization
Since the major focus of this paper is better understanding the relationship between patent
value and citations, it is important to clearly define how these values are calculated. Doing
so requires some understanding of the business model of the NPEs from which the data were
acquired. The NPEs acquire patents either by purchasing them from patent assignees or
entering into revenue-sharing agreements with them. The patent portfolios generate revenue
through licensing agreements which may be on an entire portfolio or a subset thereof.
    Revenue is allocated on a patent-year-licensee level based on the prominence the patent
played in negotiations with the licensee. Those patents that were most heavily focused upon
in licensing negotiations are placed in category 1, which is allocated the largest revenue
share. All patents within category 1 are given equal revenue for a particular licensee. In an
analogous way, for each licensing deal, patents are also assigned to categories 2, 3, and 4.
The categories denote declining relevance to the particular licensing deal and also declining
revenue share. Each patent in the same category for a deal receives the same revenue
allocation. Given that the firms licensing the patents operate in a variety of industries,
a patent that is assigned a category 3 or 4 for one licensing agreement can be assigned a
category 1 or 2 for licensing agreement.
    While there is certain to be imprecision in revenue assignment, this allocation scheme
is disciplined by competing interests on two sides. Patent owners who are due a share of
future revenues seek to maximize the revenue allocated, while the incentive of shareholders
in the NPEs is for larger revenue allocation to patents in which they have a stake and less
to others, since total revenue is fixed.
    In our baseline specification for revenue and citations, we use simple measures. For rev-
enue, we aggregate revenue across many licensing agreements to get patent-year revenue
and then we use the consumer price index (CPI) to deflate the annual revenues per patent.
Finally, we sum these revenues for each patent. We normalize all revenue amounts so that
mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars) in order to fulfill the terms of our confiden-
tiality agreement. For forward citations, we use forward citations while the NPEs hold the
patent. This allows for a comparison group for our revenue measure.
   While these baseline measures are intuitive and transparent, more complicated procedures
have been proposed in the literature. Given that citations and revenue while held by the

                                             40
Patent Value and Citations


NPEs are inherently truncated and for more recent patents, the problem is more severe, in
the appendix we consider alternatives. Figure 10 presents the incremental patent citation-
age profile as well as the revenue-age profile in aggregate. To account for the changing
distribution over time, we introduce lifetime adjustments. Another important missing factor
from the simple calculation is technology subcategory. Figure 11 shows substantial variation
in patenting rates by technology class; therefore, we consider such adjustments. In the
appendix, we consider two alternative adjustments for lifetime revenue. We estimate both
a uniform revenue adjustment (i.e. multiply patents by the inverse of the proportion of
years held by the NPEs), and a non-parametric model that estimates lifetime revenue in
similar fashion to (Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2005) for citations. Specifically, we calculate
the coefficients from the shape of the citation (or revenue)-lag distribution in each major
technology subcategory using all U.S. utility patents (or all NPE patents) with an application
year between 1987 and 2014. Then, we use these coefficient estimates to generate lifetime
citations and revenue. While this procedure will understate the number of lifetime citations
for any patent that has zero in our data set, the mean number of lifetime cites should still be
correct. If anything, this would lead us to find an excess of high value, zero citation patents,
which is something we do not observe.


                                                                                                            60
                                    2




                                                                                                            Incremental Revenue ($000's)
                                             1.5
                         Incremental Citations




                                                                                                                               40
                                  1




                                                                                                                  20
                       .5           0




                                                                                                            0




                                                   0      5                 10        15               20
                                                                           Age

                                                       Incremental Cites         Incremental Revenue


          Figure 10: Incremental Forward Citations and Revenue By Patent Age
    Notes: The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010
                                       dollars).




                                                                           41
                                                                        Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan




                                         Communications
                    .25




                                        Hardware and software
                    .2.15
                Density
                    .1




                                                Semiconductors
                    .05
                    0




                            0   10                20               30         40
                                             Subcategories

                                     USPTO Universe             NPE Patents


Figure 11: Patent Distribution Across Technology Subcategories, NPE vs. USPTO




                                              42
Patent Value and Citations


B      Robustness Checks




                                          3      2
                                  Log(Citations+1)
                                 1        0

                                                     0   1    2             3         4      5
                                                              Log Lifetime Revenue



            Figure 12: Forward Citations and Patent Value (Log Tranformation)
Note. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).


               Table 8: Forward Citations and Patent Value (Log of Citations)
                                                                 (1)                     (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                             Main Sample             Main Sample   Strategic Range   Main Sample
 Range of Valuable Patents Included                            0–95th                  0–95th         75th–95th        0–95th
 Revenue ($100,000s)                                           2.056**                 0.899**         -0.186**        0.408**
                                                              (0.0422)                (0.0580)         (0.0438)       (0.0450)
 Revenue Squared                                              -0.702**                -0.323**
                                                              (0.0222)                (0.0263)
 Strategic Range                                                                                                        0.783**
                                                                                                                       (0.0626)
 Revenue x Strategic Range                                                                                             -0.619**
                                                                                                                       (0.0606)
 Individual Inventor                                                0.309**                           0.456**           0.305**
                                                                   (0.0360)                           (0.0713)         (0.0359)
 Parent Patent                                                      0.285**                           0.260**           0.282**
                                                                   (0.0253)                           (0.0555)         (0.0252)
 Fraction of Backward Citations in Last 3 Years                    0.121**                             0.140*          0.120**
                                                                   (0.0251)                           (0.0660)         (0.0250)
 Self-Citations                                                     0.764**                           0.826**           0.770**
                                                                   (0.0123)                           (0.0192)         (0.0124)
 Claims                                                            0.0102**                          0.00728**         0.0102**
                                                                  (0.000791)                         (0.00167)        (0.000794)
 NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effect                   No               Yes                                Yes              Yes
 Application Year Fixed Effect                       No               Yes                                Yes              Yes
 Subcategory Fixed Effects                           No               Yes                                Yes              Yes
 R-squared                                          0.144            0.305                              0.322            0.306
                                     Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                             ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Notes: Separate regressions are reported in each column with robust standard errors in
parentheses. The dependent variable is log (1 + forward citations while under control
of one of the set of NPEs). The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is
$30,000 (2010 dollars).




                                                                  43
                                                                         Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan



             Table 9: Forward Citations and Patent Value (Poisson Regression)
                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                 Main Sample    Main Sample   Strategic Range   Main Sample
 Range of Valuable Patents Included                0–95th         0–95th         75th–95th        0–95th
 Revenue ($100,000s)                               3.583**        1.707**         -0.217**        0.573**
                                                   (0.127)        (0.194)         (0.0778)        (0.155)
 Revenue Squared                                  -1.283**       -0.620**
                                                  (0.0546)       (0.0795)
 Strategic Range                                                                                  1.025**
                                                                                                   (0.137)
 Revenue x Strategic Range                                                                        -0.768**
                                                                                                   (0.175)
 Individual Inventor                                                0.341**       0.357**         0.344**
                                                                   (0.0684)       (0.0910)        (0.0681)
 Parent Patent                                                      0.413**       0.299**         0.407**
                                                                   (0.0604)        (0.102)        (0.0600)
 Fraction of Backward Citations in Last 3 Years                     0.0351         0.0449          0.0382
                                                                   (0.0602)       (0.0953)        (0.0605)
 Self-Citations                                                    0.0492**      0.0467**        0.0501**
                                                                  (0.00396)      (0.00409)       (0.00402)
 Claims                                                            0.0129**      0.0106**        0.0132**
                                                                  (0.00151)      (0.00283)       (0.00151)
 NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effect                   No               Yes            Yes             Yes
 Application Year Fixed Effect                       No               Yes            Yes             Yes
 Subcategory Fixed Effects                           No               Yes            Yes             Yes
                                     Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                             ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Separate regressions are reported in each column with robust standard errors in
parentheses. The dependent variable is forward citations while under control of NPE.
The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).




                                                     44
Patent Value and Citations



                 Table 10: Forward Citations and Patent Value (1% Cutoff)
                                                  (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)
 Share of Most Valuable Patents Excluded          1%       1%        1%        1%          1%
 Revenue ($100,000s)                            3.725** 3.682**   3.320**   3.182**     2.767**
                                                (0.339)  (0.340)   (0.342)   (0.349)     (0.340)
 Revenue Square                                -0.113** -0.111** -0.0988** -0.0946**   -0.0819**
                                               (0.0112) (0.0112) (0.0111)   (0.0112)    (0.0109)
 Individual Inventor                            4.131** 4.008**   4.295**   3.798**     3.115**
                                                (0.846)  (0.849)   (0.858)   (0.859)     (0.836)
 Parent Patent                                           3.331**  3.440**   3.267**     2.673**
                                                         (0.587)   (0.602)   (0.590)     (0.576)
 Fraction of Backward Citations in Last 3 Year                     1.016*    1.008*     1.174**
                                                                   (0.397)   (0.396)     (0.394)
 Self-Citations                                                   1.348**   1.322**     1.193**
                                                                  (0.0564)  (0.0574)    (0.0601)
 Claims                                                           0.134**   0.105**    0.0710**
                                                                  (0.0157)  (0.0159)    (0.0153)
 Originality                                                                            1.034**
                                                                                         (0.356)
 Generality                                                                             13.46**
                                                                                         (0.409)
  NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effect               Yes         Yes       Yes   Yes          Yes
  Application Year Fixed Effect                   Yes         Yes       Yes   Yes          Yes
  Subcategory Fixed Effects                        No         No        No    Yes          Yes
  R-squared                                      0.104       0.107     0.150 0.166        0.205
                                 Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                         ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Separate regressions are reported in each column with robust standard errors in
parentheses. The dependent variable is forward citations while under control of NPE.
The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).




                                              45
                                                                                               Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan




                                     100
                             Lifetime Citations
                           40      6020
                                     0      80
                                                  0   200               400            600    800
                                                            Patent Lifetime Revenue ($000s)



                Figure 13: Lifetime Forward Citations and Patent Value)

Note. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).
Lifetime forward citations are calculated using Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2005) coeffi-
cients estimated from the shape of the citation-lag distribution in each major technology
subcategory using all U.S. utility patents with an application year between 1987 and 2014,
which covers the scope of our data set. Lifetime revenue is adjusted in a uniform fashion
such that if the NPEs hold the patent for X years garnering revenue R, lifetime revenue
is R ∗ 20
       X
                                     100     80
                            Lifetime Citations
                           40       60
                                     20
                                     0




                                                  0          200                     400            600
                                                            Patent Lifetime Revenue ($000s)



                Figure 14: Lifetime Forward Citations and Patent Value

Note. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).
Lifetime forward citations are calculated using Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2005) coeffi-
cients estimated from the shape of the citation-lag distribution in each major technology
subcategory using all U.S. utility patents with an application year between 1987 and 2014,
which covers the scope of our data set. Lifetime revenue is also adjusted in a similar
manner.




                                                                     46
Patent Value and Citations



                       Table 11: Lifetime Forward Citations and Patent Value
                                                     (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)
                                                 Main Sample    Main Sample   Strategic Range   Main Sample
 Range of Valuable Patents Included                0–95th         0–95th         75th–95th        0–95th

 Revenue ($100,000)                                 7.626**        3.272**       -1.994**         6.145**
                                                    (0.425)        (0.473)        (0.587)         (0.651)
 Revenue Squared                                   -5.027**       -2.529**
                                                    (0.687)        (0.780)
 Strategic Range                                                                                  32.49**
                                                                                                   (2.977)
 Revenue x Strategic Range                                                                        -9.372**
                                                                                                   (0.859)
 Individual Inventor                                               14.23**       16.90**          13.96**
                                                                    (2.248)       (4.358)          (2.232)
 Parent Patent                                                     13.45**       16.04**          13.33**
                                                                    (1.849)       (4.805)          (1.841)
 Fraction of Backward Citations in Last 3 Years                    6.797**        7.789*          6.243**
                                                                    (1.298)       (3.282)          (1.286)
 Self-Citations                                                    2.454**       2.495**          2.555**
                                                                   (0.0928)      (0.0869)         (0.0929)
 Claims                                                            0.411**       0.420**          0.382**
                                                                   (0.0472)       (0.127)         (0.0471)
 NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effect                    No              Yes           Yes              Yes
 Application Year Fixed Effect                        No              Yes           Yes              Yes
 Subcategory Fixed Effects                            No              Yes           Yes              Yes
 R-squared                                           0.03             0.19          0.27             0.20
                                     Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                             ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Separate regressions are reported in each column with robust standard errors in
parentheses. Lifetime forward citations are calculated using Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg
(2005) coefficients estimated from the shape of the citation-lag distribution in each major
technology subcategory using all U.S. utility patents with an application year between
1987 and 2014, which covers the scope of our data set. Lifetime revenue is adjusted in a
uniform fashion such that if the NPEs hold the patent for X years garnering revenue R,
lifetime revenue is R ∗ 20
                        X . “Strategic range” is defined as the 75th–95th percentile of the
revenue distribution given the lifetime revenue calculated by uniformly inflating the
revenue to match the time the patent held by the NPEs. The data are normalized so that
the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).




                                                      47
                                                          Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan



    Table 12: Forward Citations and Patent Value with Alternative Strategic Proxy
                                              (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)
 Share of Most Valuable Patents Excluded      5%         5%       5%       5%
 Strategic Proxy                           -4.335** -4.312** -4.623** -4.288**
                                            (0.555)    (0.554)  (0.562)  (0.557)
 Revenue                                   8.939** 8.723** 7.691** 5.842**
                                            (1.170)    (1.172)  (1.187)  (1.245)
 Strategic Proxy x Revenue                  14.16** 14.29** 15.06** 14.60**
                                            (1.942)    (1.940)  (1.950)  (1.932)
 Revenue Squared                           -2.529** -2.427** -1.998** -1.121*
                                            (0.507)    (0.508)  (0.514)  (0.540)
 Strategic Proxy x Revenue Squared                    -5.989** -6.347** -6.377**
                                            (0.947)    (0.947)  (0.947)  (0.942)
 Individual Inventor                                  3.108** 2.861** 2.374**
                                                       (0.582)  (0.584)  (0.580)
 Claims                                                        0.128** 0.101**
                                                               (0.0159) (0.0160)
 NPE-acquisition Year Fixed Effect            Yes        Yes      Yes      Yes
 Application Year Fixed Effect                No         Yes      Yes      Yes
 Subcategory Fixed Effects                    No         No       No       Yes
 R-squared                                   0.090      0.091    0.096    0.115
                       Robust standard errors in parentheses
                               ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Separate regressions arereported in each column with robust standard errors in
parentheses. The dependent variable is forward citations while under control of NPE.
The independent variable is the revenue of each patent during the time it is held by the
NPEs. The data are normalized so that the mean annual revenue is $30,000 (2010 dollars).




                                          48
Patent Value and Citations


C      Closing the model: Household Problem
In this section, we close our model by solving the household’s maximization problem. The
representative household consists of a fixed measure of 1 production workers, each of which
supplies one unit of labor inelastically. The household holds a balanced portfolio of assets of
all the firms in the economy At , earns rt At from it, collects the labor income wt and chooses
consumption Ct to maximize the following lifetime utility
                                          Z    ∞
                                    U=             e−ρt ln Ct dt
                                           0


subject to the following budget constraint

                                    wt + rt At = Ct + Ȧt .

Note that the household discounts the future at the rate ρ > 0. The household’s intertemporal
maximization yields the standard Euler equation

                                         gt = rt − ρ.                                     (13)

    Finally, the resource constraint of the economy is expressed as

                                        Yt = Ct + Rt .                                    (14)

This expression says that the final good produced in the economy (Yt ) is used for household
consumption (Ct ) and R&D expenses (Rt ).


D      Social Value and Patent Citations
We now analyze the relationship between social value of a patent and its forward citation
counts. We show that our model predicts a positive relationship between the social value of
patents and forward citations, as documented empirically by Trajtenberg (1990).
    To this end, we express the social value function for each innovation, which requires us to
define the household’s welfare. Since the welfare analysis is lengthy and technically involved,
we shorten it by making the following assumptions without affecting the main trade-offs in
the model.

    1. Since the main surprising outcome was due to strategic patents which led to a negative
       relationship between private value and forward citations (Section 2.2), we focus only

                                                   49
                                                                            Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


       on the relationship between the social value of strategic patents and their forward
       citations.19

   2. Recall that the impact of the height of the incumbent’s fence, m, in Section 2.2 was
      to reduce the subsequent entry rate (∂ z̄0m /∂m < 0 and ∂ z̄nm /∂m < 0), which was
      increasing in the expected duration of the monopoly power of the incumbent. We
      replicate the same dynamics of the free entry condition by assuming that a measure 1
      of entrants pays the same fixed cost ζQt and enters with a radical innovation at the
      rate z̄0m or a follow-on innovation at the rate z̄1m , which are both decreasing functions
      of the height of the fence of the incumbent (m) as in the model of Section 2.2. Finally,
      we assume α → 1 such that all innovations generate the same return with η innovation
      size.

   These assumptions keep the welfare analysis brief and notationally clean while preserving
the backbone of the model. Now we are ready to go into the technical details.
    Let us start with the household welfare, which is simply the discounted sum of future
utilities                                   Z ∞
                               Welfare =        e−ρt ln Ct dt.                       (15)
                                                       0

The resource constraint of the economy (14) describes how total output is allocated:

                                        Yt = Ct + 2ζQt + z̄0 Qt ψ

where Ct is household consumption, 2ζQt is the total R&D cost by radical and follow-on
innovators, and z̄0 Qψ is the flow cost of strategic innovation by incumbents. We can therefore
express the household consumption as

                                         Ct = (1 − 2ζ − z̄0 ψ) Yt

where the term in parenthesis is simply a constant. Using this expression for Ct , we can
rewrite welfare in (15) as
                                                                       ∞
                                   ln (1 − 2ζ − ψz̄0 )
                                                                  Z
                         Welfare =                     +                   e−ρt ln Yt dt.
                                            ρ                      0


This expression indicates that household welfare is determined by two factors. The first
factor is the propensity to consume, (1 − 2ζ − ψz̄0 ) , which governs the fraction of output
  19
    The positive relationship between social value and patent citations is trivially satisfied under productive
innovations.

                                                      50
Patent Value and Citations


that is consumed at every instant. The second -and for our purpose more important- factor
is the total output component of welfare (Yt ) , which grows through innovations in our model.
We can now express welfare as a sum of product line–specific social values Wjt :

                                                                           1
                                    ln (1 − 2ζ − ψz̄0 )
                                                                       Z
                          Welfare =                     +                      Wjt dj
                                             ρ                         0


where                                        Z   ∞
                                     Wjt ≡           e−ρt ln yjt dt.
                                             0
                                                                           Y q
Recall that the output of variety j in equilibrium is yjt = (1+ηt njt)wt , the aggregate output is
                                      R1
Yt = Qt and the wage rate is wt = Qt 0 (1 − ηj )−1 , as shown in Lemma 1. Since we restrict
our attention to α → 1, each product line will have the same markup, (ηn = η) , and thus
      Qt                                                                  (1−η)
wt = 1−η . We may then write equilibrium production in j as yjt = (1+η)         qjt .
   We are now ready to express the social value function Wjt = W (qjt , mjt ) as a function of
the quality level of the product line, (qjt ) , and the strength of the defensive patent, (mjt ) ,
which will determine subsequent entry. Henceforth, we suppress the product line index j and
the time index t on q and m when it causes no confusion. Then the social value function of
each product line as a function of its quality level and the strength of the current strategic
patent (W (q, m)) is equal to:
                                                     "                                           #
                         (1 − η)                         (z̄0m + z̄1m ) ∆tEm W (q (1 + η) , m)
        W (q, m) = ∆t ln         q + (1 − ρ∆t)
                         (1 + η)                          + (1 − z̄0m ∆t − z̄1m ∆t) W (q, m)

The intuition is as follows. During any small time interval ∆t, the household generates a
                      (1−η)
flow utility of ∆t ln (1+η) q for its consumption which is a function of the quality level q. After
a small time interval ∆t three continuation events can happen: First, there could be a new
radical innovation with probability z̄0m ∆t, second there could be a follow-on innovation with
probability z̄1m ∆t (in both cases, productivity improves by a factor of 1+η), finally there
could be no new innovation with the remaining probability. Note that all new successful
entrants will also produce a subsequent strategic innovation and draw m (hence the expected
term, Em W ). Clearly the forward-looking social value function takes all these contingencies
into account. The following lemma provides the exact form of this social value function.


Lemma 3 The form of the social value function is


                                  W (q, m) = A ln q + Bm + C

                                                 51
                                                                Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


where

                        1 (1 − η)                       z̄0m + z̄1m
    A ≡ 1/ρ,      C≡     ln       ,     and    Bm ≡                   [A ln (1 + η) + Em Bm ]
                        ρ (1 + η)                     ρ + z̄0m + z̄1m

Proof. See Appendix F.

   Since the entry rate is decreasing in the size of the strategic innovation m, the following
proposition follows from Lemma 3.

Proposition 3 The social value of an innovation is decreasing in m.

Proof. This follows directly from the fact that Bm and therefore W (q, m) is decreasing in
m.

    The intuition behind this proposition is straightforward. When the strength of the strate-
gic patent is bigger (large m), it leads to less entry as described in Proposition 2. Clearly this
is detrimental for social welfare since there is less technological progress and consumption
growth due to the blocked entry. Since forward citations are a result of subsequent entry,
the following corollary follows.

Theorem 3 In the case of strategic patents, social patent value and forward citations are
positively correlated.

    Note that our model predicts a monotonic positive relationship between the social value
of a strategic patent and its forward citations, whereas the relationship was negative between
the private value and its forward citations in Section 2.2. This shows that our model is in
line with Trajtenberg (1990)’s finding. In addition, our model also predicts a new result
which has been vocally raised during recent economic debates. Our model generates a stark
negative relationship between private value and citations in the case of strategic patenting.
This is because social value and private incentives are at odds when it comes to competition
generated through creative destruction. An incumbent raises her patent’s private patent
value by producing a strategic innovation while this behavior is detrimental to overall welfare.


E       NPEs and the Opportunistic Use of Patents
In this section, we extend our model to consider an alternative scenario where instead of
incumbents engaging in strategic patenting to defend existing technologies, an NPE uses an
existing patent (which is not necessarily used for production) to extract rents from other

                                               52
Patent Value and Citations


firms until the whole cluster becomes obsolete through a radical innovation. We show that
this alternative strategic use of a patent by the NPE generates a negative relationship be-
tween private patent value and citations (which would then generate an overall inverted-U
if productive patents are also included). Thus our main conclusion, that strategic patents
lead to a negative relationship between private patent value and citations, is strengthened
by this model.
    In this new setup, we assume that in each technology cluster, there is a single oppor-
tunistic patent that is owned by an NPE. This opportunistic patent is used to extract a
fraction m ∈ (0, 1) of the instantenous profits from the producing incumbent in the same
technology cluster due to the threat of a patent infringement. Claim m is determined once a
new technology cluster is initiated by a radical innovation and is drawn from a distribution
M ([0, 1]). Therefore the incumbent has to pay a licensing fee Ptf ee (m) to the NPE at ev-
ery instant until the technology cluster becomes obsolete through radical innovations, which
arrive at the rate z̄0 .
   The licensing fee paid to the NPE for its opportunistic patent of strength m is determined
simply
                                    Ptf ee (m) = mπn Yt                                  (16)

where m ∈ (0, 1) is the strength of the NPE’s opportunistic patent and n is the rank of the
innovation in the technology cluster. As in the previous extension, we simplify our analysis
by considering the case where α → 1 so that all the profits in the economy are equal, i.e,

                                                η
                                       πn =
                                              1+η
                                            ≡ π

and all follow-on entrants choose the same entry rate

                                       z̄nm = z̄1m .                                     (17)

Example 2 The following example illustrates these dynamics. Each technology group is as-
sociated with an opportunistic patent that is unkown ex-ante. Technology group 1 is initiated
by a radical innovation N1p . Upon entry, the radical entrant learns about the existence of an
opportunistic patent (which is a realization of m ∼ M ([0, 1])) and the entrant learns that it
is infringing an opportunistic patent N1o that is owned by an NPE. Note that this setup is
general enough to incorporate the possibility that there might be no opportunistic patent in
this group (m = 0). Once m is realized, the incumbent pays a fraction m of its per-period
return to the NPE as a licensing fee and keeps 1 − m to herself. Next, through free-entry,

                                              53
                                                                                         Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan

     Opportunistic patent ID:                                1 with strength                             2 with strength 0
               }|
az new productive      follow-on {     z
                                       entrant   replaces the}|incumbent with a {new zpatent         0
                                                                                                           N2p}|. This0 time
                                                                                                                           {
                          
      NPE payo¤ via  :            j       mp          m             m            pm        j ¬                   
                                                                                                                 ¬ there0 are
the  NPE collects
   Incumbent           thefee
               payo¤ via       from N2 (and not anymore from N1 ). Later in1the
                                         (1 ¬ )     (1 ¬ )      (1 ¬ )      (1 ¬ )             ¬ game,
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                  1¬
                              :
   |           {z              } j | {z } | {z } | p {z } |p {z } j | {z } | {z }
twoProductive
      more successful
                  patent ID:follow  j on   entries
                                            1     labeled
                                                        2 as N and
                                                                    3 3
                                                                            N   .
                                                                               4 4 The
                                                                                        NPE j   keeps
                                                                                                    5  collecting these
                                                                                                                     6
 |             {z                }     |                       {z                         }    |            p {z           }
fees until   the technology
       Tech Cluster number         group is made obsolote          by 1a radical entrant labeled Tech
                                                          Tech Cluster                                  N5 .Cluster
                                                                                                                 In the
                                                                                                                     2   new
technology grouping (technology               classification 2), an opportunistic patent N2o is drawn with
                                   An example of a sequence of innovations in a product line


strength m0 ∼ M ([0, 1]), and so on.

                                                             1 with strength                             2 with strength 0
    Opportunistic patent number:                                                            }|        z{
                                          z                            }|                         {
    NPE payo¤ via :                                                                   0        0
                            j                  m       m          m       m      j ¬          ¬
  Incumbent payo¤ via  : j               (1 ¬ ) (1 ¬ )    (1 ¬ ) (1 ¬ )       1 ¬ 0     1 ¬ 0
                                            | {z } | {z } | {z } | {z } j | {z } | {z }
  Productive patent number: j                  1     2        3     4    j      5        6
                                          |                 {z                 }   |        {z         }
         Technology Classification:                              Tech Class 1                                   Tech Class 2
                                      An example of a sequence of innovations in a product line



   Now we go back to the solving the model. Let us denote the value of the infringing
                                            p
productive patentj to the incumbent2  by
                                       3 Vjt (m) and thej value of the infringed
                                                                         2   j    opportunistic
    Step size:      |{z} o|{z} |{z} |{z} j |{z} |{z} j |{z} |{z} |{z} j          |{z} 
patent to ID:    j
           the NPE by
   Patent
                        j |
                            (m).
                      1 Vt  2
                                 Then
                                    the value
                                              5of an
                                                   6 incumbent
                                                            7   productive
                                                                       9      patent
                                                                                  10 is
                                                            } j |                } j |
                                                                   8
                                                                                                          } j
                                   3  4
                                           {z                            {z                  {z                   | {z }
 Tech Cluster number:                 Tech Cluster 1               Tech
                                                                      " Cluster 2    Tech Cluster 3             Tech Cluster 4
                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                  0(z̄ + z̄ ) ∆t × 0
                                   An example of a sequence of innovations in a product line
                                                                                        1m
            Vtp (m) = (1 − m)πYt ∆t + (1 − r∆t)                                                        p                   .
                                                                            + (1 − z̄0 ∆t − z̄1m ∆t) Vt+∆t (m)

Since our focus is on the balanced growth path equilibrium where aggregate variables grow
at a constant rate and the entry rates depend only on the payoff relevent variable m, simple
algebra leads to the following patent value:

                                                                     (1 − m)πYt
                                                      Vtp (m) =                    .
                                                                    z̄1m + z̄0 + ρ

    Finally, from the free entry condition for follow-on inventors we have

                                                max {z1m Vtp (m) − z1m ζQt z̄1m } ,
                                                z1m


and for radical inventors
                                                 max {z0 EVtp (m) − z0 ζQt z̄0 } .
                                                   z0

Note that since the radical innovator is starting a new technology grouping, he does not
                                        1
know the existence of an opportunistic patent and therefore forms an expectation over it.
The equilibrium entry rates are simply

                                                                     (1 − m)π
                                                        z̄1m =                                                                     (18)
                                                                 (z̄1m + z̄0 + ρ)ζ

                                                                    54
Patent Value and Citations


and                                                        
                                              (1 − m)π
                                  z̄0 = E                     .
                                          (z̄1m + z̄0 + ρ)ζ
where the latter is independent of m. Now we solve (18) for the equilibrium follow-on entry
rate                                       q
                              − (z̄0 + ρ) + (z̄0 + ρ)2 + 4 (1 − m) π/ζ
                       z̄1m =
                                                  2
which clearly decreases in the strength of the opportunistic patent m

                                              ∂ z̄1m
                                                     < 0.
                                               ∂m

Now we have the first part of our main result.

Proposition 4 The entry rate (forward citations) is decreasing in m.

   This is due to the fact that when an NPE extracts a larger fraction of value in a technology
grouping, new entrants account for this and invest less in follow-on innovations.
   We may now solve for the value of the opportunistic patent Vto (m):

                            ρVto (m) = Ptf ee (m) + z̄0 [0 − Vto (m)] .

This expression simply states that the NPE collects the license fee Ptf ee until the technology
grouping becomes obsolete by a new radical innovation, which arrives at the rate z̄0 . Using
(16) the value of an opportunistic patent is expressed as

                                                        mπYt
                                       Vto (m) =               .
                                                       z̄0 + ρ

Clearly the value of the opportunistic patent increases in its ability to extract rents m

                                          ∂Vto (m)
                                                   >0
                                            ∂m

This leads to our main result.

Theorem 4 In the case of opportunistic use of patents, the private value of the patent Vto (m)
are negatively correlated with forward citations.

  The intuition for this result is that when a patent is used for an opportunistic goal by an
NPE, the value of that patent increases in the ability of the patent to extract rents. For the

                                                  55
                                                                                        Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


same reason, new entrants get discouraged and technological progress in that cluster slows
and the reduction in subsequent entry results in fewer future forward citations. The end
result is that the relationship between patent value and citations is negative when patents
are used for opportunistic reasons.
   The general message from our theoretical analysis follows. The relationship between
social value and forward citations is positive since citations imply technological progress by
subsequent researchers, which increases the social value of the current innovations. However,
our theory highlights an important distinction when it comes to private value. When patents
are used for productive purposes, the relationship between private value and citations is
positive. However, when a patent is used for strategic reasons, say as a strategic patent by
an incumbent or an existing patent being used opportunistically for litigation purposes by
an NPE, the usual positive relationship between patent value and citations breaks, becomes
negative, and results in an overall inverted-U relationship.




F     Proofs and Derivations

Proof of Lemma 1. The monopolist’s equilibrium quantity is

                                                               Yt qjt
                                                   yjt =                 .
                                                            (1 + ηj ) wt

Substituting this into the final good production function (1) we get
                                                           Z       1
                                              wt = Qt                  (1 + ηj )−1 dj
                                                               0

               hR                      i−1
                  1                                R1
                      (1 + ηj )−1 dj
                                                           q jt
where Qt ≡       0
                                             exp   0
                                                        ln 1+η  j
                                                                  dj. Moreover, the labor used for production in
each line is
                                                        yjt       Yt
                                              ljt =         =              .
                                                        qjt   (1 + ηj ) wt
Using this expression in the labor market clearing condition
                                                               Z           1
                                                        1=                     ljt dj
                                                                       0


delivers Yt = Qt .
    Proof of Proposition 1.

                                                                   56
Patent Value and Citations


   We need to show that vn > vn+1 . This condition can be expressed as

                                       πn                   πn+1
                        vn =                       >                     = vn+1 .
                               ρ + (v0 + vn+1 ) /ζ   ρ + (v0 + vn+2 ) /ζ
         πn+1
Since   ρ+v0 /ζ
                  > vn+1 , we can write

                                          πn                    πn
                           vn =                       >                   .
                                  ρ + (v0 + vn+1 ) /ζ              πn+1
                                                        ρ + v0 + ρ+v       /ζ
                                                                     0 /ζ



Moreover we have
                                    πn+1                    πn+1
                                            > vn+1 =                     .
                                  ρ + v0 /ζ          ρ + (v0 + vn+2 ) /ζ
Our result will be proven if we show

                                              πn                        πn+1
                                                                >                          (19)
                                    ρ + v0 +    πn+1
                                                             /ζ       ρ + v0 /ζ
                                               ρ+v0 /ζ


since we will then have

                 πn                    πn                 πn+1             πn+1
 vn =                        >                      >           >                     = vn+1 .
         ρ + (v0 + vn+1 ) /ζ              πn+1
                               ρ + v0 + ρ+v        /ζ   ρ + v0 /ζ   ρ + (v0 + vn+2 ) /ζ
                                            0 /ζ



The inequality in (19) is true if
                                                                    
                                  v0   α (1 + ηn )      v0    πn+1
                               ρ+    >               ρ+    +           .
                                  ζ     1 + αηn         ζ    ζρ + v0

A sufficient condition is                                     
                                          α (1 + ηn )     πn+1
                                       ρ≥              ρ+        .
                                           1 + αηn         ζρ
where we eliminated v0 . Likewise, a sufficient condition would be
                                                
                                         (1 − α)     α + αηn π
                                       ρ           ≥
                                         1 + αηn     1 + αηn ζρ

since the right-hand side (RHS) is increasing in πn . Finally, since RHS is also increasing in
ηn , we get the desired condition
                                       ζρ2      α
                                            ≥        .
                                        η     1−α


   Proof of Lemma 3.               Substitute in the conjecture and cancel the common terms on

                                                    57
                                                                  Abrams, Akcigit, and Grennan


both sides to get
                                       (                                                    )
                          (1 − η)          (z̄0m ∆t + z̄1m ∆t) [A ln (1 + η) + EBm − Bm ]
      0 = ∆t ln q + ∆t ln         +
                          (1 + η)                  −ρ∆t [A ln q + A ln +Bm + C]

where we ignored the second order terms since they vanish as ∆t → 0. Dividing both sides
by ∆t we get

                                       (1 − η)
     ρA ln q + ρBm + ρC = ln q + ln            + (z̄0m + z̄1m ) [A ln (1 + η) + EBm − Bm ]
                                       (1 + η)

Equating the coefficients we get

                     (1 − η)
ρA = 1,    ρC = ln           ,   and   (ρ + z̄0m + z̄1m ) Bm = (z̄0m + z̄1m ) [A ln (1 + η) + EBm ]
                     (1 + η)

   This completes the proof.




                                                 58
