NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECULATIVE BEHAVIOR OF
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS

John Pound

Robert J. Shiller

Working Paper No. 1964

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1986

The survey discussed here was carried out by Donald B. DeLuca,
director, Office for Teaching and Research, the Roper Center, Yale
University. This research is part of the Investor Behavior
Project, School of Management, Yale University. The authors are
indebted to Robert Alder, Peter L. Bernstein, Jonathan E. Ingersoll
Jr., Thomas F. Juster, Robert Lovell, Burton S. Malkiel, Joel R.
Mogy, Jeremy J. Siegel, Martin D. Sass, and John R. Tilton for
helpful suggestions, and to anonymous respondents to the
questionnaire. This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation under grant No. 8408565. The views expressed here are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
the institutions with which they are affiliated. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Working Paper #1964
June 1986

Speculative Behavior of Institutional Investors

ABSTRACT

A survey compared speculative behavior in two groups of institutional
investors. The 'experimental' group held stocks that had shown extraordinary
price increases over the preceding year that also had high price earnings
ratios. The control group held randomly selected stocks. In Shiller and
Pound [1986] we argued that the survey results gave some support to some
diffusion or epidemic models for interest in the stocks in the experimental
group. Here, we show that the two groups are similar in describing their
investment strategy as relating to a theory about fundamental value rather
than about the kind of stocks that are becoming attractive to investors.
However, the experimental group is less likely to make explicit comparisons
of price with measures of fundamental value, and differs from the control
group in their attitudes toward timing, price changes, and short-term
earnings disappointment. Overall, these results appear consistent with the
notion that price changes unrelated to fundamentals may be caused by
contagious enthusiasm about fundamentals amongst institutional investors.
The holding patterns of those experimental group investors who said that
they were unsystematic in their stock choice are studied. These investors
tended to show gradually increasing holdings over the period of stock price
increase. Reasons respondents gave for the gradual increase are discussed.

John Pound
Office of the Chief Economist
Securities and Exchange Commission
Room 6023, Stop 6-3
450 Fifth St., NW

Washington, DC 20549

Robert J. Shiller
Department of Economics,
Cowles Foundation and
School of Management
Yale University
Box 2125 Yale Station

New Haven, CT 06520

Introduction
We have undertaken a broad-based survey of institutional investors to
learn about the their habits of behavior, interpersonal communications, and
the nature of their theories. In a companion paper (Shiller and Pound
[1986]) some results of the survey were used to evaluate a model of

interpersonal communications that was patterned after contagion models used
by epidemiologists. In this paper other results of the survey are described
that help us learn whether institutional investors in some stocks fit models
of speculative behavior that could mean that they (and not just individual
investors) give rise to price movements unrelated to objective fundamentals.

Here, we also look at patterns of holdings of those institutional investors
whose behavior seems particularly relevant to such presumed speculative
"bubbles".

The idea that prices of speculative assets might move for reasons having

to do more with the speculative behavior of investors than with information
about true fundamentals has generally been out of favor ever since the
literature on market efficiency became widely known. More recently, however,

a lot of 'anomalous evidence' regarding the efficient markets hypothesis has
appeared and the widespread conclusion that markets are efficient has been
questioned (see, for example, Shiller [1984], or Summers [1986] for a
discussion). One of us (Shiller [1984]) has proposed an alternative model of
prices of speculative assets which admits the existence of some "smart
money" that attenuate the effects of the more ordinary investors on price
but do not eliminate the effects. In this model price is equal to the
3

present value of expected future dividends plus a term proportional to the
present value of the expected (by smart money) demands of ordinary
investors. Such a model might well accommodate most of the evidence on
market efficiency while at the same time allowing also purely speculative
price movements, i. e., price movements generated by investors speculative
behavior rather than by any information about fundamental value. Analogous
models have been proposed by Kyle [1986], and Singleton [1985]. A number of
papers in the "noisy rational expectations" models literature also imply
that the effect of ordinary investors on price is not eliminated by smart
money (e. g., Hellwig [1980], Admati [1985]). The arbitrage pricing theory
(Ross [1976]) is consistent with such an effect if the speculative price

movements in individual stocks contribute towards a factor structure for all
returns.

A great deal of attention has recently been paid the fact that stocks
with high price-earnings ratios and stocks whose price has increased
dramatically tend to show subsequent negative abnormal returns. (See for
example Basu [1983] and DeBondt and Thaler [1985].) One popular
interpretation for these results is that such stocks are often undergoing

purely speculative price runups whose probable end brings subsequent price
declines. We thus sought to study such stocks to see if we could find
evidence that might show a speculative component to institutional investors'
behavior.

The ten stocks used for the experimental1 group were chosen to show, in

1We use the term 'experimental' to denote the group of investors that
we wish to compare with randomly selected investors. This use of the term
corresponds to the common usage in analysis of variance, even though here no
controlled experiment was undertaken.
4

May or June of 1985, extremely high price increase in the preceding year and

a high P/E ratio. Of course, we do not know with any certainty whether any
of the ten stocks that we selected were actually overpriced. At the very
least, however, the experimental group stocks are stocks that are
'interesting' and may incite extensive interpersonal communications, and may
be also be grouped in some other dimensions with the stocks that could be
predicted to show negative abnormal returns. The experimental group of
investors consisted of 125 institutional investors in these ten stocks. The

control group of investors consisted of 95 institutional investors in ten
companies chosen at random from the universe of publicly held corporations.
These investors should be representative of the market as a whole. Names of
institutional investors were taken from those who indicated, on the 13f

report to the Securities Exchange Commission, that they held stock in one
of the companies on March 31 or June 30, 1985.2

Questionnaires that used the company name throughout for each of the 20
stocks. Complete individualization of questionnaires (rather than individualization of letters only asking that the questionnaire be filled out with
the stock in mind) was done to assure that answers related to the actual
stocks and were not interpreted as answers to hypothetical questions.
Responses were obtained for nine stocks in the experimental group, and six

in the control group. For these stocks, several summary statistical
differences are shown in Table 1. As can be seen, not only were price
increases and P/E ratios more dramatic in the group, but other differences
2lnstitutional investors with discretion over accounts with combined
equity assets exceeding $100 million must report on Form l3f their equity
holdings at the end of each quarter. Equity holdings below 10,000 shares and
also below $200,000 in market value need not be reported, although such
holdings often are reported anyway.
5

that we did x select on are also evocative of stocks going through a
public fad. Turnover rates were higher for the experimental group stocks.
Consensus forecasts of fiscal 1985 earnings increased more in the

experimental group than in the control group, but the increase came nowhere
near the increase in prices. The increase in the consensus forecast for
fiscal 1985 relates to expectations for the firms over a short horizon (for
which information is likely to be relatively concrete), in contrast to the
increase in price which presumably reflects expectations for the firm over
the indefinite future.
We followed a rigorous regimen (following Dilinian's [1978] "Total Design

Method") in order to maximize accuracy of sampling and the response rate

from our sample of investing institutions. Each institution was initially
contacted and asked to forward a questionnaire to an individual within the
organization who was responsible for the decision to purchase stock in the
corporation in question. The letter strongly emphasized that the
questionnaire should be filled out only by the actual decision maker. Three
follow-up letters were then sent, two of which included an extra

questionnaire, the final letter delivered by registered mail. All
emphasized the individual survey response would be treated confidentially,

and that the survey results would be published, so that their efforts had
the potential to result in significant advancement of public knowledge about
the stock market.

We received cooperative responses from 128 or 59% of the 216 institutions
surveyed. We felt this was a very high response rate given the pitfalls
involved in asking institutions to obtain the cooperation of the relevant

decision maker. Of these, 57 institutions indicated that they were out of

6

frame (usually, that the decision to purchase was not made by someone
presently in the institution or that the decision was forced by a mechanical
rule, as with index funds). We received usable questionnaires from 41
experimental group institutions, and 30 control group respondents.3

We concluded, in the other paper discussing some results of this survey
(Shiller and Pound [1986]), that the evidence supported the notion that
contagion models are particularly useful in understanding the investors'
behavior in our experimental group. Contagion models have been used by
epidemiologists to study the transmission of diseases (e. g., Bailey [1975])
or social psychologists and sociologists to study the transmission of

fashions or fads (e. g., Bartholomew [l982]). If, as a simple

contagion

model suggests, interest in fad stocks is spread primarily by personal
communication among investors, then this should be evident in two aspects of
fad investors' communication patterns in our experimental group. First,
these investors should become interested in the stocks in question primarily

because of personal communications with other investors. Second, these
investors should be active in communicating with others, thereby spreading

the word about the stock. We interpreted our results as in concordance these
inferences even for our control group, and, moreover, supporting these
inferences more for those investors in the experimental group.

Fundamentals versus Market Psychology
For the purpose of learning whether traditional bubble or fads models

3Further details about the sampling procedure, implementation method
are in Shiller and Pound [1986].
4Social psychologists have shown that direct interpersonal
communications among peers is of singular importance for attitude change
(McCuire [1969]).

7

might in some sense be descriptive of the behavior of investors in our
experimental group, we first approached the issue in a very direct way. We
posed an open-ended question, asking investors to state briefly the theory
that motivated them to invest in the stock in question:5

In a few words, state the theory that caused you to purchase
___________ Put the theory as you would have put it to convince a
trusted friend or fellow investment professional to buy the stock.

Immediately after the space in which they were to write the theory, the
following questions appeared:

Which of the following better describes the above theory? (circle one
number)
A theory about the kinds of stocks that are becoming
attractive to investors
7%)
experimental group: 25% (ci
control group: 21% (a = 8%)

A theory about fundamentals, such as profits or dividends

experimental group: 75% (ci = 7%)
control group: 79% (ci =
8%)

n:40,28

There is virtually no difference between the experimental and control
groups on their classification of their theories: they both tend strongly to

51n what follows, the percent of those answering the question who chose
the indicated answer are shown for the experimental and control groups.
Since some respondents did not answer all questions, the number answering
the question are also shown for the experimental and control groups.
Standard errors, designated a, are computed by the formula a =
where x is the number selecting the answer.
8

describe their theories as concerning fundamentals.6 The theories provided,
in both control and experimental groups, seemed also to refer to judgments

about public information about fundamentals, such things as growth trends in

the industry and quality of management] For both experimental and control
groups, there was no explicit mention in the open-ended question of market
psychology. No investor in either the control or experimental group of
stocks explicitly stated that the stock in question might be overpriced.
Of course, buying an overpriced stock would seem unlikely unless there is a
theory that market psychology would result in its becoming even more

overpriced, and we have seen that no mention of market psychology was ever
made.

We interpret these results as rather unfavorable (at least for these
institutional investors) to the sort of traditional bubble model in which
investors perceive themselves as participating in a bubble and hope to exit

before it is over. The answers to the open-ended question, however, are not
inconsistent with the notion that 'fads' among institutional investors about
theories of fundamental value might engender speculative bubbles.

Within the framework of fundamental analysis used by both investor
groups, there was in fact a significant difference between control and
experimental investors' theories. The difference lay in their concern with

relative valuation. Among control investors, 60% mentioned the relative
value of their stock in describing their investment theory --

comparing

its

6

Of course, choosing the second answer to the above question does
not rule out that the respondent was counting on an inappropriate market
response to fundamentals. Margin comments indicated that some respondents
had trouble answering this question
Except for unspecific references to discussions with management, none
referred to distinct inside information.
9

price, at the time they invested, to some measure of fundamental value.8
Most common were mentions of low P/E rations, low price relative to asset

(or book) value, and low price relative to cash flow. A majority of control
group investors thus explicitly stated that they considered the stock a good
value at the time of investment - -

with

44% explicitly suggesting that it

was undervalued at the time.

By contrast, only 12% of our 41 experimental respondents compared the

price of the stock to either current or future fundamental value.9 Instead,
their answers focussed almost exclusively on the near-term future earnings

and growth prospects for the industry in question. Of the 41 experimental
group investors, 80% mentioned the prospect for strong, apparently

short-term, growth as the major motivation to invest. Earnings projections
were virtually never compared to price but rather mentioned as something

desirable in their own right. The group thus appeared caught up in growth
potential, and far less concerned with whether this potential was already
reflected in the stock's current market price.

Almost all of the experimental group investors described their theory in

the classic lines of the good "story" stock. The industry in question had

8Perhaps this concern with undervaluation reflects some concern
with market psychology, not explicitly stated.
9Such comparisons with fundamental value need not have involved
complicated calculations. While price was very high relative to the
immediately available earnings figure, there are potentially many other
things that one might expect professional investors to compare with price.
For example, they might cite the per-share values of the appraised value of
the assets, of public earnings forecasts, or of size of plausible market
share. We cannot rule out the possibility that they had such comparisons in
mind and did not see fit to write them in the four-lines space provided.
Still, if such calculations were really on their mind one would think that
the calculations would be cited more often in efforts to convince a "fellow
investment professional to buy the stock."

10

undergone an important shift in prospects. This shift was tied to a fairly
vivid recent qualitative changes that have been widely analyzed in the
popular press. Prominent among the investors' "theories" mentioned were
trends that any follower of general corporate news would be familiar with;
including the shift in medical care to health maintenance organizations, the
shift to generic drugs, and the growing industrial waste problem. Thus,

experimental group investors' theories did not seem particularly subtle or
unusually insightful, as would be suggested if the investment were driven by
comparisons of price with specialized knowledge about the company.

Market Timing
The traditional bubble model might seem to suggest that investors are
very concerned with the timing of their investments. If fundamentals do not
justify the price increases, then investors are perhaps likely to feel that
the profit opportunity is short-lived. We asked:

Do you remember thinking at any time that the potential for profiting
in __________ was short-lived and that it was therefore urgent to
purchase quickly?
(CIRCLE ONE NUMBER]
Yes
1
experimental group: 30% (a — 7%)
control group: 17% (a — 7%)

No
2
experimental group: 70% (a — 7%)
control group: 83% (a — 7%)
n:40,30
The experimental group does have somewhat more investors who feel that the
profit opportunity is short-lived. We thought that such a result might be
suggest that concerns with what other investors are thinking in the short
run is much more on the mind of the experimental group investors. But,

11

admittedly, the outcome of this question could have other interpretations.
It's possible, for example, that the greater concern with timing is just due
to the observed rapidity of price movements.

Hypothetical Questions
We posed several hypothetical questions concerning the stocks under
study:

In each of the following questions, what is your best guess as to how
you would change your holdings of __________ common stock?
I would
buy more

I would
sell

I would do
nothing

[CIRCLE ONE NUMBER FOR EACH ITEM]

a. Price of the stock increases
by 25% over the next year

1

2

3

16% (o—6%) 46% (o—8%) 38% (a—8%)
4% (a—4%) 36% (o—9)
61% (a—9%)

experimental group
control group

n: 37, 28

b. Price of the stock decreases
1

by 2. over the next year

2

3

47% (a—9%) 38% (a—8%) 15% (o—6%)
50% (a—9%) 43% (a—9%)
7% (a—5%)
n:34,28

experimental group
control group
C. A broker, or other investment
professional calls and
recommends that you sell

1

2

0%
0%

experimental group
control group

3

92% (c—4%)
100%

8% (a—4%)
0%

n:40,30
d. Bad news about current or nearterm corporate performance
appears in the Wall Street Journal
(e.g., poor earnings, worsening
competitive position, etc.)

1

2

40% (a—8%) 55% (cS%)
57% (a—9%) 21% (a8%)

5% (a—3%)
21% (o—8%)

experimental group
control group

3

n:40,28

e. The company announces a cut
in dividends
experimental group

1

2

0% (ax%)
12

3
41% (i=8%) 59% (ci8%)

control group

4% (o-—4%)

52% (a—lO%) 44% (i'lO%)
n: 34,27

Answers to part "a" show that control group investors are more likely
than experimental group investors to sell if the price rises substantially.
This suggest perhaps that control group investors more often have in mind a
notion of fundamental value, and tend more to be looking for bargains in
stocks. Moreover, the experimental group investors are more likely to buy
more if there is a price rise, as suggested by traditional bubble models.
Still, only 16% would buy more, which suggests against the importance of the
notion that experimental group investors are well-described in terms of a
traditional bubble story in which price increases generate increased demand
and thus further price increases, in a vicious circle. There is essentially
no difference between the groups in their reaction to a price decline, part

Answers to part "d" show a difference between the groups' reactions to a
short-term disappointment in fundamental performance. A majority of the
experimental group investors say they would sell their holdings given such
news, compared to only a fifth of the control investors. This result is
consistent with the heavy emphasis experimental investors gave to near-term
earnings performance in describing their investing theory.

Part ttb shows essentially no difference between the groups, but it is
noteworthy that essentially half of both groups would buy more if price fell
25%. Certainly this result Is not consistent with traditional bubble theory
in which a price decrease would signal the collapse of the bubble.

Price Changes and Investor Interest
One possible view of investment professionals is that they might spend
13

their time estimating "intrinsic values" for a large number of stocks, and
then automatically buy stocks whenever price falls below intrinsic value.
Interest in particular stocks would then be spurred by price declines (as
well as by reevaluations of intrinsic values). This may well be true of most
of the investors in the control group:

Did a significant change in the price of stock motivate your initial
interest in a way that led to your purchase of this stock?
[CIRCLE ONE NUMBER]

v..

1

experimental

group: 30% (a — 7%)
control group: 50% (a — 9%)

No

2
experimental group: 70% (a — 7%)
control group: 50% (a — 9%)
n:41, 30

If Yes, what was the direction of the change?
Up

1

experimental group: 33% (a — 14%)

control group: 0%
Down

2

experimental group: 67% (a — 14%)
control group: 100%
n:12,15

An opposite view of investor reaction to price changes that is often
espoused is that investor interest in individual stocks is spurred by price
increases. As noted above, traditional bubble models say that people
extrapolate past price increases, thinking that the trend will continue.

Some of the experimental group said they were attracted by a price

14

increase, though most did not.

Investor Motivation
Related to the conventional notion of speculative bubbles is the notion that
participants in the bubble are motivated by the hopes of great profits. This
would imply that the experimental group investors would be more likely to be
seeking an unusual profit opportunity. The answers to the following question
confirm this presumption, but in fact most investors in both groups describe
themselves as seeking such opportunities:

Which of the following statements better describes how your current
portfolio (or the portfolios you manage) was put together?
[CIRCLE ONE NUMBER]

The primary motivation for purchasing each stock was my
expectation of an unusual profit opportunity in that stock
at the time of purchase.
1

experimental group: 95% (a
control group: 77% (a

3%)
8%)

The primary motivation for purchasing each stock was to
balance the portfolio, that is, to keep certain kinds of
stocks as a certain proportion of the portfolio.
2

experimental group: 5% (a = 3%)
control group: 23% (a = 8%)
n: 30.40

Diffusion Investors and Systematic Investors
Decision makers in the experimental group of stocks tend to describe
their approach to stock-picking differently than do investors in other

stocks. We asked the decision makers surveyed whether they agreed with the
15

statement: "My initial interest was the result of my, or someone else's,

systematic search over a large number of stocks (using a computerized or
other similar search procedure) for a stock with certain characteristics."

The differences in response to this question were striking. Among
control-group investors, 67% answered yes. By contrast, in the experimental
group only 25% answered yes. We took these results to be quite important
(Shiller and Pound [1986]). Diffusion or contagion models of stock price

behavior are based on unsystematic investor behavior, and indeed the great
majority in our experimental group appear unsystematic. Even if the wording
of the question leaves some doubt as to how unsystematic those who answer no
actually are, it is nonetheless clear that those in the experimental group
are less systematic than those in the control group. Note that the question
does not specify what the investors were systematic about. For what follows,

we shall divide the investors in our sample into two groups: 'diffusion
investors' are those who answered no to the above question, denying that
they were systematic. 'Systematic investors' are those who answered yes.

Diffusion Investors Tended to Increase Holdings During Period of
Rapidly Rising Prices
Figure 1 shows the number of shares (adjusted for splits and
distributions) held by each of the diffusion traders in the experimental

group as a function of time.1° These are end-of-quarter data for each
quarter from June 1984 to September 1985. Since the stocks used in the
experimental group were selected to have very high price increases over the

101t should be noted that figures shown are for the institution and do
not necessarily reflect primarily the decision maker who filled out the
questionnaire.
16

year ending May or June 1985, the time period in the plots (except for the
last observation) may be characterized as having an 'uptrend' in price.
It is striking that over this period of price increase diffusion
investors tended to increase their holdings. Many of these investors showed

a gradual increase in holdings over the period of price increase, but only

one showed a gradual decrease. It should be emphasized that what are
plotted are numbers of shares and not value of holdings. Since there were no
new issues by any of the firms, the remainder of investors, not among the
diffusion investors in our sample, must have tended to decrease their
holdings over the sample period.

One possible interpretation that is consistent with this

finding is that

diffusion investors are overly enthusiastic and faddish, that other
investors tend to offset the effect of their enthusiasm on price, but do not
offset their effect enough to prevent a dramatic price increase.

The Steady Growth and Sudden CollaDse' Pattern of Holdings
As is evident from Figure 1, the number of shares held through time for
each of the 30 diffusion investors in the experimental group tended to grow
zradually through the sample period, over which prices per share were
generally rising dramatically.12 This steady growth generally either
110f course, since our sample consisted of investors who held the stock
near the end of the sample period plotted, those investors who
systematically decreased their holdings to zero by this date do not appear
in the plots. However, it is not clear that any important bias is introduced
by this sampling method. Suppose that the holdings of shares are for each
investor a random walk truncated at zero and at an upper barrier. Then those
in the sample are as likely to have a higher quantity of holdings at the
beginning of the sample as a lower.
12 .

Since the stocks for the experimental group were selected from
among

the highest performing stocks for the year ending June 1985 (corresponding
to the second to the last point plotted in Figure 1) the prevailing pattern
of price was dramatically upwards.
17

continued unabated throughout the times observed or suddenly collapsed.

All of the 30 investors increased their holdings at some point in the
sample shown in Figure 1, yet only 7 (or 23%) made an abrupt (that is,

within three months) increase in their holdings from essentially nothing to
the maximum holdings. On the other hand, of the 15 investors whose holdings
decreased at some point in the sample shown in Figure 1, 11 (Or 73%)

decreased their holdings abruptly (that is, within three months) from

essentially their maximum holdings to essentially zero. There is thus a
distinct asymmetry between increases and decreases in holdings patterns.
In only two cases was there an abrupt in-and-out pattern of holding.

There was no highly irregular pattern of holdings, in which a firm came in
and out of the stock more than once in the sample period, as might be
suggested by models in which firms were comparing the price with their own
specific information as it evolved.13

The smoothness of the increase in holdings might possibly be
attributed to the fear on the part of investors that buying large blocks of
stocks might push up the price of the stock. But there are several reasons
why this explanation is unconvincing. First, our diffusion investors are not
afraid to sell abruptly, only to buy. Second, total institutional holdings
in our sample are small, with none exceeding the 5% threshold requiring SEC
disclosure. Third, the literature on block trades - -

defined

as more than

10,000 shares transacted at once, as a secondary distribution - - documents

13The absence of monotonically declining patterns of holdings among the
diffusion investors in the experimental group is striking. Of course, our
sampling procedure assured that all those included would hold shares on
either March or June 1985, and so there are none who had sold out by those
dates. Still, there could have been monotonically declining patterns in
figure 1, and their absence is probably due to the behavior of diffusion
investors in a market with rapidly rising prices.
18

an insignificant price effect from "market disruption", and a small (1 or
2%) price impact from "information" (Scholes [1972], Kraus and Stoll
[1972]).

A further examination of the holdings in the sample, comparing them to
trading volume, heightens the impression that market disruption is not the
reason for the pattern of slow accumulation. Taking the largest holdings
among diffusion traders in our experimental group in each of the nine

experimental stocks, as of December 31, 1984, and dividing the number of
shares traded in that stock in January 1985 yields an average ratio of .165.

With about 22 trading days in the average month, this ratio shows that the
largest positions in our sample of institutional investors amounted
approximately to three trading days worth of volume - -

hardly

justification

for six-month-long periods of increasing holdings. Further, as the
institutions showing highest holdings tended to be disproportionately large,

with disproportionately large holdings, the same ratio for most institutions
was a fraction of the above figure, often amounting to less than one day of
trading volume.

If investors' fear of influencing price is not likely to be the reason
for the smoothness of holding patterns, what ia

the reason? The following

question was posed to afford some impression as to the possibilities:

Which of the following help to explain why you waited as long as you
did to increase your holdings to their maximum?
[CIRCLE ONE NUMBER FOR EACH]

No
Yes
a. I purchased only when cash flows or other sales provided
funds for the purchase.
1
2

19

experimental group: 29% (a7%)
control group: 23% (a=8%)
diffusion traders, experimental: 27% (a=lO%)

71% (a7%)
77% (a8%)
73% (a=8%)

n:41,30,30

b. I waited until I had carefully thought through purchasing
the stock.
2

1

experimental group: 49% (o=8%)
control group: 40% (c=9%)
diffusion traders, experimental: 53% (o-=9%)

51% (a=8%)
60% (a=9%)

47% (u9%)
n:4l,30,30

c. I wanted to accumulate over time, buying more if the
stock's performance confirmed my initial expectations.
2

1

experimental group: 46% (ci=8%)
control group: 47% (a=x%)
diffusion traders, experimental: 50% (a=9%)

54% (c8%)
53% (cx8%)

50% (c9%)
n:4l,30,30

d. I purchased at that time because some critical
information suggested that this was the best time to buy.
1

2

experimental group: 39% (a.'8%)

control group: 33% (a9%)
diffusion traders, experimental: 37% (a—9%)

61% (a8%)
67% (a9%)
63% (c=9%)
n:4l,30,30

e. I waited until a broker, analyst, or other expert
suggested that I buy.
1
2

experimental group: 10% (a5%)
control group: 3% (a=3%)
diffusion traders, experimental: 10% (cr=5%)

90% (cx=5%)

97% (c=3%)
90% (a=5%)
n:4l,30,30

f. Other (specify):__________________
1

experimental group: 29% (a7%)
control group: 27% (a8%)
diffusion traders, experimental: 37% (a=9%)
20

2

71% (c=7%)
73% (o=8%)
63% (cr=9%)

n: 41, 30, 30

Most of those filling in an "other" for part "f" said something to the

effect that the purchase was triggered when price fell or when information
suggested that fundamental value had risen relative to price. Only three of
the 71 answering part "f" brought up concerns that might be construed as
related to their possibly influencing the price of the stock.

We see in these answers instead some confirmation that for many their

timing of purchase had its origins in their own way of thinking or
operating. They needed time to think through their purchases (part "b"). To
a lesser extent, they maintain their interest until cash flows allow them to
invest in the shares (part "a"). These answers suggest that the kind of time
lags between the time a diffusion investor hears a story about a stock and
actually invests fully in it may be thought of as due to simple delay, as
hypothesized in the simple contagion or epidemic models (Shiller and Pound
[1986]).

The most popular answer of all to the above question is part "c". They

wanted to experience good performance before investing a lot. This answer
suggests that traditional 'vicious circle' bubble models may have some
validity, not because price increases attract initial interest, but because
they reassure those who have already invested, who then increase their
demand.

Analysis
Institutional investors in our experimental group of 'fad' stocks are
different from those in our control group in a number of dimensions. They
are less likely to compare price with any measure of fundamental value, and
more likely to rest their case for a stock on a nonspecific "story" about
21

short-run earnings prospects. They are somewhat more likely to think that
timing is critical, somewhat more likely to have their interest attracted by
price increases and somewhat less likely to report that they would sell the
share if the price increases substantially. They are more likely to sell
their shares if confronted with a short-term disappointment about
fundamental performance.

Institutional investors in our experimental group are not very different

from those in our control group in a number of other dimensions where
bubble models might have led us to expect differences. The two groups both
generally agree that they are investing on theories about fundamentals

rather than about market psychology. Most in the two groups agree that they
are seeking unusual profit opportunities, and not looking for a "balanced1'

portfolio. The two groups give similar explanations why most of them take a
substantial time to get around to investing in the stocks they are
interested in.

These results help us to frame a little better the nature of possible
purely speculative movements in stock prices. They suggest, for example,

some modification of the traditional story, as told by Keynes, of the role
of professionals in such price movements:14
This battle of wits to anticipate the basis of conventional valuation
a few months hence, rather than the prospective yield of an investment
over the long term of years, does not even require the gulls amongst
the public to feed the maws of the professional; - -

Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money, pp.155-6.
22

-- it

can be played by the professionals amongst themselves. Nor is it
necessary that anyone should keep this simple faith in the
conventional basis of valuation having any genuine long-term validity.
For it is, so to speak, a game of Snap, of Old Maid, of Musical
Chairs, a pastime in which he is victor who says Snap neither too soon
nor too late, who passes the Old Maid to his neighbor before the game
is over, who secures a seat for himself when the music stops.

Investors in our experimental group are not so conscious of timing and are
more concerned with fundamentals than his story might suggest. The bubbles
might better be described as involving interpersonal communications, rumors
and theories, about genuine fundamentals. The bubbles, if they indeed were
found among our experimental group, would be more in the nature of fashions

or fads concerning theories about which industries will be profitable in the
short- run.

23

Table 1.

Comparison of Experimental and Control Group Stocks

Experimental

Price Increase (6/84-6/85)
Earnings-Price Ratio (6/85)
Turnover Rate (6/85)

Change in Consensus Forecast of
Fiscal 1985 Earnings (6/84-6/85)
(IBES Earnings Forecast Data Base)

Control

184.5%

9.0%

.025

.056

8.0%

4.7%

35.6%

-25.3%

Note: All figures shown are weighted averages of figures for individual
stocks. Weights used were the number of respondents we had for each stock.
Earnings forecasts exclude several stocks: stocks for which we had three
respondents in the experimental group and two respondents in the control
group.

24

Figure 1.

L'

Number of Shares Held by Firms as Proportion of Maximum Number Held

___

__
___

__

A - ___
I .r\

_
I

I

___

L' 1.L7

___ ___ I A I /
Note: Each plot in the above figure corresponds to a firm represented by a
diffusion investor in the experimental group. For each plot the vertical
axis shows number of (split and distribution adjusted) shares held (as a
proportion of the maximum number held for that investor) on each of 6 dates:
June, September, and December of 1984, and March, June and September of
1985. Data are from Form 13f filings with the S. E. C., as reported in
Computer Directions Advisors, Inc., SPECTRUM III: 13f Institutional
Stockholder Survey.
25

REFERENCES

Admati, Anant R., "A Noisy Rational Expectations Equilibrium for Multi-Asset
Securities Markets," Econometrica Vol. 53 No. 3 May 1985.
Bailey, Norman T. J., The Mathematical Theory of Infectious Diseases, London,
Griffin, 1975.
Bartholomew, D. J., Stochastic Models for Social Processes, 3rd edition, John
Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1982.
Basu, Sanjoy, "The Relationship between Earnings Yield, Market Value and
Return: Further Evidence," Journal of Financial Economics, 12:129-56,
June 1983.
DeBondt, Werner F. M., and Richard Thaler, "Does the Stock Market Overreact?"
Journal of Finance, 40:793-805, July 1985.
Diliman, Don A., Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design Method John
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1978.
Heliwig, Martin F., "On the Aggregation of Information in Competitive
Markets," Journal of Economic Theory, 22:477-98, 1980.
Kraus, A. and H. R. Stoll, "Price Impacts of Block Trading on the New York
Stock Exchange," Journal of Finance, pp. 569-88, June 1972.
Kyle, Albert S., "An Explicit Model of Smart Money and Noise Trading,"
unpublished paper, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University, 1985.
McGuire, William J., "The Nature of Attitudes and Attitude Change," in Gardner
Linzey and Elliot Aronson eds., The Handbook of Social Psychology, Second
Edition, vol. III, Addison Wesley, Reading Mass, 1969.
Peavey III, John W., and Dave A. Goodwin, "The Significance of P/E's for
Portfolio Returns," Journal of Portfolio Management, 9:43-7, Winter 1983.

Reinganum, Marc R., "Misspecification of Capital Asset Pricing: Empirical
Anomalies Based on Earnings Yields and Market Values," Journal of
Financial Economics, 9:19-46, 1981.
Ross, Stephen A., "The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing," Journal of
Economic Theory, 13:341-76, December 1976.
Scholes, Myron, "The Market for Securities: Substitution versus Price Pressure
and the Effects of Information on Share Prices," Journal of Business, pp.
179-211, April 1972.
Shiller, Robert J., "Stock Prices and Social Dynamics,"Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, p. 457-97, 1984-Il.

26

Shiller, Robert J., and John Pound, "Survey Evidence on Diffusion of Interest
Among Institutional Investors," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper, 1986.
Singleton, Kenneth, "Asset Prices in a Time-Series Model with Disparately
Informed, Competitive Traders," unpublished paper, Carnegie-Mellon
University, 1985.

27

