                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE FINANCIALIZATION OF COMMODITY MARKETS

                                           Ing-Haw Cheng
                                             Wei Xiong

                                        Working Paper 19642
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19642


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2013




This review is prepared for the Annual Review of Financial Economics. We thank James Smith and
Michael Sockin for helpful comments. Xiong acknowledges financial support from Smith Richardson
Foundation grant #2011-8691. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ing-Haw Cheng and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Financialization of Commodity Markets
Ing-Haw Cheng and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 19642
November 2013
JEL No. G00,Q02,Q1,Q4

                                            ABSTRACT

The large inflow of investment capital to commodity futures markets in the last decade has generated
a heated debate about whether financialization distorts commodity prices. Rather than focusing on
the opposing views concerning whether investment flows either did or did not cause a price bubble,
we critically review academic studies through the perspective of how financial investors affect risk
sharing and information discovery in commodity markets. We argue that financialization has substantially
changed commodity markets through these mechanisms.


Ing-Haw Cheng
100 Tuck Hall
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
ing-haw.cheng@tuck.dartmouth.edu

Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19642
Over the last decade, commodity futures have become a popular asset class for portfolio investors,
just like stocks and bonds. This process is sometimes referred to as the financialization of
commodity markets. According to an estimate provided by the CFTC in 2008, investment inflows
to various commodity futures indices from early 2000 to June 30, 2008 totaled $200 billion (CFTC,
2008). Concurrently, a large number of commodities across the energy, metal, and agricultural
sectors experienced a synchronized boom and bust cycle in 2007-2008. During this period, the
price volatility of many commodities spiked.

    This high price volatility has led to growing concern of the public and in policy circles as to
whether financialization has distorted commodity prices, and whether more government regulation
in these markets is warranted. Michael Masters, in his 2008 testimony to the U.S. Senate, argued
that futures market speculation had caused a bubble in oil prices in 2007 and 2008, leading to
significantly higher energy costs for consumers (Masters, 2008). This “bubble” view was later
echoed by former Congressman Joseph Kennedy II (Kennedy, 2012), extended to grain
commodities in a U.S. Senate report (U.S. Senate, 2009), and also was advocated abroad by then-
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown and French President Nicolas Sarkozy in 2009 (Brown and
Sarkozy, 2009).

    On the other hand, many economists, such as Krugman (2008), Stoll and Whaley (2010),
Irwin and Sanders (2012a), and Fattouh, Kilian and Mahadeva (2012), argue that there is little
systematic evidence to support the bubble view and that speculators in commodity markets are no
cause for concern. The debate between this “business-as-usual” view and the aforementioned
“bubble” view has garnered substantial attention from academics and policymakers alike.

    The truth is likely in between these two extreme views. It is important to note that rejecting
one does not necessarily justify the other. Rather than focusing on these two extreme views, we
argue that researchers should test whether financialization has affected commodity markets
through the mechanisms that underpin the functioning of these markets: storage, risk-sharing, and
information discovery. Viewed through this lens, the evidence suggests that financialization may
have transformed the latter two functions of commodity futures markets.

    Commodity futures markets have had a long history of assisting commodity producers to
hedge their commodity price risks. The longstanding hedging pressure theory of Keynes (1923),


                                                1
Hicks (1939), and Hirshleifer (1988) posits that hedgers are typically on the short side of futures
markets and need to offer positive risk premia to attract speculators to take the long side. By
bringing a large number of financial investors to the long side, financialization mitigates this
hedging pressure and improves risk sharing, as suggested by Tang and Xiong (2012). However, as
pointed out by Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong (2013), and Acharya, Lochstoer, and Ramadorai
(2012), financial investors also have time-varying risk appetites owing to risk constraints and
financial distress. For example, financial investors may have to unwind their long commodity
positions if sudden price drops in other markets lead them to reduce risk. As a result, they transmit
outside shocks to commodity markets. Financialization thus affects risk sharing in commodity
markets through the dual roles of financial investors: as providers of liquidity to hedgers when
trading to accommodate hedging needs and as consumers of liquidity from hedgers when trading
for their own needs.

    Financialization may also affect information discovery in commodity markets. Due to
informational frictions in the global supply, demand, and inventory of commodities, centralized
futures markets supplement commonly decentralized spot markets in information discovery, a la
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Hellwig (1980). For example, the futures prices of key
commodities such as crude oil, copper, and soybeans have been widely used as barometers of the
global economy in recent years. In the presence of informational frictions, Singleton (2012)
emphasizes that heterogeneous expectations among financial investors can lead to drift in
commodity futures prices. Sockin and Xiong (2012) show that noise brought by trading of
financial investors in futures markets can feed back to the commodity demand of final-goods
producers. The key friction is that goods producers cannot differentiate whether futures prices
move due to financial investor trading or due to changes in global economic fundamentals.

    We revisit several focal issues in the debate from the perspective of these two mechanisms.
First, informational frictions help explain the puzzling price increases of many commodities in
early 2008. As pointed out by Hamilton (2009a) and Kilian (2009), a key factor in explaining the
commodity price boom in recent years is strong commodity demand from China and other
emerging economies coupled with a stagnant commodity supply. However, this factor fails to
explain the large price increases in the first half of 2008, a period when the price of crude oil
increased by over 40% before hitting a peak of $147 per barrel in July 2008. It is difficult in


                                                 2
hindsight to argue that emerging market growth, itself slowing after late 2007, could have more
than offset the slowdown of developed economies to raise oil prices by 40% over six months. One
possibility is that final-goods producers increased their oil demand after temporarily mistaking the
price increase in oil futures as a signal of robust economic growth when it may have been induced
by noise in futures market trading.

    Second, one strand of the literature examines the effects of speculation based on the premise
(which is motivated by the theory of storage), that inventory must have risen if speculation
distorted futures prices upward (Kilian and Murphy, 2013; Juvenal and Petrella, 2012; Knittel and
Pindyck, 2013). These studies find that the price boom of crude oil in 2007-2008 was not
accompanied by an inventory spike and are cited as evidence supporting the business-as-usual
view. However, an inventory response to the rise in prices presumes that traders in equilibrium
distinguish between a rise in prices induced by speculation and a rise in prices induced by changes
in economic fundamentals. This presumption may be unrealistic in the face of informational
frictions in spot markets. Instead, futures market speculation may distort price discovery and
induce a temporary price boom accompanied by a demand response that mistakes the futures price
increase as a signal of strong future fundamentals and unaccompanied by an inventory response.

    Third, a significant number of empirical studies in the debate focus on directly linking futures
price changes to the trading of financial investors based on the notion that their trading must be
correlated with contemporaneous futures returns or be able to predict futures returns in the
presence of any distortions.      Standard correlation and Granger causality tests tend to be
inconclusive. These unconditional tests assume that observed changes in positions are all due to
shifts in the demand curve of financial traders. The market clearing condition implies that
observed position movements of financial traders comprise both shifts in their demand curve as
well as shifts in the demand curve of other traders in the market. In a classic version of the
simultaneity bias in econometrics this leaves undetermined the sign of unconditional correlations
or Granger causality tests of futures returns with the trading of financial investors, as the link is
positive at times when financial investors consume liquidity but is negative when financial
investors provide liquidity to commercial hedgers. Studies that employ clearer identification
strategies have provided clearer evidence on the price impact of trades initiated by financial traders.



                                                  3
    Despite the seemingly confusing evidence presented in the debate, we emphasize that
organizing the evidence in terms of risk-sharing and information discovery provides a clearer
picture of whether and how financial investors have affected commodity markets. Testing extreme
yet elusive views that financial investors did or did not cause a commodity price bubble is unlikely
to bear further fruit.

                                        I.      Basic Facts

A. Commodity Price Dynamics and Macro Fundamentals

    Commodity futures prices have experienced a boom-bust cycle over the past ten years. Figure
1 plots commodity futures prices for the GSCI total returns index and three commodities from
2000-2011, normalized to their average 2000 level. At their peak in the summer of 2008, oil prices
were nearly four times their average 2000 price, before collapsing suddenly later that year. The
GSCI Total Returns index, which tracks futures prices in a basket of commodities across
agriculture, energy, and metal sectors, peaked at over three times its average 2000 level.

    In searching for explanations for this pronounced “super-cycle” in commodity prices,
researchers have noted that commodity futures price dynamics have changed substantially since
2000 and in particular since the financial crisis. Of particular interest have been both cross-
commodity correlations and correlations of commodity prices with prices in other asset classes.
Figure 2 plots the cross-commodity correlation of the different sectors of the GSCI index with the
GSCI Energy index and shows that correlations rose from a pre-2004 range of -0.2 to 0.2 to a peak
of 0.7 in the middle of 2008. Even across sectors, commodity prices have tended to move together
as a class since the 2000s. This is consistent with the notion that commodity prices have shared a
common boom and bust cycle.

    Correlations of commodity prices with prices in other asset classes have also changed. Figure
3 plots a rolling 252-day correlation of the GSCI index with the MSCI Emerging Markets Index
(measuring equity performance in over twenty markets in the Americas, Asia, and Europe), the
Reuters DXY Dollar Index (a weighted index of the euro, Japanese yen, British pound, Canadian
dollar, Swedish krona, and Swiss franc against the dollar), the Shanghai Stock Exchange A index,
the change in the 10-year US Treasury yield, and the CRSP Value-Weighted Index covering US
equities. Broadly, correlations trended upward from 2004-2008 and have increased significantly

                                                 4
since the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008. Since then, they have stayed at elevated levels
compared with historical periods.1

      Many macroeconomic explanations have been put forth in explaining these patterns. A great
deal of discussion has focused on oil prices, given their historically important role in the real
economy (Blanchard and Gali, 2010; Hamilton, 2005) and subsequent attention from policymakers
(Brown and Sarkozy, 2009). Although supply shocks to oil have traditionally received significant
attention, which is perhaps not surprising given the history of oil supply shocks such as those in
the 1970s, recent research has attributed much of the post-2003 rise in oil prices to increases in
global demand (Kilian, 2009).2 The growth of demand from emerging markets such as China and
its interaction with stagnant production in the 2005-2007 period have been of particular concern
(Carney, 2008; Hamilton, 2009a, 2009b). The substantial increase in correlations of commodity
prices with the emerging markets and Shanghai A indices plotted in Figure 3, as well as the
increasingly negative exchange rate correlation, are consistent with the view that these
fundamental demand factors from outside the U.S. have shaped oil prices.

      This growing resource demand from emerging markets, as well as the adoption of technologies
such as ethanol that arguably turn agricultural commodities into substitutes for oil (Peñaranda, and
Micola, 2011), have been cited as fundamental reasons as to why commodity prices have increased
not only in oil, but across the board. Data from China Customs indicates that imports of soybeans,
cotton, sugar, copper, and aluminum have grown significantly over the preceding decade, and
markets routinely follow these numbers as leading indicators of demand. The increase in cross-
commodity correlations plotted in Figure 2 is also consistent with this conjecture that these
fundamental demand factors are shaping not only oil prices, but many other commodity prices.

B. The Changing Nature of Futures Market Participation

      The composition of participants in commodity futures markets has also dramatically changed
over the past decade. Traditionally, researchers have viewed commercial hedgers and non-


1
 Extreme market volatility biases estimates of correlations (Forbes and Rigobon, 2002). However, the increased
correlation after the collapse of Lehman is not an artifact of this bias. A formal test that compares heteroskedasticity-
adjusted correlations in the post-Lehman period with those in the pre-Lehman period all reject the null hypothesis of
no change in correlation at the 1% level.
2
    See Kolodzeij and Kaufmann (2013) for a contrasting view.

                                                           5
commercial traders (such as hedge funds) as the two major classes of market participants.
Commercial hedgers such as farmers, producers, and consumers regularly trade commodity futures
to hedge spot-price risk inherent in their commercial activities. Non-commercial traders, such as
hedge funds or other managed money vehicles, invest others’ money on a discretionary basis in
commodities, commodity futures, and options on futures, and make extensive use of leverage.

   Over the past decade, there has been a large inflow of investment capital from a class of
investors, so-called commodity index investors (CITs), also known as index speculators. CITs
seek exposure to commodity prices as part of a broader portfolio strategy. They treat commodity
futures as an asset class just like stocks and bonds, and often invest in instruments linked to broad-
based indices such as the GSCI. On a practical level, CITs often establish commodity index
positions by acquiring index swap contracts from financial swap dealers, or purchasing ETFs and
ETNs from fund companies, rather than directly taking long positions in individual commodity
futures. These financial swap dealers and funds then hedge themselves by taking long positions in
individual commodity futures.

   The influx of CITs has led to significant changes in futures markets across two significant
dimensions. First, gross positions in futures markets grew dramatically from 2004 through 2006.
Data from the CFTC’s Commitment of Traders (COT) plotted in Figure 4 shows that open interest
in many commodities rose dramatically from 2004 onward. The annualized monthly growth rate
among the thirteen GSCI commodities that the COT has tracked since its inception averaged 31%
during the 2004-2006 period, a rate nearly triple that of 2001-2003 and not seen since the inception
of the COT.

   Second, although market-clearing implies that the net exposure of CITs, hedge funds, or
commercial hedgers need not have grown as a result of the growth in gross positions, net exposures
did grow substantially, leading to the so-called financialization of futures markets. Figure 5 shows
that the growth in CIT investing has resulted in a dramatic expansion of the longside of agricultural
futures markets. The Figure shows that producers expanded their short positions concurrently with
the expansion of long positions by CITs. These dramatic changes in market participation have led
to a concern that financialization in the form of index speculation contributed toward the dramatic
run-up in commodity prices.


                                                  6
                                 II.    Economic Mechanisms
   Before we dive into the intensive debate about the effects of financialization, we first review
several economic mechanisms through which futures market trading can impact commodity prices.
We first describe the standard theory of storage, in which the spread between futures price and
spot price serves as the incentive to store a commodity over time. We then describe two other
mechanisms---risk sharing and information discovery. Although they have received much less
attention in the ongoing debate about the financialization of commodity markets, these two
mechanisms are widely regarded as the key ways that trading may impact many other financial
markets.

A. Commodity Storage

   The theory of storage of Kaldor (1939), Working (1949), Brennan (1958), and Telser (1958)
emphasizes a timing option embedded in holding a storable commodity. As the holder of such a
commodity can choose to either consume the commodity or save it for future consumption, the
price of the commodity is the maximum of its current consumption value and the expected value
from consuming it at a future date when the commodity supply is scarce. The option of delaying
consumption thus makes the commodity price higher than the value from consuming all currently
available supply and gives rise to a convenience yield of holding the commodity. This notion of
convenience yield has motivated a strand of the literature to model the term structure of commodity
futures prices by parameterizing the dynamics of the convenience yield (Brennan, 1991; Gibson
and Schwartz, 1990; Casassus and Collin-Dufresne, 2005).

   The convenience yield is ultimately driven by the non-negativity constraint of commodity
inventory. When there is a shortage of a commodity, one cannot simply borrow from future supply
to fulfill current consumption. Scheinkman and Schethtman (1983) first develop a dynamic
rational expectations model with risk-neutral agents to analyze the impact of the non-negativity
constraint on the dynamics of commodity prices.          They characterize the agent’s optimal
consumption/storage decision in the presence of uncertainty about the balance between future
supply and demand. Their analysis formalizes the intuition from the previous literature and
generalizes numerical models of Wright and Williams (1982). Building on this dynamic
framework, Deaton and Laroque (1992, 1996) highlight that commodity storage can smooth prices


                                                7
and induce serial dependence in prices even when commodity supply and demand follow
independent and identically distributed processes. They also provide empirical evidence that this
insight helps explain the serial correlation commonly observed in commodity prices.

   In the theory of storage, the futures basis (the spread between the futures and spot prices) of a
storable commodity is directly related to the cost of storing the commodity, which includes costs
of warehousing and financing. If the spread is higher than the cost, a commodity carry trade of
buying the commodity in the spot market, shorting a futures contract, and carrying the commodity
to make the delivery leads to an arbitrage.     Nominal interest rates are an important factor that
drives the futures spread because they affect the financing cost of the carry trade, which Fama and
French (1987) confirm empirically. Through this interest-rate channel, Frankel (2006) argues that
monetary policy has an important effect on commodity prices. Gruber and Vigfusson (2012)
provide both theoretical and empirical analyses to show that by reducing inventory cost, lower
interest rates decrease commodity price volatility.

   Routledge, Seppi, and Spatt (2001) analyze the term structures of both the price level and
volatility of commodity futures prices by adopting the aforementioned rational expectations model
of storage. They highlight several results. First, there is a positive correlation between the futures
spread and commodity inventory, which Gorton, Hayashi, and Rouwenhorst (2013) confirm using
detailed inventory data in a large set of commodities. Second, inventory buffers the impact of
temporary supply and demand shocks on the spot price and thus mitigates the downward sloping
volatility curve attributed to the mean reversion of the supply and demand shocks by Samuelson
(1965). This prediction is consistent with the earlier finding of Fama and French (1988) that
among industrial metals, futures prices are less variable than spot prices when inventory is low
and that the variability is similar when inventory is high.

   If agents are risk neutral, commodity futures prices should reflect agents’ expectations
regarding future spot prices, which in turn makes the futures spread a useful predictor for future
spot prices. Fama and French (1987) find only mixed evidence that the futures spread is a useful
predictor of future spot prices. Instead, their analysis indicates the importance of a time-varying
risk premium component in the futures spread. In subsequent studies, Gorton, Hayashi, and
Rouwenhorst (2013) further relate this risk premium to commodity inventory, while Hong and
Yogo (2012) relate it to growth of open interest. Alquist and Kilian (2010) also confirm that the

                                                  8
futures spread of crude oil does not provide more predictive power than the current spot price, and
instead argue that uncertainty about future oil supply drives the futures spread through
precautionary demand.

B. Risk Sharing

   One of the original reasons for developing commodity futures markets was to facilitate more
efficient sharing of commodity price risk. Farmers are heavily exposed to price risk in crops that
are yet to be harvested; producers of oil, copper, and gold are exposed to their respective price risk,
and airlines face the risk of higher fuel costs induced by rising oil prices. Centralized commodity
futures markets provide convenient platforms for producers and consumers of different
commodities to hedge commodity price risk in their commercial businesses and thus to facilitate
more efficient risk sharing among a broad set of agents.

   B.1 Hedging Pressure

   The long-standing hedging pressure theory of Keynes (1923) and Hicks (1939) emphasizes
that commercial hedgers, who are typically net short in the commodity futures market, face
insufficient interest from other participants on the long side and need to offer premia for unloading
their risks. Such risk premia, all else being equal, cause commodity futures curves to tilt towards
backwardation. For this reason, this theory is also called the theory of normal backwardation. The
key friction in this theory is the (partial) segmentation of commodity futures markets from the
broad financial markets, which leads to inefficient risk sharing.

   In the modern literature, Hirshleifer (1988, 1990) provides formal models to lay out specific
assumptions that underlie inefficient risk sharing in commodity futures markets. Hirshleifer (1988)
adopts a static CAPM setting with commodity producers initially endowed with both aggregate
market risk and idiosyncratic commodity risk. Producers can sell a commodity futures contract to
speculators to diversify the commodity risk. However, a fixed participation cost limits the risk-
bearing capacity of speculators on the long side of the futures market, and thus endogenously
determines the equilibrium premium for the idiosyncratic commodity risk. Hirshleifer (1990)
further clarifies several other necessary conditions. In particular, he addresses why consumers
who face the opposite commodity price risk from producers do not hedge, which would otherwise
eliminate the producers’ hedging pressure.         As consumers face price risk across multiple

                                                  9
commodities they consume, and producers face concentrated price risk in the specific commodity
they produce, the fixed cost of participating in each futures market deters consumers more than
producers.

   On the empirical front, Carter, Rausser, and Schmitz (1983) and Bessembinder (1992) provide
evidence that average returns from holding commodity futures positions tend to be significantly
positive conditional on hedgers taking net short positions, while significantly negative conditional
on hedgers taking net long positions. They also document a significant premium for idiosyncratic
risk in a set of agricultural commodity futures returns. De Roon, Nijman, and Veld (2000) provide
evidence that hedging pressure on a commodity futures market stems from not only its own-market
but also hedgers’ short positions in other closely related commodities, or so-called cross-market
hedging. On the other hand, Rouwenhorst and Tang (2012) review the literature and conclude that
the empirical support linking excess returns to hedging positions is more mixed.

   B.2 Returns to Passive Investment

   Several recent studies find that in the historical data, rolling over commodity futures contracts
provides attractive investment returns. Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) analyze futures returns of
a set of commodities in the GSCI from 1959-2004, and find that the average return of 5.23% per
annum in excess of the short-term interest rate is comparable to the 5.65% excess return of the
S&P 500 during the same period. The volatility of commodity futures returns and S&P 500 returns,
12.10% and 14.85%, are also comparable. More important, the commodity futures returns offer a
diversification benefit, as they are negatively correlated with returns of stocks and bonds and
positively correlated with changes in inflation.

   There are two sources of returns from investing in a passive commodity futures index. A
typical index such as the GSCI requires holding the front-month futures contract of a commodity
until the contract is close to maturity and then rolling it into the next futures contract. Thus, even
in the absence of any fluctuation in the spot price and the futures curve, this rolling strategy of
buying a more distant contract and then selling it at a shorter maturity would yield a positive return
if the futures curve is in backwardation (downward sloping), but a negative return if the curve is
in contango (upward sloping). This return is derived from the slope of the futures curve and is



                                                   10
often called the roll return. Operationally, one can compute the roll return as the residual return
after removing the commodity’s spot return from its futures return.

    Erb and Harvey (2006) characterize the return from investing in commodity futures in a sample
from 1982-2004. They highlight that the roll return is a more important source of return than the
spot return in the observed high return from rolling commodity futures indices. This implies that
commodity futures curves tend to be in backwardation. Furthermore, they show that futures
returns from individual commodities are largely uncorrelated in their sample period, with
agricultural commodities and precious metals performing particularly poorly and the energy sector
performing well.3

    The high return from investing in passive commodity futures indices is consistent with the
hedging pressure theory. In particular, several features indicate that commodity futures markets
were partially segmented from each other and from outside markets during the period analyzed by
these studies. First, the high average roll return gives a direct measure of the premium hedgers
offer to unload their commodity price risk, which ultimately reflects the insufficient risk- bearing
capacity on the long side. Second, the lack of correlation between the futures returns of individual
commodities is in sharp contrast to the well-known large positive correlations between unrelated
stocks in the same stock market and reflects the partial segmentation of individual commodity
futures markets from each other. Third, the negative return correlation between commodities and
stocks also suggests that systematic risk, which the asset-pricing literature identifies as a key factor
in explaining returns of many asset classes such as stocks, bonds and currencies, was not an
important factor in the positive returns to commodity futures.

C. Information Discovery

    In the presence of informational frictions about global supply and demand of commodities,
centralized futures market trading serves to aggregate dispersed information by market participants
across the world. This makes commodity futures prices important price signals to guide
commodity demand and thus an important feedback channel for futures market trading to affect
both commodity demand and spot prices.


3
  Irwin and Sanders (2012b) challenge the robustness of the high returns in historical data by noting the large variation
in the returns from investing in commodity futures across periods and across commodities.

                                                           11
    C.1. Informational frictions

    Participants of commodity markets face severe informational frictions. The globalization of
many industrial and agricultural commodities has exposed market participants to informational
frictions regarding the supply, demand, and inventory of these commodities around the world.
Aggregating such information from different countries or regions is challenging. The statistics
from emerging economies are often scarce and unreliable. The statistics from OECD countries,
while more reliable, are often delayed and also subject to subsequent revisions. Information
regarding the supply and inventory of oil is difficult to capture completely, as it incorporates both
above-ground, below-ground, and ship-board supplies. The process of quoting spot prices has also
arguably been subject to manipulation due to these informational frictions (Scheck and Gross,
2013).

    Motivated by the pervasive informational frictions in commodity markets, Singleton (2012)
argues that heterogeneous beliefs can lead market participants to engage in speculative trading
against each other, which, in turn, may induce commodity prices to drift away from fundamental
values, and result in price booms and busts. Furthermore, he documents economically and
statistically significant effects of investor flows on oil futures prices and attributes these effects to
risk or informational channels distinct from changes in convenience yield.

    C.2. Informational role of commodity futures prices

    Trading in spot markets is subject to several practical complications. First, there is substantial
heterogeneity in quality and grades of any given commodity, say crude oil. This heterogeneity can
lead to a significant variation in the traded prices. Second, the cost of transporting the commodity
to different locations around the world allows the commodity of the same quality to be traded at
different prices at different locations.

    Trading in futures markets serves as an important platform for aggregating dispersed
information and mitigates informational frictions in spot markets. Futures contracts are usually
standardized and precisely specify the quality and grades of the commodity to be delivered at a
specific location and time. The standardized contracts make their prices easier to evaluate.
Furthermore, the convenience of trading futures contracts without necessarily taking or making
physical delivery allows people from all over the world to trade in a few centralized futures

                                                   12
exchanges, such as the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), the New York Mercantile Exchange
(NYMEX), and the London Metals Exchange (LME).

   Roll (1984) provides a classic study of how the futures price of orange juice efficiently reflects
information about the temperature in central Florida, which produces most of the juice oranges in
the U.S. After going through a large number of variables related to both supply and demand of
orange juice, he also finds that a large fraction of price volatility remains unexplained. Garbade
and Silber (1983) compare the roles of futures markets and cash markets in information discovery
for a set of commodities. By estimating a vector-autoregressive model of futures and spot prices,
they find that it is common for more than half of new information to be incorporated first into
futures prices before flowing into spot prices.

    Due to their global nature, commodity futures markets are often regarded as barometers of
global economic strength. Hu and Xiong (2013) provide evidence that commodity futures prices
traded in the U.S. reveal information relevant to East Asian stock prices. Specifically, they find
that in 2005-2012, the stock prices of China, Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan had
positive reactions to lagged overnight futures prices of copper and soybeans traded in the U.S.,
albeit with weaker reactions to crude oil. Interestingly, these East Asian economies are all net
importers of these commodities. The positive price reactions indicate that East Asian stock markets
tended to interpret the rising futures prices as signals of strong global demand for their produced
final goods despite the higher input factor cost during the sample period.

    Broadly speaking, economic policymakers across the world also pay close attention to
commodity prices for information regarding inflation. In March 2008, the European Central Bank
(ECB) raised its key interest rate, citing high commodity prices at the time as a key reason for it
to be concerned by potential inflation risk. The awkward timing of this interest rate increase on
the eve of the worst global recession in several decades highlights the strong influence that
commodity prices exert on economic policymakers.

    C.3. Information aggregation and feedback effects

    The economics literature has long acknowledged that centralized trading in asset markets
serves an important role in aggregating dispersed information possessed by market participants.
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Hellwig (1980) developed the canonical workhorse models for

                                                  13
analyzing information revelation in asset prices. Due to the presence of noise traders, who trade
for reasons unrelated to asset fundamentals, equilibrium asset prices only partially reveal informed
traders’ private signals in the first model and the asset fundamental in the latter. Recently, Smith,
Thompson, and Lee (2013) adopt this framework to characterize the determinants of informational
efficiency in commodity spot prices.

    Sockin and Xiong (2012) develop a theoretical framework to analyze informational feedback
effects of commodity spot and futures prices on commodity demand. Their framework integrates
centralized commodity market trading under asymmetric information with an international macro
setting, as in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996) and Angeletos and La'O (2013). In this setting, a
continuum of specialized goods producers whose production has complementarity --- which
emerges from their need to trade produced goods with each other --- demand a key commodity,
such as copper, as a common production input. Through trading the commodity, the goods
producers aggregate dispersed information regarding unobservable global economic strength,
which ultimately determines the demand for their produced goods and thus the goods producers’
demand for the commodity. The model features a unique log-linear equilibrium in which the
commodity price is a function of global economic strength and informational noise originating
from either supply-side uncertainty or non-fundamental futures market trading.

    In the absence of any informational frictions, standard economic intuition suggests that: 1) a
higher commodity price leads to a lower quantity demanded by commodity consumers; 2) a
positive supply shock reduces price and boosts quantity demanded; and 3) futures prices are a
shadow of spot prices through the standard no-arbitrage relation.

    When goods producers face unobservable shocks to demand and supply and noise in futures
market trading, these standard intuitions may not hold. Due to the informational role of commodity
prices, demand may increase with price. This is because a higher commodity price signals a
stronger global economy and motivates each goods producer to demand more of the commodity
for producing more goods. This informational effect offsets the cost effect. The complementarity
in production among goods producers magnifies the informational effect through their incentives
to coordinate production decisions and can lead to a positive price elasticity of their commodity
demand. Due to the same mechanism, noise from futures market trading can affect goods
producers’ expectations of global economic strength and thus feed back to their commodity

                                                 14
demand and the spot price of the commodity, causing futures prices more than just a shadow of
spot prices.

    A supply shock also has an amplified price effect. As goods producers cannot differentiate a
price decrease caused by a positive supply shock from a price decrease caused by a negative
demand shock, they partially attribute the supply shock to the demand shock. This reduces the
incentive of goods producers to demand a greater quantity of the commodity at the lowered price.

                                III.    Focal Issues in the Debate

    We now discuss several focal issues in the debate through the lens of these economic
mechanisms.

A. What Is Speculation?

    The debate has largely focused on whether excessive speculation has distorted prices.
Conceptually, hedging is usually defined as trading in futures markets to mitigate cash flow risk
in one’s endowed business, while speculation is defined as trading in futures markets to profit from
price movements. Excessive speculation in futures markets has been defined traditionally as
speculation in excess of what would be required to satisfy hedging demand, for example, as in
Working (1960).

    Many academic and policy studies of futures markets tend to operationalize this definition
through two long-standing practices. One practice is to classify all market participants into hedgers
and speculators based on certain identification schemes and then to treat all trading by hedgers as
hedging and all trading by speculators as speculation. The other practice is to treat hedgers’
hedging demand as exogenous and fixed.

    These practices are intuitively appealing and convenient to implement, and thus have had a
long-standing influence on the measurement and study of speculative activity in futures markets.
In measuring positions in futures markets, the COT report itself, with a history dating back to 1924,
classifies trader positions into two categories: those of Commercial and Non-Commercial traders.
Studies analyzing the role of speculation, dating from Working (1960), have analyzed the role of
Working’s T, also known as Working’s speculative index, a ratio of position held by speculators
to that of hedgers. It is common to interpret a high index or high volatility of the index as indicative

                                                  15
of excessive speculation. This interpretation of Working’s T assumes that the total measured level
of hedgers’ positions is the exogenous hedging demand and that the variation in Working’s T is
being driven by trading by speculators.

   However, these practices face serious limitations. The first practice ignores the different
motives for commercial hedgers to trade in futures markets. As suggested by Figure 5, the
volatility of commercial hedger positions is quite high. Cheng and Xiong (2013) show that
although commercial hedgers in wheat, corn, soybeans, and cotton do take short positions to hedge
crop exposure, the volatility in their positions is many times the volatility of output and revisions
to output forecasts. Price changes prove to be a far better explanatory variable for short-term
changes in hedgers’ positions than changes in output forecasts. Using weekly COT data from 1994
onward in 26 commodities, Kang, Rouwenhorst, and Tang (2013) and Rouwenhorst and Tang
(2012) show that hedgers trade weekly in a contrarian manner by selling when prices are high and
buying back when prices are low. Hartzmark (1987) shows that the daily trades of hedgers earn
significant profits. Taken together, hedgers trade more than just to hedge risk in their commercial
businesses.

   In contrast to the second practice, speculators do not just trade amongst themselves—they trade
with commercial hedgers. For example, the position changes of commercials and non-commercials
in Figure 5 are largely mirror images; Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong (2013) provide evidence for
trader groups defined in finer categories. This implies that any “excessive trading” by speculators
is associated with “excessive trading” by commercial hedgers. In the absence of further evidence,
it is difficult to distinguish those who are consuming from those who are providing liquidity in
these markets.

   One possibility is that commercial hedgers may attempt to exploit informational advantages
by trading against speculators. For example, commercial firms may exploit informational frictions
in spot markets, as they may have better knowledge of local physical market conditions. This
“selective hedging” has been observed in practice by Stulz (1996) and Knill, Minnick, and
Nejadmalayeri (2006).     A second possibility is that participants in futures markets are not
producers themselves, but are market-makers between the cash and futures markets who trade
futures to hedge forward contracts written with the ultimate commodity producers such as farmers.


                                                 16
   While risk-sharing is a central function of futures markets, the line between hedging and
speculating is blurred in practice. If one takes the notion of speculation as trading for profit from
price movements, all trader groups, including commercial hedgers, appear to be engaged in
speculation on the margin. An analysis of who provides and consumes liquidity, and who performs
what role in different periods, may be a more economically relevant analysis of trading activity
rather than classifications based on trader status.

   In analyzing the role of speculation by different trader groups in futures markets, the problem
of treating one particular trader group as exogenous is pervasive. The market-clearing condition
will imply that position changes of any trader group can be alternately providing liquidity during
some periods or consuming liquidity in others, so that no trader group can be treated as plausibly
exogenous. This problem has manifested itself most recently in the debate about the role of CITs
in futures markets, to which we now turn.

B. Price Pressure from Index Speculation

   The concern about index investment affecting commodity prices became particularly
prominent after Michael Masters’ testimony before the U.S. Senate (Masters, 2008). By imputing
CIT positions for oil using index weights and reported positions in the SCOT for Kansas City
Wheat, Feeder Cattle, and Soybean Oil, he posited the so-called “Masters hypothesis,” which, on
its face, is a simple assertion – that the large boom and bust in oil prices was caused by index
investment flows.

   An early wave of studies examine this by testing whether CIT position changes are either
contemporaneously correlated with futures price changes or Granger-cause changes in futures
prices (Brunetti and Büyükşahin, 2009; Brunetti, Büyükşahin and Harris, 2011; Büyükşahin and
Harris, 2011; Irwin and Sanders, 2012; Irwin, Sanders, and Merrin 2009; Sanders and Irwin, 2011a,
2011b; Stoll and Whaley, 2010), and find little relationship in a wide basket of commodities.
However, the 13-week change in CIT futures positions for oil predicts changes in futures prices in
2006-2010 (Singleton, 2012; Hamilton and Wu, 2013a).             Gilbert (2010) argues that index
investment does Granger-cause rises in food prices. Others also examine Working’s T, and find
few increases (Sanders, Irwin, and Merrin, 2010, in addition to many of the above papers). Cross-



                                                  17
sectional tests do not find higher monthly or quarterly returns in commodities in which CITs
dominate the market (Sanders and Irwin, 2010).

    While a useful first step in describing the data, the conflicting results from these tests highlight
the limitation of their empirical design. Tests of whether CIT position changes are correlated with
price changes treat CIT position changes as exogenous, which lead to downward-biased estimates
of price impacts in a classic version of the simultaneity bias in econometrics (Cheng, Kirilenko,
and Xiong, 2013). Tests of Working’s T often suffer from the mirror image problem of treating
hedging positions as exogenous.              Granger-causality tests, despite being a standard test of
forecasting power, do not establish causality either way.4

    Direct tests of price impacts and impacts on correlations should incorporate clear identification
strategies in the spirit of Angrist and Pischke (2010). Recent papers which exploit variation in
motives for trading have found effects of CIT trading in certain contexts. Henderson, Pearson,
and Wang (2012) find that trading of new commodity linked notes (CLNs), a form of index
investment, leads to positive price pressure in futures markets around a two-day window of the
pricing date, and that this price impact increases with the size of the trade. Mou (2011) examines
the interaction of hedge fund trading in response to the so-called roll of CITs and finds that these
pre-specified rolls allow hedge funds to profit at the expense of index investors. Further work
along this line is needed.

C. Effects on Risk Sharing

    C.1. Index speculation and risk-sharing

    In asserting that the primary cause of the oil boom and bust was index investment, the Masters
hypothesis oversimplifies its potential effect on commodity prices by ignoring the underlying


4
  These issues are compounded given the issues with data from the COT reports, particularly given the simultaneous
interest in oil but lack of well-measured data for CIT positions in non-agricultural commodities. Instead, much of the
above literature often uses data on swap- dealer positions, either from the public Disaggregated COT (DCOT), or from
the proprietary CFTC Large Trader Reporting System (LTRS) data underlying the COT reports, to proxy for CIT
positions. However, swap dealer positions are a very noisy proxy for CIT positions, as it co-mingles positions of both
commodity index traders, who trade in financial swaps, and physical commodity swap dealers who are not CITs
(intuitively, there were swap dealers in commodity futures markets well before the advent of CITs). On the other
hand, the original methodology proposed by Masters (2008) appears at odds with the low-frequency “special call”
data about CIT positions in all commodities (including non-agriculturals) the CFTC has gathered via survey (Irwin
and Sanders, 2012). Overall, there is no consensus on how to measure CIT positions outside of agricultural markets.

                                                         18
mechanisms. The large inflow of financial capital to the long side of commodity futures markets
is likely to affect risk sharing by integrating the previously segmented commodity futures markets
with outside financial markets. Several findings from recent studies are consistent with such a
possible integration. First, by analyzing the daily futures returns of individual commodities, Tang
and Xiong (2012) find that the correlations between different commodities have increased after
2004 to significantly positive levels from levels close to zero. In particular, they find that the
correlation increases are particularly pronounced for commodities inside popular commodity
futures indices.5

    Second, several studies, such as Büyükşahin and Robe (2011, 2013) and Silvennoinen and
Thorp (2011), show that the return correlation between commodities and stocks has turned
significantly positive after 2008, in sharp contrast to the negative correlation between them in the
previous years. Büyükşahin and Robe (2011, 2013) provide further evidence linking the positive
correlation between commodities and stocks to the trading of hedge funds, although this may not
hold generally (Büyükşahin, Haigh, and Robe, 2010). They find little effect of CIT trading on
commodity-equity correlations. However, it does appear that correlations across contracts within
commodities have increased significantly since 2004, consistent with the rise of CIT trading
(Büyükşahin et al., 2008).

    Finally, Hamilton and Wu (2012b) estimate a structural affine model of crude oil futures prices,
which explicitly builds in potential hedging pressure from hedgers or financial investors. They
find a significant reduction in oil futures risk premia since 2005, consistent with smaller average
hedging pressure in recent years.

    Recent theoretical studies help explain risk sharing in commodity markets with heterogeneous
agents. Basak and Pavlova (2012) analyze an endowment economy in a continuous-time setting
with multiple commodity goods and two types of agents. One type of agent has standard power
utility preferences, while the other type --- index investors --- has preferences benchmarked to the
level of a commodity-investment index. The presence of index investors causes the futures returns
of those commodities in the index to have higher correlations with each other and with the stock


5
  This finding is consistent with an earlier study of Pindyck and Rotemberg (1990) regarding the presence of excessive
co-movement among seemingly unrelated commodities, which Pindyck and Rotemberg attribute to speculation or
irrational expectations.

                                                         19
return than those outside the index. Baker and Routledge (2012) develop a dynamic endowment-
economy model with two goods, one of which is oil, and two types of agents with different risk
preferences within the Epstein-Zin recursive preference structure. Their calibration analysis shows
that dynamic risk sharing between the two types of agents can generate wide variations in prices,
risk premia, and open interest over time.

   Baker (2012) develops a dynamic equilibrium model with heterogeneous risk-averse
participants and storage to evaluate the effects of financialization. In his model, financialization
reduces the cost to household consumers of trading in a futures market, which is initially dominated
by commercial producers and dealers. His calibration shows that financialization accounts for a
significant reduction in the commodity futures excess return and the frequency of futures curve
backwardation.

   C.2. Time-varying risk appetite

   Several recent studies, such as Etula (2010), Acharya, Lochstoer, and Ramadorai (2012), and
Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong (2013), emphasize that financial investors’ risk-bearing capacity, and
thus the risk premium and degree of risk sharing, vary over time. They emphasize that the group
of traders driving prices at any given moment is given by the group with the strongest incentive to
trade. While the hedging pressure theory posits that commercial hedgers compose this group,
these studies emphasize that this group can at times change to financial traders, consistent with the
growing strand of intermediary pricing theory. This theory emphasizes that at times, especially
during crises, reduced risk appetite may cause financial traders to unwind positions (Shleifer and
Vishny 1997; Kyle and Xiong 2001; Gromb and Vayanos 2002; Brunnermeier and Pedersen 2009;
He and Krishnamurthy 2009; and Danielsson, Shin, and Zigrand 2010).

   Etula (2010) shows that the relative leverage of the broker-dealer sector (a measure of financial
traders’ risk-bearing capacity) has significant predictive power for futures returns of a set of
commodities, especially for energy commodities. Acharya, Lochstoer, and Ramadorai (2012) use
the default risk of a set of energy producers to measure their hedging demand. They provide
evidence that futures risk premia of the related energy commodities increase with the producers’
hedging demand and, furthermore, the fraction of the futures risk premia attributable to producers'
default risk is higher when broker-dealer balance sheets are shrinking.


                                                 20
   Motivated by the financial distress experienced by many financial institutions during the recent
financial crisis, Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong (2013) analyze the reallocation of commodity risk
between financial traders and hedgers during the crisis. By using changes in the VIX to proxy for
shocks to financial traders’ risk-bearing capacity, they find that during the crisis, albeit not before
the crisis, increases in the VIX led financial traders such as commodity index investors and hedge
funds to reduce their net long positions in 12 agricultural commodities. The market-clearing
condition implies that this was coupled with reductions in futures prices and hedgers’ short
positions, leading to a reallocation of commodity price risk from financial traders to hedgers during
the crisis. This result highlights financial traders’ dual roles as both liquidity providers and
liquidity consumers to hedgers.

D. Did Speculation Distort Spot Prices?

   A central question in the debate is whether speculation in futures markets, either by CITs or
other speculators, distorted spot prices. After the price boom in 2008, several economists, such as
Krugman (2008), Hamilton (2009a), and Smith (2009), pointed toward the lack of inventory
response to futures prices as reason to doubt speculative effects on spot prices. The logic follows
the theory of storage. If speculation drives up the futures price of a commodity, the increased
futures spread to the spot price would induce more commodity storage, which in turn would drive
up the spot price as less of the commodity is made available for current consumption. Knittel and
Pindyck (2013) examine the U.S. data on crude oil production, consumption, inventory, and the
futures spread, and find little evidence for this storage effect in the data for the 1998-2012 period.

   Kilian and Murphy (2013) use a structural vector autoregressive approach to analyze
speculative effects on oil spot prices through this storage mechanism. Using data on crude oil
production, global real activity, the real price of oil, and above-ground oil inventories, along with
sign restrictions on the impact of innovations of these four variables on other variables and bounds
on demand and supply elasticities, they argue that “speculative demand” shocks – shocks to above-
ground inventories – cannot account for the recent boom and bust in oil prices, although they do
account for behavior in the 1979, 1986, and 1990 oil price shock episodes. Instead, shocks to
demand associated with fluctuations in the business cycle, or “flow demand” shocks, account for
most of the recent boom and bust in 2007-2008. Juvenal and Petrella (2012) use a different set of
structural assumptions to estimate the role of speculative effects in this episode and find a slightly

                                                  21
larger effect for speculative demand, although their results suggest that global demand was
nonetheless the key driver of the recent oil price boom.

    These studies sidestep the debate about how the trading of different groups affects futures
prices and instead go directly to the question of how much variation in spot prices can be accounted
for by variation in inventories using a structural VAR analysis of the real oil market. Futures
market data is not used in their analysis at all. While useful for identifying effects of futures market
speculation flowing through the inventory channel, it is less useful for identifying speculative
effects through the risk-sharing and information-discovery channels. Few studies have examined
the effects of futures market trading on spot prices through these other two channels.6

    While no one doubts the importance of the theory of storage, the dramatic increase in oil prices
during the first half of 2008 presents a challenge for studies which attribute it to a rise in
fundamental demand. Although strong oil demand from emerging markets such as China drove
prices to high levels before 2008, oil prices further increased by 40% in the first half of 2008 before
peaking at $147 per barrel in July 2008. During this period, oil inventory did not spike, leading
many to conclude that the price increase during this period was driven by strengthening demand
as it was before 2008.7

    However, major world economies such as the U.S. were falling into recession in late 2007,
with the U.S. beginning its recession in December 2007 (as marked by the NBER). The S&P 500,
FTSE 100, DAX, and Nikkei equity indices had peaked by October 2007; with the collapse of
Bear Stearns in March 2008, the world financial system was facing imminent trouble. Growth in
China was also slowing: year-on-year growth in China’s GDP peaked in mid-2007, and the
Shanghai CSI 300, MSCI China, and broader MSCI Emerging Markets equity indices peaked in
October 2007. With the benefit of hindsight, it is difficult to argue that the growth of the emerging



6
  As an exception to this literature, Lombardi and Van Robays (2012) explicitly build in futures market shocks in a
structural VAR model. By imposing a set of sign restrictions, their estimation results show that futures market shocks
can destabilize spot prices in the short run and in particular, exacerbated oil price volatility in 2007-2009. A potential
weakness of their analysis is that their sign restrictions allow the spread between futures and spot prices to deviate
from their no-arbitrage relation without spelling out a specific mechanism for futures market shocks to affect spot
prices.
7
 Interestingly, oil inventory in the U.S. dramatically increased at the end of 2008 when the price dropped to around
$40 per barrel, less than one-third of the peak level.

                                                           22
economies, themselves slowing, was strong enough to more than offset the weakness in the
developed economies to push up oil prices by over 40% in half a year.

    The puzzle is then how perceptions of demand could have strengthened in early 2008.
Explicitly accounting for the informational role of commodity prices helps solve this puzzle. In
early 2008, agents in the economy could have reasonably interpreted the large increases in futures
prices of oil and other commodities as positive signals of robust commodity demand from China
and other emerging economies. In fact, the large commodity price increases even motivated the
European Central Bank to increase its key interest rate in March 2008. The large increases of
commodity prices in early 2008, a portion of which may be attributable to investment inflows into
commodity markets coming from the declining real estate market (Caballero, Farhi, and
Gourinchas, 2008), may have temporarily distorted people’s expectations of global economic
strength and thus commodity demand by distorting price signals.8

    Overall, in the presence of realistic informational frictions faced by market participants, using
observed commodity demand to justify high commodity prices and rule out speculative effects is
insufficient.    Although challenging, structural models should explicitly account for the
informational role of commodity prices.

                                              IV.     Conclusion

    The bubble view and the business-as-usual view are both too simplistic to capture the impact
of the financialization on commodity markets. Instead, understanding the impact of
financialization on commodity prices requires a focus on how it affects the economic mechanisms
of commodity markets. We highlight risk sharing and information discovery as two important
channels.

    The following directions will likely be particularly fruitful for future research. First, future
research must update its practice of categorizing trading by hedgers as hedging and trading by
speculators as speculation. A systematic modeling of the different trading motives of hedgers and
speculators at different times is necessary to uncover dynamics of risk-sharing in commodity


8
  Distorted commodity demand may also distort commodity production through the Hotelling (1931) principle by
inducing producers to store the oil in the ground, due to its consumable and exhaustible nature (Hamilton, 2009a;
Hamilton, 2009b; Jovanovic, 2013).

                                                       23
futures markets. Second, incorporating informational frictions and the informational role of
commodity prices into existing theoretical and empirical frameworks is likely to significantly
improve our understanding of the boom and bust cycles of commodity prices. Furthermore, to the
extent that commodity markets are an indispensable part of the global economy, it is important to
understand how risk reallocation and information transmission from commodity markets affect the
real economy and the global financial markets.




                                                 24
References

Acharya, Viral, Lars Lochstoer and Tarun Ramadorai (2013), Limits to arbitrage and hedging: evidence
from commodity markets, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 441-465.
Alquist, Ron, and Lutz Kilian (2010), What do we learn from the price of crude oil futures? Journal of
Applied Econometrics 25, 539-573.
Angeletos, Marios and Jennifer La’O (2013), Sentiment, Econometrica, 81, 739-780.
Angrist, J. and J. Pischke (2010), The credibility revolution in empirical economics: How better research
design is taking the con out of econometrics, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 42(2), 3-30.
Baker, Steven (2012), The financialization of storable commodities, Working paper, Carnegie Mellon
University.
Baker, Steven and Bryan Routledge (2012), The price of oil risk, Working paper, Carnegie Mellon
University.
Basak, Suleyman and Anna Pavlova (2012), A model of financialization of commodities, Working paper,
London Business School.
Bessembinder, Hendrik (1992), Systematic risk, hedging pressure, and risk premiums in futures markets,
Review of Financial Studies 4, 637-667.
Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Gali (2010), The macroeconomic effects of oil shocks: why are the 2000s so
different from the 1970s?, in Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (eds), International Dimensions of Monetary
Policy, University of Chicago Press.
Brennan, Michael (1958), The supply of storage, American Economic Review 48, 50-72.
Brennan, Michael (1991), The price of convenience and the valuation of commodity contingent claims, in
Diderik Lund and Bernt Oksendal, eds., Stochastic Models and Option Models, North Holland,
Amsterdam.
Brown, Gordon and Nicolas Sarkozy (2009), Oil prices need government supervision, The Wall Street
Journal, July 8, Available online: http://online.wsj.com/article/SB124701217125708963.html [Last
accessed: October 2013].
Brunetti, Carlos and Bahattin Büyükşahin (2009), Is speculation destabilizing?, Working Paper, CFTC.
Brunetti, C., Bahattin Büyükşahin and Jeffrey Harris (2011), Speculators, prices, and market volatility,
Working paper, CFTC.
Brunnermeier, Markus and Lasse Pedersen (2009), Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review of
Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.
Büyükşahin, Bahattin, Michael Haigh, Jeffrey Harris, Jim Overdahl, and Michel Robe, (2008),
Fundamentals, trader activity, and derivative pricing, Working paper, CFTC.
Büyükşahin, Bahattin, Michael Haigh, and Michel Robe, (2010), Commodities and equities: ever a
“market of one”?, Journal of Alternative Investments, 76-95.
Büyükşahin, Bahattin and Jeffrey Harris (2011), Do speculators drive crude oil prices, The Energy
Journal, 32(2), 167-202.


                                                    25
Büyükşahin, Bahattin and Michel Robe (2011), Does paper oil matter? Energy markets’ financialization
and equity-commodity co-movements, Working paper, CFTC.
Büyükşahin, Bahattin and Michel Robe (2013), Speculators, commodities, and cross-market linkages,
Journal of International Money and Finance, Forthcoming.
Caballero, Richardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008), Financial crash, commodity
prices, and global imbalances, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-55.
Carney, Mark (2008), Capitalizing on the Commodity Boom – The role of monetary policy, remarks to
the Haskayne School of Business, Calgary, Alberta, Available online:
http://www.bis.org/review/r080620d.pdf [Last accessed: October 2013].
Carter, Colin, Gordon Rausser, and Andrew Schmitz (1983), Efficient asset portfolios and the theory of
normal backwardation, Journal of Political Economy 91, 319-331.
Casassus, Jaime, and Pierre Collin-Dufresne (2005), Stochastic convenience yield implied from
commodity futures and interest rates, Journal of Finance 60, 2283-2331.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, and Wei Xiong (2013), Why do hedgers trade so much?, Working paper, Dartmouth
College.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Andrei Kirilenko, and Wei Xiong (2013), Convective risk flows in commodity futures
markets, Working paper, Dartmouth College.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2008), Staff report on commodity swap dealers & index
traders with commission recommendations, September, available online:
http://www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@newsroom/documents/file/cftcstaffreportonswapdealers09.pdf
[Last accessed: October 2013].

Danielsson, Jon, Jean-Pierre Zigrand, and Hyun Song Shin (2010), Balance sheet capacity and
endogenous risk, Working paper, London School of Economics and Princeton University.

de Roon, Frans, Theo Nijman, and Chris Veld (2000), Hedging pressure effects in futures markets,
Journal of Finance 55, 1437-1456.
Deaton, Angus, and Guy Laroque (1992), On the behaviour of commodity prices, Review of Economic
Studies 59, 1-23.
Deaton, Angus, and Guy Laroque (1996), Competitive storage and commodity price dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy 104, 896-923.
Erb, Claude and Campbell Harvey (2006), The strategic and tactical value of commodity futures,
Financial Analysts Journal 62 (2), 69-97.
Etula, Erkko (2010), Broker-dealer risk appetite and commodity returns, Working paper, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (1987), Commodity futures prices: Some evidence on forecast power,
premiums, and the theory of storage, Journal of Business 60, 55-73.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (1988), Business cycles and the behavior of metals prices, Journal of
Finance 43, 1075-1093.
Fattouh, Bassam, Lutz Kilian, and Lavan Mahadeva (2012), The role of speculation in oil markets: What


                                                   26
have we learned so far?, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Forbes, Kristin and Roberto Rigobon (2002), No contagion, only interdependence: measuring stock
market comovements, Journal of Finance, 57(5), 2223-2261.
Frankel, Jeffrey (2006), The effect of monetary policy on real commodity prices, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper #12713.
Garbade, Kenneth and William L. Silber (1983), Price movements and price discovery in futures and cash
markets, Review of Economics and Statistics 65, 289-297.
Gibson, Rajna and Eduardo S. Schwartz (1990), Stochastic convenience yield and the pricing of oil
contingent claims, Journal of Finance 45, 959-976.
Gilbert, Christopher (2010), How to understand high food prices, Journal of Agricultural Economics,
61(2), 398-425.
Gorton, Gary and Geert Rouwenhorst (2006), Facts and fantasies about commodity futures, Financial
Analysts Journal 62 (2), 47-68.
Gorton, Gary, Fumio Hayashi, and Geert Rouwenhorst (2013), The fundamentals of commodity futures
returns, Review of Finance 17, 35-105.
Gromb, Denis and Dimitri Vayanos (2002), Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially
constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407.
Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets,
American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
Gruber, Joseph and Robert Vigfusson (2012), Interest rates and the volatility and correlation of
commodity prices, Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Hamilton, James (2005), Oil and the macroeconomy, in S. Durlauf and L. Blume (eds), The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd ed., Palgrave MacMillan Ltd.
Hamilton, James (2009a), Causes and consequences of the oil shock of 2007-08, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 40(1), 215-293.
Hamilton, James (2009b), Understanding crude oil prices, The Energy Journal, 30(2), 179-206.
Hamilton, James and Jing Wu (2013a), Effects of index-fund investing on commodity futures prices,
Working paper, University of California at San Diego.
Hamilton, James and Jing Wu (2013b), Risk premia in crude oil futures prices, Working paper, University
of California at San Diego.
Hartzmark, Michael (1987), Returns to individual traders of futures: aggregate results, Journal of
Political Economy, 95(6), 1292-1306.
He Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2009), Intermediary asset pricing, American Economic Review,
forthcoming.
Hellwig, Martin (1980), On the aggregation of information in competitive markets, Journal of Economic
Theory 22, 477-498.
Henderson, Brian, Neil Pearson and Li Wang (2012), New evidence on the financialization of commodity
markets, Working paper, University of Illinois.

                                                    27
Hicks, Charles (1939), Value and Capital, Oxford University Press, Cambridge.
Hirshleifer, David (1988), Residual risk, trading costs, and commodity futures risk premia, Review of
Financial Studies 1, 173-193.
Hirshleifer, David (1990), Hedging pressure and futures price movements in a general equilibrium model,
Econometrica 58, 411-428.
Hong, Harrison and Motohiro Yogo (2012), What does futures market interest tell us about the
macroeconomy and asset prices?, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 473-490.
Hotelling, Harold (1931), The economics of exhaustible resources, Journal of Political Economy 39, 137-
175.
Hu, Conghui and Wei Xiong, Are commodity futures prices barometers of the global economy?, Working
paper, Princeton University.
Irwin, Scott and Dwight Sanders (2012a), Testing the Masters hypothesis in commodity futures markets,
Energy Economics, 34, 256-269.
Irwin, Scott and Dwight Sanders (2012b), A reappraisal of investing in commodity futures markets,
Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 34, 515-530.
Irwin, Scott and Dwight Sanders and Robert Merrin (2009), Devil or angel? The role of speculation in the
recent commodity price boom (and bust), Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 41, 377-391.
Jovanovic, Boyan (2013), Bubbles in prices of exhaustible resources, International Economic Review 54,
1-34.
Juvenal, Luciana and Ivan Petrella (2012), Speculation in oil market, Working paper, Federal Reserve
Bank of Saint Loius.
Kaldor, Nicholas (1939), Speculation and economic stability, Review of Economic Studies 7, 1-27.
Kang, Wenjin, K. Geert Rouwenhorst and Ke Tang (2013), The role of hedgers and speculators in
liquidity provision to commodity futures markets, Working paper, Yale University.
Kennedy, Joseph P. II (2012), The high cost of gambling on oil, The New York Times, April 10, available
online: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/11/opinion/ban-pure-speculators-of-oil-futures.html [Last
accessed: October 2013].
Keynes, John Maynard (1923), Some aspects of commodity markets, Manchester Guardian Commercial,
European Reconstruction Series, Section 13, 784-786.
Kilian, Lutz (2009), Not all oil price shocks are alike: Disentangling demand and supply shocks in the
crude oil market, American Economic Review 99, 1053-1069.
Kilian, Lutz, and Daniel Murphy (2013), The role of inventories and speculative trading in the global
market for crude oil, Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Knill, April, Kristina Minnick, and Ali Nejadmalayeri, Selective hedging, information asymmetry, and
futures prices, Journal of Business, 79(3), 1475-1501.
Knittel, Christopher and Robert Pindyck (2013), The simple economics of commodity price speculation,
Working paper, MIT.
Krugman, Paul (2008), More on oil and speculation, New York Times, May 13.

                                                   28
Kyle, Albert and Wei Xiong (2001), Contagion as a wealth effect, Journal of Finance 56, 1401-1440.
Lombardi, Marco J. and Ine Van Robays (2011), Do financial investors destabilize the oil price?,
Working paper, ECB.
Masters, Michael (2008), Testimony before the committee on homeland security and governmental
affairs. Technical report, US Senate, May 20th.
Mou, Yiqun (2011), Limits to arbitrage and commodity index investment: front-running the Goldman
roll, Working paper, Columbia University.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Ken Rogoff (1996), Foundations of International Macroeconomics, MIT Press.
Peñaranda, F., and A. Micola (2011), On the drivers of commodity co-movement: evidence from biofuels,
Working paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Roll, Richard (1984), Orange juice and weather, American Economic Review 74, 861-880.
Pindyck, Robert and Julio Rotemberg (1990), The excess co-movement of commodity prices, Economic
Journal 100, 1173-1189.
Routledge, Bryan, Duane Seppi, and Chester Spatt (2000), Equilibrium forward curves for commodities,
Journal of Finance 55, 1297-1338.
Rouwenhorst, Geert K. and Ke Tang (2012), Commodity investing, Annual Review of Financial
Economics 4, 447-467.
Samuelson, Paul (1965), Proof that properly anticipated prices fluctuate randomly, Industrial
management review 6, 41-49.
Sanders, Dwight and Scott Irwin (2010), A speculative bubble in commodity futures prices? Cross-
sectional evidence, Agricultural Economics, 41, 25-32.
Sanders, Dwight and Scott Irwin (2011a), New evidence on the impact of index funds in US grain futures
markets, Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, 59, 519-532.
Sanders, Dwight and Scott Irwin (2011b), The impact of index funds in commodity futures markets: A
systems approach, Journal of Alternative Investments, 14, 40-49.
Sanders, Dwight, Scott Irwin and Robert Merrin (2010), The adequacy of speculation in agricultural
futures markets: Too much of a good thing?, Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 32(1), 77-94.
Scheinkman, Jose and Jack Schechtman (1983), A simple competitive model with production and storage,
Review of Economic Studies 50, 427-441.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1997), Limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.

Singleton, Kenneth (2012), Investor flows and the 2008 boom/bust in oil prices, Management Science,
forthcoming.

Smith, James (2009), World oil: market or mayhem?, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 145-164.

Smith, James, Rex Thompson, and Thomas Lee (2013), The informational role of spot prices and
inventories, Working paper, Southern Methodist University.
Sockin, Michael and Wei Xiong (2012), Informational frictions and commodity markets, Working paper,
Princeton University.

                                                   29
Stoll, Hans and Robert Whaley (2010), Commodity index investing and commodity futures prices,
Journal of Applied Finance 1, 1-40.

Stulz, Rene (1996), Rethinking risk management, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 9(3), 8-24.

Tang, Ke and Wei Xiong (2012), Index investment and financialization of commodities, Financial
Analysts Journal 68 (6), 54-74.

Telser, Lester (1968), Futures trading and the storage of cotton and wheat, Journal of Political Economy
66, 233-255.
U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations (2009), Excessive speculation in the wheat
market, Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, June 24.
Scheck, Justin and Jenny Gross (2013), Traders try to game Platts oil-price benchmarks, Wall Street
Journal, June 19, available online:
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324682204578517064053636892 [Last accessed:
October 2013].
Working, Holbrook (1949), The theory of the price of storage, American Economic Review 39, 1254-
62.
Working, Holbrook (1960), Speculation on hedging markets, Food Research Institute Series, 1, 185-220.
Wright, Brian and J.C. Williams (1982), The economic role of commodity storage, Economic Journal 92,
596-614.




                                                   30
                                      Figure 1: Commodity Prices

This figure plots the level of the GSCI Total Return Index as well as commodity prices for corn, crude oil,
and copper, normalized to the average price in 2000. Data source: Bloomberg.




                                                    31
                       Figure 2: GSCI Sector Correlations with GSCI Energy

This figure plots the 252-day rolling correlation of percentage changes in the GSCI Energy Total Return
Index with percentage changes in the GSCI Excluding Energy, GSCI Grains, and GSCI Industrial Metals
Total Return Indices. Data source: Bloomberg.




                                                  32
                           Figure 3: GSCI Correlation with Asset Classes

This figure plots the 252-day rolling correlation of the percentage change in the GSCI Total Return Index
with the percentage change in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index, DXY Dollar Index (multiplied by -1),
and return to the Shanghai A index in the left-hand panel, and the change in 10-year Treasury yield and
return to the CRSP Value-Weighted Index in the right-hand panel. Data source: Bloomberg.




                                                   33
                                       Figure 4: Open Interest

The left-hand panel plots open interest in corn, sugar, oil and GSCI normalized to the average 1986 open
interest. The right-hand panel plots annualized average monthly percentage changes in open interest for
three-year periods beginning in 1986. The GSCI Core Equal-Weighted Average is the equal-weighted
commodity average within the GSCI commodities that have data going back to 1986. All values are 52-
week trailing averages. Data source: CFTC Commitment of Trader reports.




                                                  34
                     Figure 5: Aggregate Net Notional Values by Trader Group

This left-hand panel plots the aggregate net notional value for trader groups in the Commitment of Traders
report in the 18 GSCI commodities tracked by the COT, while the right-hand panel plots the same for trader
groups in the Supplemental Commitment of Traders report for the 12 agricultural commodities tracked by
the SCOT. Notional values are calculated using fixed prices as of December 15, 2006. Data source:
Bloomberg, CFTC Commitment of Trader reports.




                                                   35
