NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RICARDIAN PRODUCTIVITY DIFFERENCES AND THE GAINS FROM TRADE
Andrei A. Levchenko
Jing Zhang
Working Paper 19641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19641
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We are grateful to Alan Deardorff, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Linda Tesar, an anonymous referee, and
seminar participants at the University of Michigan, University of Nottingham, University of Warwick,
and the 2013 NBER ITI Spring Meetings for helpful suggestions. The views expressed here are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the
Federal Reserve System, its Board of Governors, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andrei A. Levchenko and Jing Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Ricardian Productivity Differences and the Gains from Trade
Andrei A. Levchenko and Jing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 19641
November 2013
JEL No. F4
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the role of sectoral heterogeneity in determining the gains from trade. We first
show analytically that in the presence of sectoral Ricardian comparative advantage, a one- sector sufficient
statistic formula that uses total trade volumes as a share of total absorption systematically understates
the true gains from trade. Greater relative sectoral productivity differences lead to larger disparities
between the gains implied by the one-sector formula and the true gains. Using data on overall and
sectoral trade shares in a sample of 79 countries and 19 sectors we show that the multi-sector formula
implies on average 30% higher gains from trade than the one-sector formula, and as much as 100%
higher gains for some countries. We then set up and estimate a quantitative Ricardian-Heckscher-Ohlin
model in which no version of the formula applies exactly, and compare a range of sufficient statistic
formulas to the true gains in this model. Confirming the earlier results, formulas that do not take into
account sectoral heterogeneity understate the true gains from trade in the model by as much as two-thirds.
The one-sector formulas understate the gains by more in countries with greater dispersion in sectoral
productivities.
Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu
Jing Zhang
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
jzhangzn@gmail.com

1

Introduction

It has recently been discovered that under certain restrictions, models with different microstructures – Armington, Eaton-Kortum, and Melitz – deliver an identical expression for gains
from trade (Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare 2012a). In its simplest form, the gross
−1/θ

proportional gains from trade can be expressed as πii

, where πii is the share of spending on

domestically produced goods in total spending of the economy, and θ is the elasticity of trade
flows with respect to iceberg trade costs.
This result is potentially powerful for two closely related and mutually reinforcing reasons.
The first is that one need not even take a precise stand on the micro-structure of the economy
or motives for international exchange when evaluating the gains from trade. The second is that
the gains are in fact expressed in terms of only a couple of (in principle) observable values. Thus,
if the right data are available, and/or one is willing to take a stand on the value of just one or
two reduced-form parameters, one could compute a country’s gain from trade easily, without the
heavy lifting of setting up, estimating/calibrating, and solving a large-scale quantitative trade
model. This promises to dramatically lower barriers to applied policy analysis, and transform the
way policy research on the benefits of trade is conducted.
Since the formula features the share of spending on domestically produced goods in total
spending, an (over-)simplified message from this literature can easily be taken to be “all you
need to know is the overall trade volume.” By contrast, it has been understood since Ricardo
(1817) that when sectors are imperfect substitutes in consumption, comparative advantage in
international trade matters for the magnitude of the gains. Broadly speaking, the stronger the
comparative advantage – the more different countries are in their relative technology – the larger
are the gains from trade. In turn, cross-sectoral Ricardian comparative advantage will manifest
itself in differences in trade shares across sectors, as countries will have less imports as a share
of total spending in their comparative advantage sectors, and more imports in their comparative
disadvantage sectors. Does the simple formula featuring the overall trade openness adequately
capture this source of gains from trade? Arkolakis et al. (2012a) show how under certain conditions, the formula can be extended to a setting with multiple sectors, but do not discuss how the
gains from trade in a multi-sector formula differ from the gains implied by the one-sector formula.
This paper shows that by ignoring the sectoral heterogeneity in productivity – and hence
in trade volumes – the one-sector formula systematically understates the gains from trade. We
develop this result in three ways. First, we use a simplified 2-sector, 2-country model to show
analytically that the gains from trade according to the one-sector formula coincide with the true
gains only when the trade volumes relative to absorption are the same in every sector. Any
deviation from equal trade volumes across sectors – holding aggregate trade volumes relative to

1

absorption constant – leads to larger gains than what is implied by the one-sector formula. Greater
differences in relative sectoral productivities, implying greater dispersion in sectoral trade shares,
increase both the gains from trade and the disparity between the true gains and those implied by
the one-sector formula.
Second, the differences between one- and multi-sector formula gains are large in magnitude
when computed on observed trade flows. We use actual data on output and cross-border trade
at sector level in a large sample of countries to compare the gains implied by the one-sector
formula to those implied by the formula that uses information on sectoral trade shares. Almost
without exception, the gains according to the one-sector formula are lower than those according
to the multi-sector formula, confirming the analytical results. The multi-sector formula produces
30% higher gains from trade on average, and as much as 100% higher in countries with a large
dispersion in sectoral trade shares. The disparity is also highly non-uniform across countries.
There are many examples in which total trade volumes – and thus the gains according to the
one-sector formula – are quite similar for a pair of countries, but the multi-sector formula gains
differ substantially because of very different degrees of dispersion in sectoral trade shares.
The third part of the paper relates the dispersion in the sectoral trade shares and the resulting
bias in the one-sector formulas explicitly to Ricardian comparative advantage. We use the sectoral
productivity estimates and the large-scale 79-country 20-sector Ricardian-Heckscher-Ohlin model
built by Levchenko and Zhang (2011, 2012). In addition to Ricardian productivity differences, the
framework incorporates multiple factors of production, a non-tradeable sector, and intermediate
input linkages between and within the sectors. The parameters are calibrated using observed
production technologies and input-output matrices, and estimated using bilateral sector-level
trade. The model matches relative factor prices and both overall and bilateral trade quite well.
In this framework, no version of the formula applies. Because we fully solved it, we can compute
the true gains from trade inside this model. We then compare these gains to a series of sufficient
statistic formulas, to evaluate which types of formulas work best, and thus which features of the
real world are a must to include in any formula-based analysis. It is important to emphasize that
we do not claim that gains from trade computed in this model coincide with the true gains from
trade in reality. No matter how rich the model, the real world will inevitably be more complex. In
our view, the exercise is nonetheless informative because the model does capture, in a quantitative
way, several distinct sources of the gains from trade, which can then be compared to the sufficient
statistic formulas’ attempts to also capture (some of) those gains.
Our main finding is that the simpler formulas that do not use information on sectoral trade
volumes understate the true gains from trade dramatically, often by more than two-thirds. The
error in the formulas across countries is strongly negatively correlated to the strength of Ricardian comparative advantage: the one-sector formula-implied gains understate the true gains from
2

trade by more in countries with greater dispersion in sectoral productivity. The model-based
exercise thus reinforces the main result of the paper that accounting for sectoral heterogeneity in
productivity is essential for a reliable assessment of the gains from trade.
We conclude from the analytical results, the data-based evaluation, and the model-based
evaluation that policy analysis must take sectoral variation in trade volumes into account when
computing the gains from trade using the sufficient statistic approach.
This paper contributes to the recent literature on the welfare gains from trade that arose in
parallel with, and in response to, Arkolakis et al. (2012a). A number of papers explore the impact
of market structure (the extensive margin, variable markups) on the gains from trade (see, among
others, Arkolakis, Demidova, Klenow and Rodrı́guez-Clare 2008, Atkeson and Burstein 2010,
Feenstra 2010, Corcos, Del Gatto, Mion and Ottaviano 2012, Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson and
Rodrı́guez-Clare 2012b, de Blas and Russ 2012, di Giovanni and Levchenko 2013).
This paper addresses sectoral heterogeneity instead. In that respect, our analysis is most
closely related to Imbs and Méjean (2011) and Ossa (2012), who explore the biases in the one-sector
gains from trade formula induced by sectoral heterogeneity, and Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare
(2012), who provide a series of gains from trade results under different assumptions, including onesector and multi-sector formulas. Relative to these papers, our substantive point is complementary
and distinct. We explore variation in sectoral productivity and trade volumes, whereas Imbs and
Méjean (2011), Ossa (2012), and Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012) focus on the variation
in the trade elasticities across sectors. To make this distinction as transparent as possible, our
analysis is carried out under the same trade elasticity in all sectors. While Imbs and Méjean
(2011) and Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012) also allude to the dispersion in trade shares
across sectors, we relate it explicitly to Ricardian comparative advantage and present a complete
elaboration of this effect both analytically and quantitatively. In addition, we provide a modelbased evaluation of the performance of the different sufficient statistic formulas. Our argument
that sectoral productivity heterogeneity increases the gains from trade is related to the arguments
in Melitz and Redding (2013) regarding the impact of firm heterogeneity.
The last part of the paper is based on the quantitative Ricardian-Heckscher-Ohlin model
developed and estimated by Levchenko and Zhang (2011, 2012) and di Giovanni, Levchenko and
Zhang (2013). This paper shares with our earlier work the emphasis on the quantitative welfare
impact of sectoral technology differences. While our earlier papers focus on technological change
or trade integration of individual regions (China, Eastern Europe), this paper investigates the
performance of the various sufficient statistic formulas for the gains from trade. The modelbased exercise in the last part of the paper is methodologically related to studies that evaluate
empirical estimation approaches by applying them to model-simulated data in which the true
data-generating process is by construction known. See, for instance, Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan
3

(2008) for an application of this strategy in the business cycle context, and Hauk and Wacziarg
(2009) for an application in the economic growth context. Our approach of looking for observables
that accurately capture the gains from trade bears an affinity to Burstein and Cravino (2012), who
explore the conditions under which real GDP data will reflect the welfare gains from reductions
in trade costs.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 derives the analytical results on the
impact of sectoral dispersion in trade flows on the gains from trade. Section 3 compares onesector and multi-sector sufficient statistic formulas for the gains from trade using data on the
trade volumes and production. Section 4 sets up the quantitative framework and discusses the
results of comparing a range of sufficient statistic formulas to the true gains from trade. Section
5 concludes.

2

Analytical Results

This section presents a simple model to illustrate the role of sectoral heterogeneity in determining
the gains from trade. The exercise makes two main points. First, the one-sector formula for the
gains from trade systematically understates the true gains from trade when there is dispersion in
trade volumes across sectors. Holding the overall trade volume – and thus the gains implied by the
one-sector formula – constant, the true gains from trade increase in the cross-sectoral dispersion
in trade shares. And second, the degree of dispersion in trade shares across sectors is intimately
related to the strength of Ricardian comparative advantage.
Consider a two-country (1 and 2) two-sector (a and b) Eaton and Kortum (2002, henceforth
EK) model. Labor is the only input in production, and both countries are endowed with one unit:
L1 = L2 = 1. International trade is costless. Each sector is a CES composite of a continuum
of varieties [0, 1] that do not overlap across sectors, and country i can produce each infinitesimal
variety with productivity drawn randomly from the Fréchet distribution with dispersion parameter
θ common to all countries and sectors, and central tendency parameter Tij in country i, sector
j. The parameter Tij determines the average productivity draw in country i sector j. Thus, as a
shorthand we will refer to Tij as country i’s “productivity” in sector j. As the structure of the
EK model is standard, we do not reproduce the functional forms and derivations here (the more
full-fledged multi-sector EK model is described in Section 4), and focus instead on the outcomes.
Preferences are Cobb-Douglas over the broad sectors of the economy, an assumption adopted
throughout the paper. Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012) show that the overall gains from
trade depend heavily on the “upper level” elasticity of substitution, and point out that we currently have no reliable estimates of what that elasticity would be across broad sectors of the
economy. The level of sectoral disaggregation we employ throughout the paper is quite coarse

4

– 19 tradeable sectors – making the Cobb-Douglas assumption relatively more plausible than it
would be with finely disaggregated sectors.1 The result that sectoral dispersion in trade shares
will increase the gains from trade conditional on the overall trade volume is more general, however, and would obtain whenever the elasticity of substitution between sectors is lower than the
elasticity of substitution within sectors – a reasonable assumption.
To obtain analytical results under endogenous factor price determination, we assume (i) equal
expenditure shares in the two sectors and (ii) a mirror image of productivities across sectors and
countries: T1a = T2b and T1b = T2a . Of course, relative productivities are not generically the same in
the two countries, T1a /T1b 6= T2a /T2b , and thus the strength of comparative advantage can vary. The
mirror image assumption on sectoral productivity and symmetry in the utility function ensure
that the wages are equal in the two countries, w1 = w2 , which we set as the numeraire. Together
with the normalization of labor endowments to 1 this implies that the total income/expenditure
in each country is equal to 1, and trade flows expressed as shares of total expenditure also equal
absolute trade flows.
j
Denote by πni
the share of total expenditure in country n on goods coming from country i in

sector j. The import shares in country 1 from country 2 are given by
T2a
T2a w2−θ
=
,
T1a + T2a
T1a w1−θ + T2a w2−θ

(1)

T2b
T2b w2−θ
T1a
=
=
,
T1a + T2a
T1b + T2b
T1b w1−θ + T2b w2−θ

(2)

a
π12
=

b
π12
=

where the last equality uses the mirror image assumption we put on the relative productivities
(T1a = T2b and T1b = T2a ).
Importantly, regardless of the sectoral import shares, the assumptions on preferences and
technology imply that the overall imports (and thus domestically produced goods) as a share
of total absorption is always one half: π11 = π22 = 12 , regardless of the strength of comparative
advantage.2 An “econometrician” that assumes this economy is well-characterized by a one-sector
1

As a related point, our results cannot be “extrapolated” to argue that adopting an ever finer level of sectoral
disaggregation will lead to ever higher implied gains from trade, for two reasons. First, the multi-sector gains from
trade formulas explored in the paper only apply if the utility over these sectors is Cobb-Douglas. As we disaggregate
sectors further and further, the Cobb-Douglas assumption will become implausible. While the assumption of unitary
elasticity of substitution is palatable at the 19-sector level of disaggregation (Food Products, Textiles, Apparel,
etc), it will be implausible for a 190-sector level of disaggregation, since by construction more finely disaggregated
products will be more similar to each other, and thus more substitutable. Second, the model relies on the EK
structure within each sector – that is, there is a continuum of varieties within each sector, and at the sector level
countries have interior trade shares. Under much more disaggregated sectors, the EK assumption within each sector
will be strained.
2
To see this, note that the total imports as a share of spending in country 1 are given by:
π12 =

a
b
+ w1 L1 12 π12
w1 L1 12 π12
1
= ,
w 1 L1
2

5

EK model with labor as the only input in production will compute the (gross) gains from trade
as3
−1

πii θ .

(3)

This implies that gains from trade computed using only aggregate trade volumes are always
constant in this model.
However, as comparative advantage and thus sectoral trade shares change, the true gains
from trade will change as well. Welfare in country i is given by the indirect utility function, and
corresponds to real income
wi
1

,

(4)

(pa pb ) 2
where pj is the price of sector j = a, b composite, which does not vary by country since trade is
costless. Standard steps lead to the expression for welfare as a function of technology and trade
shares by sector:4
wi
(pa pb )

1
2

− 1

1 
2θ
2θ
πiia πiib
,
= Γ−1 Tia Tib

(5)

where Γ is a constant. Thus, the true gains from trade in this model are expressed as:


πiia πiib

− 1

2θ

1

= (πiia (1 − πiia ))− 2θ ,

(6)

b = π a = 1 − π a = 1 − π a . The following
where the second equality is due to the fact that π11
22
21
12

result is immediate, coming from differentiation of (6) with respect to πiia :
Proposition 1. When the share of absorption spent on domestically produced goods is the same
across sectors, πiia = πiib , (i) the true gains from trade attain their minimum, and (ii) the gains
from trade implied by the one-sector formula (3) and computed based on aggregate imports and
absorption coincide with the true gains from trade. Therefore, the one-sector formula understates
the true gains from trade as long as πiia 6= πiib .
The result stated in the proposition is illustrated in Figure 1(a). It plots the true gains from
trade and the gains from trade implied by the one-sector formula against the share of spending
on domestic goods in sector a, πiia . Because of the symmetry assumptions we imposed, the total
trade volume as a share of absorption is fixed throughout, and so the gains implied by the onesector model are constant as πiia varies. The true gains from trade, computed using information on
sectoral trade volumes, are always at least as great as the gains implied by the one-sector formula,
b
a
where the last equality comes from the fact, immediate from (1)-(2), that π12
= 1 − π12
. Since the share of total
1
spending on domestically produced goods and on imports sum to 1, π11 = 1 − π12 = 2 .
3
See Eaton and Kortum (2002), Arkolakis et al. (2012a).
4
The price index in sector j is given by pj = Γ(T1j +T2j )1/θ (Eaton and Kortum 2002). Combining this expression
j
with the trade shares (1)-(2) to write pj as a function of πii
and plugging into (4) yields (5).

6

and the deviation gets larger the larger is the asymmetry between the sectoral trade shares πiij .
The one-sector formula yields the true gains from trade only when the trade shares are identical
in the two sectors: πiia = πiib = 12 .
Finally we draw the connection between the magnitude of the gains from trade and the strength
of comparative advantage.
Corollary 1. The deviation between the true gains and the gains implied by the one-sector formula
increases as the comparative advantage becomes stronger – that is, as the differences in relative
Tij ’s grow.
The corollary is immediate from equations (1)–(2). The point at which the welfare gain implied
by the one-sector formula coincides with the true gains corresponds to identical technology in the
two countries: T1a = T1b = T2a = T2b . The sectoral absorption shares in the gains from trade formula
(6) are more different the more different are T1a and T1b . Figure 1(b) depicts this relationship. It
plots the percentage difference between the gains from trade implied by the one-sector formula
and the true gains against the dispersion in sectoral Tij ’s, measured by the standard deviation
between T1a and T1b . As expected, greater dispersion in Tij ’s results in the one-sector formula
missing the true gains by more.

3

Dispersion in Sectoral Trade Shares and Gains from Trade

It is possible that while analytically we can show that the one-sector formula systematically
understates the gains from trade in a multi-sector environment, real-world sectoral trade shares
are such that this understatement is not large in magnitude. In this section we use actual data
on manufacturing production and trade for a sample of 79 countries to assess how large are the
disparities between the gains from trade implied by the one-sector and the multi-sector formulas
under the observed sectoral trade shares.
For 52 countries in the sample, information on output comes from the 2009 UNIDO Industrial
Statistics Database. For the 27 European Union countries plus FYR Macedonia, the EUROSTAT
database contains data of superior quality, and thus for those countries we used EUROSTAT
production data. The two output data sources are merged at the roughly 2-digit ISIC Revision
3 level of disaggregation, yielding 19 manufacturing sectors. Bilateral trade data come from the
United Nations’ COMTRADE database, concorded to the same sectoral classification. Sectoral
absorption shares are averaged for the period 2000-2007, which is the time period on which we
carry out the analysis. Appendix Table A1 lists the countries used in the analysis, while Appendix
Table A2 lists the sectors.
We compare the gains from trade implied by two formulas: a one-sector formula in which the
manufacturing sector is treated as one, and a multi-sector formula. To scale the aggregate gains
7

from trade appropriately, we augment these formulas with a non-tradeable sector. The one-sector
formula is
−ξ

πii θ − 1.

(7)

The multi-sector formula (see Arkolakis et al. 2012a, section IV.A) is:
J 
Y

πiij

− ξωj
θ

− 1,

(8)

j=1

where j indexes sectors.
To be precise, (7) is the gains from trade in a model with labor as the only input in production,
one tradeable and one non-tradeable sector, with utility Cobb-Douglas in the two sectors and ξ as
the expenditure share of tradeables. The tradeable sector can be an EK-type sector as in Sections
2 and 4, or an Armington-type sector that aggregates goods from different origin countries. The
non-tradeable sector can be either an EK-type sector or a sector producing a homogeneous good.
The model that yields (8) as the gains from trade is the same except tradeables are composed
of j sectors, over which utility is Cobb-Douglas with expenditure shares ωj . Once again, each
tradeable sector can be either EK or Armington.
For a fully-fledged description of one particular model that can lead to these gains from trade
formulas, we can refer to Section 4 below. Formula (7) captures the gains from trade in the model
set out in Section 4 when (i) there is only 1 traded sector (J = 1), (ii) there is no capital (Kn = 0
∀n and αj = 1 ∀j) and (iii) there are no input-output linkages (βj = 1 ∀j). Formula (8) captures
the gains from trade in the model in Section 4 under conditions (ii)-(iii), but with J > 1.
In formulas (7) and (8), the absorption shares in manufacturing, both in aggregate (πii ) and
at the sector level (πiij ) come directly from the data on production and trade. To implement these
formulas, we must take a stand on a number of parameters. We adopt two alternative assumptions
on the Cobb-Douglas shares of sectors in consumption ωj . First, to make the mechanics behind
sectoral heterogeneity’s effect as transparent as possible, we set those weights to be equal across
sectors. Second, since ωj ’s are equivalent to consumption shares, we set them to the actual
absorption shares of each manufacturing sector in each country. Since those shares differ across
countries, and since a great deal of gross absorption of manufacturing output goes to intermediate
input usage, this approach may be less transparent, but it will account for inherent differences in
sector sizes. The other two parameters (θ and ξ) do not matter for the qualitative conclusions
about the direction of the effect, since they both exponentiate the whole formula. Anticipating the
quantitative exercise below, in which this elasticity has a concrete interpretation in the context
of the Eaton-Kortum model, we set θ to 8.28, which is the preferred value in Eaton and Kortum
(2002). We set the Cobb-Douglas utility weight of the manufacturing sector to 0.35 (Alvarez and

8

Lucas 2007).
Table 1 presents the summary statistics for the gains from trade implied by the one-sector
formula (7) and the multi-sector formula (8), under two assumptions on the utility weights ωj .
The bottom two rows report the summary statistics for the proportional difference between the
multi-sector gains from trade and the one-sector gains from trade. The clear result is that the onesector formula systematically understates the gains from trade relative to the multi-sector formula.
The difference is substantial in proportional terms: the gains implied by the multi-sector formulas
are 32% and 56% larger, on average, than the one-sector gains. In the more extreme cases, the
gains implied by the multi-sector formulas are twice as large as the gains implied by the one-sector
formula. The direction of the bias is also (nearly) universal: in every single one of the 79 countries,
the expenditure-weighted formula implies larger gains than the one-sector formula, and in 78 out
of 79 countries, the equal-weighted formula implies larger gains.
Figure 2 presents the results graphically, by plotting the multi-sector formula gains on the yaxis against the one-sector formula gains on the x-axis. The solid dots denote the gains implied by
the equal-weighted sectors, while the hollow dots denote the gains under the expenditure weights.
For convenience, a 45-degree line is added to the plot. It is immediate that nearly all the dots are
above the 45-degree line – the multi-sector gains are larger than the one-sector gains. It is also
clear that the larger are the total gains, the greater is the deviation between the one-sector and
the multi-sector formulas.
To provide intuition for how sectoral heterogeneity conditions the gains from trade, consider
the comparison between Bolivia and the Czech Republic. In the data, these two countries have
similar overall openness in the manufacturing sector, and thus similar gains from trade according
to the one-sector formula. In fact, Czech Republic’s one-sector formula gains, at 2.39%, are slightly
larger than the one-sector formula gains for Bolivia, which are 2.06%. However, at a similar –
in fact slightly lower – level of overall openness, the dispersion in trade volumes across sectors is
much greater in Bolivia. Figure 3 depicts the shares of domestically produced goods in sectoral
spending, πiij , for Bolivia and Czech Republic, ranking sectors from the most open (lowest πiij ) to
the least open for each country. It is immediate that the variation in openness across sectors in
Bolivia is higher. In its most open sectors, a far greater share of total expenditure goes to imported
goods, and in its least open sector, a lower share of expenditure goes to imports, compared to the
Czech Republic. This greater heterogeneity implies that Bolivia’s gains from trade are actually
higher than Czech Republic’s, not lower as implied by the one-sector formula. The differences in
sectoral heterogeneity also mean that the deviation between the one- and the multi-sector gains is
much larger in Bolivia. The expenditure-weighted multi-sector gains in Bolivia are 3.93%, nearly
double the gains implied by the one-sector formula, and the equal-weighted gains are 5.57%, or
2.7 times larger. By contrast, for the Czech Republic, the multi-sector gains are 2.67% and 2.68%,
9

or only 11−12% larger than the one-sector gains.
The pattern that greater dispersion in sectoral πiij ’s implies greater deviations between multiand one-sector gains is a general one. Figure 4 plots the proportional difference between the
one-sector gains and the expenditure-weighted multi-sector gains against the standard deviation
of πiij ’s across sectors in each country, which we use as a measure of dispersion in trade shares
across sectors. The correlation between the two is −0.82. In countries with larger dispersion in
trade shares across sectors, the one-sector formula understates the gains by more, relative to the
multi-sector formula.

4

Quantitative Assessment

The previous section performed a data-driven exercise: it used actual trade shares by sector to
compare the gains implied by the different formulas. However, variation in sectoral trade shares
alone does not itself establish Ricardian comparative advantage, since trade shares can differ for
a variety of reasons. In addition, the world economy is much more complex than the models that
lead to either formula (7) or formula (8), what we cannot do purely with the data is compare the
formula-implied gains to the true gains from trade.
While we cannot ever know the true gains from trade in the real world, in this section we
implement a large-scale quantitative trade model, and conduct a model-based exercise in which
we compare the true gains from trade in that model to a range of possible sufficient statistic
formulas calculated based on model quantities that can (in principle) be measured in actual data.
The exercise has two goals. First, we relate the performance of the different sufficient statistic
formulas explicitly to Ricardian comparative advantage. And second, we evaluate which, if any,
sufficient statistic formulas that can be computed using real-world data are a good approximation
to the true gains from trade in a world that is more complex. Aside from the sufficient statistic
formula extensions that account for sectoral heterogeneity such as (8), a number of other extensions are known. For instance, sufficient statistic formulas can be enriched to take into account
input linkages, which are well-known to increase the gains from trade. In the world characterized
by multiple sectors, input linkages, as well as many additional features at the same time, it is
an open quantitative question which extensions to the sufficient statistic formula are essential to
get closer to the true gains. This exercise can thus assess the relative importance of the main
mechanism in this paper – cross-sectoral dispersion in trade shares – compared to other sources
of error in the simple gains from trade formulas.
Different sufficient statistic formulas also have very different data requirements. Clearly, a
one-sector formula that uses only total trade flows and gross output requires less data than a
multi-sector formula. Thus, from the perspective of applied trade policy evaluation using the

10

sufficient statistic approach, it is important to know what are the minimum data requirements
for a reliable assessment of the gains from trade.

4.1

The Environment

The world is comprised of N countries, indexed by n and i. There are J tradeable sectors, plus
one nontradeable sector J + 1. Utility over these sectors in country n is given by

Un = 

 ξn

J
Y


j ωj

Yn

YnJ+1



1−ξn

,

(9)

j=1

where ξn denotes the Cobb-Douglas weight of the tradeable sector composite good, ωj is the share
P
of tradeable sector j in total tradeable expenditure (and Jj=1 ωj = 1), YnJ+1 is the nontradeablesector composite good, and Ynj is the composite good in tradeable sector j.5
Each sector j aggregates a continuum of varieties q ∈ [0, 1] unique to each sector using a CES
production function:
Qjn

Z
=

1

ε−1
Qjn (q) ε dq

ε
 ε−1

,

0

where ε denotes the elasticity of substitution across varieties q, Qjn is the total output of sector
j in country n, and Qjn (q) is the amount of variety q that is used in production in sector j and
country n. Producing one unit of good q in sector j in country n requires

1
j
zn
(q)

input bundles.

Production uses labor (L), capital (K), and intermediate inputs from other sectors. The cost
of an input bundle is:
cjn

=




α 1−α βj
wn j rn j

J+1
Y

pkn

γk,j

!1−βj
,

k=1

where wn is the wage, rn is the return to capital, and pkn is the price of intermediate input from
sector k. The value-added based labor intensity is given by αj , and the share of value added in
total output by βj . Both vary by sector. The shares of inputs from other sectors, γk,j vary by
output industry j as well as input industry k.
As standard in the EK model, productivity znj (q) for each q ∈ [0, 1] in each sector j is random,
and drawn from the Fréchet distribution with cdf:
j −θ

Fnj (z) = e−Tn z .
In this distribution, the absolute advantage term Tnj varies by both country and sector, with
higher values of Tnj implying higher average productivity draws in sector j in country n. The
5

Note that unlike in Sections 2 and 3, the expenditure share of tradeables ξn will differ across countries and
calibrated using data as described below.

11

parameter θ captures dispersion, with larger values of θ implying smaller dispersion in draws.
The production cost of one unit of good q in sector j and country n is thus equal to cjn /znj (q).
Each country can produce each good in each sector, and international trade is subject to iceberg
costs: djni > 1 units of good q produced in sector j in country i must be shipped to country n in
order for one unit to be available for consumption there. The trade costs need not be symmetric
– djni need not equal djin – and will vary by sector. We normalize djnn = 1 for any n and j.
All the product and factor markets are perfectly competitive, and thus the price at which
country i supplies tradeable good q in sector j to country n is:
pjni (q)

=

cji
zij (q)

!
djni .

Buyers of each good q in tradeable sector j in country n will only buy from the cheapest source
country, and thus the price actually paid for this good in country n will be:
pjn (q) = min

i=1,...,N

n
o
pjni (q) .

The model thus contains two features that make a closed-form expression for gains from
trade impossible (or at least currently unknown): multiple factors of production and crosssectoral input-output linkages, both within the tradeable sector, and between tradeables and
non-tradeables.

4.2

Characterization of Equilibrium

The competitive equilibrium of this model world economy consists of a set of prices, allocation
rules, and trade shares such that (i) given the prices, all firms’ inputs satisfy the first-order conditions, and their output is given by the production function; (ii) given the prices, the consumers’
demand satisfies the first-order conditions; (iii) the prices ensure the market clearing conditions
for labor, capital, tradeable goods and nontradeable goods; (iv) trade shares ensure balanced
trade for each country.
The set of prices includes the wage rate wn , the rental rate rn , the sectoral prices {pjn }J+1
j=1 , and
the aggregate price Pn in each country n. The allocation rules include the capital and labor allocaj J+1
j J+1
tion across sectors {Knj , Ljn }J+1
j=1 , final consumption demand {Yn }j=1 , and total demand {Qn }j=1

(both final and intermediate goods) for each sector. The trade shares include the expenditure
j
share πni
in country n on goods coming from country i in sector j.

12

4.2.1

Demand and Prices

It can be easily shown that the price of sector j’s output will be given by:
pjn

Z

1

=

pjn (q)1−ε dq

1
 1−ε

.

0

Following the standard EK approach, it is helpful to define
Φjn

=

N
X


−θ
Tij cji djni
.

i=1

This value summarizes, for country n, the access to production technologies in sector j. Its value
will be higher if in sector j, country n’s trading partners have high productivity (Tij ) or low cost
(cji ). It will also be higher if the trade costs that country n faces in this sector are low. Standard
steps lead to the familiar result that the price of good j in country n is simply
pjn = Γ Φjn

where Γ = Γ

θ+1−ε
θ

1
 1−ε

− θ1

,

(10)

, with Γ the Gamma function. The consumption price index in country

n is then:

Pn = Bn 

J
Y

ξn
(pjn )ωj 

1−ξn
,
(pJ+1
n )

(11)

j=1

where Bn = ξn−ξn (1 − ξn )−(1−ξn ) .
Both capital and labor are mobile across sectors and immobile across countries, and trade is
balanced. The budget constraint (or the resource constraint) of the consumer is thus given by
J+1
X

pjn Ynj = wn Ln + rn Kn ,

(12)

j=1

where Kn and Ln are the endowments of capital and labor in country n.
N
Given the set of prices {wn , rn , Pn , {pjn }J+1
j=1 }n=1 , we first characterize the optimal allocations

from final demand. Consumers maximize utility (9) subject to the budget constraint (12). The
first order conditions associated with this optimization problem imply the following final demand:
pjn Ynj = ξn ωj (wn Ln + rn Kn ), for all j = {1, .., J}
and
J+1
pJ+1
= (1 − ξn )(wn Ln + rn Kn ).
n Yn

13

4.2.2

Production Allocation and Market Clearing

Let Qjn denote the total sectoral demand in country n and sector j. Qjn is used for both final
consumption and as intermediate inputs in domestic production of all sectors. Denote by Xnj =
j
pjn Qjn the total spending on the sector j goods in country n, and by Xni
country n’s total spending

on sector j goods coming from country i, i.e. n’s imports of j from country i. The EK structure
in each sector j delivers the standard result that the probability of importing good q from country
j
j
i, πni
is equal to the share of total spending on goods coming from country i, Xni
/Xnj , and is

given by:
j
Xni
Xnj

j
= πni
=


−θ
Tij cji djni
Φjn

.

(13)

The market clearing condition for expenditures on sector j in country n is:
pjn Qjn

=

pjn Ynj

+

J
X

(1 − βk )γj,k

N
X

!
k k k
πin
pi Qi

J+1
+ (1 − βJ+1 )γj,J+1 pJ+1
n Qn .

i=1

k=1

Total expenditure in sector j = 1, ..., J + 1 in country n, pjn Qjn , is the sum of (i) domestic final
consumption expenditure pjn Ynj ; (ii) expenditure on sector j goods as intermediate inputs in
P
P
k k k
all the traded sectors Jk=1 (1 − βk )γj,k ( N
i=1 πin pi Qi ), and (iii) expenditure on the j’s sector
J+1
intermediate inputs in the domestic non-traded sector (1 − βJ+1 )γj,J+1 pJ+1
n Qn . These market

clearing conditions summarize two important features of the world economy captured by our
model: complex international production linkages, as much of world trade is in intermediate
inputs, and a good crosses borders multiple times before being consumed (Hummels, Ishii and
Yi 2001); and two-way input linkages between the tradeable and the nontradeable sectors.
In each tradeable sector j, some goods q are imported from abroad and some goods q are exP
j j j
ported to the rest of the world. Country n’s exports in sector j are given by EXnj = N
i=1 1Ii6=n πin pi Qi ,
P
j j j
and its imports in sector j are given by IMnj = N
i=1 1Ii6=n πni pn Qn , where 1Ii6=n is the indicator
PJ
j
function. The total exports of country n are then EXn =
j=1 EXn , and total imports are
P
IMn = Jj=1 IMnj . Trade balance requires that for any country n, EXn − IMn = 0.
PN j j j
Given the total production revenue in tradeable sector j in country n,
i=1 πin pi Qi , the
optimal sectoral factor allocations must satisfy
N
X

j j j
πin
pi Qi =

i=1

wn Ljn
rn Knj
=
.
αj βj
(1 − αj )βj

For the nontradeable sector J + 1, the optimal factor allocations in country n are simply given by
J+1
pJ+1
=
n Qn

wn LJ+1
rn KnJ+1
n
=
.
αJ+1 βJ+1
(1 − αJ+1 )βJ+1
14

Finally, the feasibility conditions for factors are given by, for any n,
J+1
X

Ljn = Ln and

j=1

4.3

J+1
X

Knj = Kn .

j=1

Estimation, Calibration, and Solution

The core implementation step of this model is the estimation of the sector-level technology parameters Tnj for a large set of countries. The technology parameters in the tradeable sectors relative
to a reference country (the U.S.) are estimated using data on sectoral output and bilateral trade.
The procedure relies on fitting a structural gravity equation implied by the model. Intuitively,
if controlling for the typical gravity determinants of trade, a country spends relatively more on
domestically produced goods in a particular sector, it is revealed to have either a high relative
productivity or a low relative unit cost in that sector. The procedure then uses data on factor
and intermediate input prices to net out the role of factor costs, yielding an estimate of relative
productivity. This step also produces estimates of bilateral, sector-level trade costs djni . The next
step is to estimate the technology parameters in the tradeable sectors for the U.S.. This procedure
requires directly measuring TFP at the sectoral level using data on real output and inputs, and
then correcting measured TFP for selection due to trade. Third, the nontradeable technology for
all countries is calibrated using the first-order condition of the model and the relative prices of
nontradeables observed in the data. The detailed procedures for all three steps are described in
Levchenko and Zhang (2011) and reproduced in Appendix A.
Estimation of sectoral productivity parameters Tnj and trade costs djni requires data on total
output by sector, as well as sectoral data on bilateral trade, that are described at the beginning
of Section 3. Productivity and trade cost estimation requires an assumption on the dispersion
parameter θ. We pick the value of θ = 8.28, which is the preferred estimate of EK, and in addition
assume that it does not vary across sectors.6
6
There are no reliable estimates of how θ varies across sectors, and thus we do not model this variation. Shikher
(2004, 2005, 2011), Eaton, Kortum, Neiman and Romalis (2011), and Burstein and Vogel (2012), among others,
follow the same approach of assuming the same θ across sectors. Caliendo and Parro (2010) use tariff data and
triple differencing to estimate sector-level θ. However, their approach may impose too much structure and/or
be dominated by measurement error: at times the values of θ they estimate are negative. In addition, in each
sector the restriction that θ > ε − 1 must be satisfied, and it is not clear whether Caliendo and Parro (2010)’s
estimated sectoral θ’s meet this restriction in every case. Our approach is thus conservative by being agnostic on
this variation across sectors. It is also important to assess how the results below are affected by the value of this
parameter. One may be especially concerned about how the results change under lower values of θ. Lower θ implies
greater within-sector heterogeneity in the random productivity draws. Thus, trade flows become less sensitive to
the costs of the input bundles (cji ), and the gains from intra-sectoral trade become larger relative to the gains from
inter-sectoral trade. In Levchenko and Zhang (2011), we estimated the sectoral productivities for a sample of 75
countries assuming instead a value of θ = 4, which has been advocated by Simonovska and Waugh (2011) and
is at or near the bottom of the range that has been used in the literature. Overall, the results are remarkably
similar. The correlation between estimated Tij ’s under θ = 4 and under θ = 8.28 is above 0.95, and there is actually
somewhat greater variability in Tij ’s under θ = 4.

15

In order to implement the model numerically, we must in addition calibrate the following sets
of parameters: (i) preference parameters ωj and ξn ; (ii) production function parameters ε, αj , βj ,
γk,j for all sectors j and k; (iii) country factor endowments Ln and Kn .
The share of expenditure on traded goods, ξn in each country is sourced from Yi and Zhang
(2010), who compile this information for 30 developed and developing countries. For countries
unavailable in the Yi and Zhang data, values of ξn are imputed based on fitting a simple linear
relationship to log PPP-adjusted per capita GDP from the Penn World Tables. The fit of this
simple bivariate linear relationship is quite good, with the R2 of 0.55. The taste parameters for
tradeable sectors ωj were set equal to final consumption expenditure shares in the U.S. sourced
from the U.S. Input-Output matrix.
The production function parameters αj and βj are estimated using the output, value added,
and wage bill data from EUROSTAT and UNIDO. To compute αj for each sector, we calculate
the share of the total wage bill in value added, and take a simple median across countries (taking
the mean yields essentially the same results). To compute βj , we calculate the ratio of value
added to total output for each country and sector, and take the median across countries.
The intermediate input coefficients γk,j are obtained from the Direct Requirements Table
for the United States. We use the 1997 Benchmark Detailed Make and Use Tables (covering
approximately 500 distinct sectors), as well as a concordance to the ISIC Revision 3 classification
to build a Direct Requirements Table at the 2-digit ISIC level. The Direct Requirements Table
gives the value of the intermediate input in row k required to produce one dollar of final output
in column j. Thus, it is the direct counterpart of the input coefficients γk,j . Note that we assume
these to be the same in all countries.7 In addition, we use the U.S. I-O matrix to obtain αJ+1
and βJ+1 in the nontradeable sector.8 The elasticity of substitution between varieties within each
tradeable sector, ε, is set to 4 (of course, as is well known, this value plays no role in this model,
beyond affecting the value of the constant Γ). Appendix Table A2 lists the key parameter values
for each sector: αj , βj , the share of nontradeable inputs in total inputs γJ+1,j , and the taste
parameter ωj .
The total labor force in each country, Ln , and the total capital stock, Kn , are computed based
on the Penn World Tables 6.3. Following the standard approach in the literature (see, e.g. Hall and
Jones 1999, Bernanke and Gürkaynak 2001, Caselli 2005), the total labor force is calculated from
7

di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) provide suggestive evidence that at such a coarse level of aggregation, InputOutput matrices are indeed similar across countries. To check robustness of the results, Levchenko and Zhang (2011)
collected country-specific I-O matrices from the GTAP database. Productivities computed based on country-specific
I-O matrices were very similar to the baseline values, with the median correlation of 0.98, and all but 3 out of 75
countries with a correlation of 0.93 or above, and the minimum correlation of 0.65.
8
The U.S. I-O matrix provides an alternative way of computing αj and βj . These parameters calculated based
on the U.S. I-O table are very similar to those obtained from UNIDO, with the correlation coefficients between
them above 0.85 in each case. The U.S. I-O table implies greater variability in αj ’s and βj ’s across sectors than
does UNIDO.

16

data on the total GDP per capita and per worker.9 The total capital stock is calculated using the
perpetual inventory method that assumes a depreciation rate of 6%: Kn,t = (1−0.06)Kn,t−1 +In,t ,
where In,t is total investment in country n in period t. For most countries, investment data start
in 1950, and the initial value of Kn is set equal to In,0 /(γ + 0.06), where γ is the average growth
rate of investment in the first 10 years for which data are available.
Given the estimated sectoral productivities, factor endowments, trade costs, and model parameters, we solve the system of equations defining the equilibrium under the baseline values. The
algorithm for solving the model is described in Levchenko and Zhang (2011). Then, to compute
the true gains from trade in the model we re-solve it under the assumption that each country is
in autarky, and compare the autarky welfare to the welfare in the baseline. Finally, we compute
in the baseline model a range of values that are (potentially) observable in the real-world data,
and that are then used to compute gains from trade according to a range of formulas.

4.4

Model Fit

Table 2 compares the wages, returns to capital, and the trade shares in the baseline model solution
and in the data. The top panel shows that mean and median wages implied by the model are
very close to the data. The correlation coefficient between model-implied wages and those in the
data is above 0.99. The second panel performs the same comparison for the return to capital.
Since it is difficult to observe the return to capital in the data, we follow the approach adopted
in the estimation of Tnj ’s and impute rn from an aggregate factor market clearing condition:
rn /wn = (1 − α)Ln / (αKn ), where α is the aggregate share of labor in GDP, assumed to be 2/3.
Once again, the average levels of rn are very similar in the model and the data, and the correlation
between the two is about 0.95.
Next, we compare the trade shares implied by the model to those in the data. The third panel
j
of Table 2 reports the spending on domestically produced goods as a share of overall spending, πnn
.

These values reflect the overall trade openness, with lower values implying higher international
j
trade as a share of absorption. Though we under-predict overall trade slightly (model πnn
’s tend

to be higher), the averages are quite similar, and the correlation between the model and data
values is 0.92. Finally, the bottom panel compares the international trade flows in the model and
the data. The averages are very close, and the correlation between model and data is about 0.91.
We conclude from this exercise that our model matches quite closely the relative incomes of
countries as well as bilateral and overall trade flows observed in the data.
9

Using the variable name conventions in the Penn World Tables, Ln = 1000 ∗ pop ∗ rgdpch/rgdpwok.

17

4.5

Comparison of Candidate Gains from Trade Formulas

All throughout, welfare is defined as the indirect utility function. Straightforward steps can
be used to show that indirect utility in each country i is equal to total income divided by the
price level. Since the model is competitive, total income equals the total returns to factors of
production. Expressed in per capita terms welfare is thus:
wi + ri ki
,
Pi
where ki = Ki /Li is capital per worker, and Pi comes from equation (11).
The true gains from trade in this model are computed by solving the baseline model, calculating
welfare, and comparing this welfare to a counterfactual scenario in which all countries are assumed
to be in autarky. The question is, from a pragmatic perspective, whether there is a formula based
on quantities potentially observable in the data that can approximate the true gains from trade
well. We go through a sequence of candidate formulas, with different data requirements, to see
which data are essential to reliably compute the gains from trade using a formula.
To facilitate comparisons, Table 3 summarizes the formulas, the underlying models that deliver
those formulas as the exact gains from trade, and the data requirements for implementing each
formula. We proceed in the increasing order of data requirements. The simplest is a one-sector
formula that does not distinguish explicitly between the traded and the non-traded sector, and
relies only on observing the aggregate trade volume relative to the total gross output. To compute
it, one would only need to collect data on aggregate imports and exports, as well as the gross
output in the economy. The latter may not be as readily available as total GDP, but could be
approximated, for instance, by “grossing up” total GDP by a factor that corresponds to one minus
the share of intermediates in total output. One would then take these data and apply the formula
−1/θ

πii

− 1 where πii = (OUTPUT − EXPORTS)/(OUTPUT − EXPORTS + IMPORTS).

This formula can be augmented to account for intermediate input linkages. Since it does not
distinguish between the tradeable and the non-tradeable sectors, the strength of the intermediate
input linkages simply becomes the share of value added to total gross output, and thus to augment this formula to include input linkages, no extra data are required beyond aggregate value
−1/βθ

added, which is just total GDP. The augmented formula becomes πii

− 1, where β = VALUE

ADDED/OUTPUT in the aggregate economy.
To take explicit account of the fact that much of the domestic GDP is in the non-tradeable
sector, one could use some information on the output of tradeables, and the share of tradeables
in value added, to refine this formula. The data requirements for implementing this formula call
only for aggregate imports and exports, the gross output of the tradeable sector, and the share of
tradeables in total value added. The formula for the gains from trade is then given by (7) (where
18

now ξi can vary by country).
This formula can also be augmented with intermediate input linkages, under the assumption
that these input linkages are strictly within-sector. That is, the tradeable sector only uses tradeable intermediates, and the non-tradeable only non-tradeable intermediates. The formula then
becomes:
−

ξi

πii βθ − 1.

(14)

In terms of measuring intermediate input linkages, there are now a couple of ways to proceed.
The first, less data-demanding way is to measure the linkages by the share of value added to output
in the tradeable and the non-tradeable sectors, exactly as above. That approach would give the
input linkages the maximum strength, but may potentially overstate the true gains from trade.
This is because a significant share of input usage in the tradeable sector goes to non-tradeables
(see Appendix Table A2), and those are not subject to comparative-advantage driven gains from
trade. Thus, measuring the strength of input linkages simply by the share of value added in total
output overstates international trade’s benefits acting through this channel.
The second approach to calibrating the linkages is to isolate the share of intermediate input
usage in the tradeable sector that goes to tradeables. This will quantify the intermediate-input
driven gains more precisely, but raises the data requirements. In particular, now we need to
know not just the total value added and total output, but the breakdown of the input usage into
tradeables and non-tradeables. In other words, we now need the (2-sector) input-output table,
and the β in (14) is now one minus the share of spending on tradeable intermediate inputs in the
tradeable sector gross output.
Finally, one can implement explicitly multi-sector formulas. The data requirements are much
higher in this case, as we now need imports, exports, and gross output at the sector level for
tradeables. Without input-output linkages, the formula for the gains from trade in an explicitly
multi-sector context is given by (8) (where again ξi is now country-specific).
This formula can be extended to incorporate within-sector intermediate linkages, in the two
ways that parallel the two-sector tradeable-non-tradeable formula. The first way, that does not
require any additional data, is to proxy for the strength of intermediate input linkages by the
share of value added to total output in each sector. In that case, the gains from trade formula
becomes

J 
Y

πiij

− ξi ωj
βj θ

− 1,

(15)

j=1

where βj is simply the value added over output in sector j.
Once again, this approach will overstate the contribution of international trade through the
input channel because some intermediates used in the tradeable sector are non-tradeable, and

19

thus not subject to the productivity gains from trade. To confine the impact of intermediate
inputs to the tradeable inputs only, one must use the full multi-sector input-output table, and
for each sector j set βj to one minus the share of tradeable inputs in total output in each sector.
Note that this last option is the most data-intensive, requiring the complete input-output table
in addition to data on sectoral output and cross-border trade. While formula (15) does capture
some important intermediate input linkages, it still mismeasures the nature of the real-world input
linkages because it assumes that all of the linkages are within-sector. That is, the Textile sector
uses only Textiles as intermediate inputs, the Apparel sector uses only Apparel, and so on. Thus,
to the extent that cross-sectoral input linkages are important – for instance, Apparel uses a great
deal of Textiles as intermediates – this formula will miss those. It is ultimately a quantitative
question, given the observed input-output matrices, how much those linkages matter.
Before moving on to the results, we pause to clarify the nature of the exercise. Each of the
formulas offered above can be calculated based on observable data, and thus would not require the
researcher to implement, estimate/calibrate, and perform counterfactuals in, a complete quantitative model. Thus, the potential promise of these formulas is to enable researchers to estimate
gains from trade quickly and easily.
For each of the formulas offered above, there is a model under which that formula represents
the exact gains from trade. However, all of these behind-the-scenes models are simplifications,
both with respect to reality, and with respect to the full quantitative model. The question
we answer below is whether, for the purposes of computing the gains from trade, any of these
simplified models represent reasonable approximations to (i) the full quantitative model and (ii)
the real world. Our exercise provides the complete answer to (i). With respect to (ii), our results
are of course more suggestive, but here the discipline of the estimation and calibration of the
quantitative model to real world data, and the match to observed trade flows is helpful.
Table 4 reports the summary statistics for the gains from trade in our 79-country model. The
top row reports the true gains from trade implied by the model. On average, the gains are 7.22%,
ranging from 1% to 22% in this sample of countries. The rest of the table presents the results of
using the formulas to compute the gains from trade. By and large, the message from this table is
that the formulas tend to under-predict the gains from trade, often by a significant margin. At
the extreme, the one-sector, no-intermediate formula delivers the gains from trade of 1.88% at the
mean, or less than a third of the true model gains. The range of gains across countries predicted
by these formulas is also much narrower than the range of true gains. Thus, the formulas tend to
understate both the mean, and the variation in the gains from trade.
The one exception to this regularity is the multi-sector formula that assumes all of the intermediate good usage to come from the sector itself (second-to-last row). That formula overstates
both the average gains, and the dispersion. As we mention above, this overstatement is due
20

to the fact that in the real world and in the quantitative model, a large share (about 40%) of
intermediates are actually non-tradeables. These non-tradeables do not benefit from imported,
more productive varieties when the country opens to trade, and thus the formula featuring the
total intermediate input usage in effect overstates the productivity-enhancing impact of imported
intermediates.
Table 5 summarizes the performance of the different formulas relative to the true gains. The
first 4 columns present the summary statistics for the proportional deviation of the formulaimplied gains from the true ones. We see that most of the formulas understate the true gains
by 40 to 70%, with the exception of the second-to-last formula, which overstates them by nearly
50%. For most formulas, deviations can be quite large for individual countries. At the extreme,
some formulas miss 80 to 90% of the true gains from trade, while the multi-sector, total linkage
formula overstates the gains for one of the countries by 100%. We can also see that the bias is
quite systematic, with most of the formulas understating the gains for every single country, while
one of the formulas overstates the gains for every country.
The clear winner is in the last row. The formula that features multiple sectors, intermediate
inputs, and that only uses tradeable intermediate inputs to reflect the intermediate input linkages
gets closest to the true gains. This is not surprising, given that it is the most sophisticated and
data-intensive approach. However, what is striking is how much better the results are compared
to the simpler alternatives. On average, the last formula understates the gains by a relatively
modest 11%. The range of its deviations from the true model gains is narrow, from −0.38 to 0.23,
and nearly symmetric around zero. Columns (5) and (6) of Table 5 report the mean squared error
and the mean absolute error for each formula relative to the true gains. The last row emerges as
the clear winner, with both the mean squared error and the mean absolute errors nearly an order
of magnitude lower than every other formula, and with the mean absolute error being nearly 2
times smaller than the next best formula.
We conclude from this exercise that, not surprisingly, in order to obtain reliable results for
the gains from trade, it is essential to both (i) use sector-level data, and (ii) reflect input-output
linkages carefully using input-output tables. Point (i) thus confirms analytical results in Section
2 and the data-driven exercise in Section 3.
Finally, it turns out that the second-best formula is not also the second-most complicated or
data-intensive. Instead, the second-best formula is a two sector (tradeable/non-tradeable) formula
with input linkages, that features the ratio of tradeable value added to tradeable output as the
measure of linkages. The average deviation for that formula from the true gains is also −11%,
just as for the best one. It is also the only formula aside from the winner that produces both
positive and negative deviations from true gains. Finally, its mean squared and absolute errors
are substantially lower than the rest of the field, though still much higher than the winner’s.
21

This potentially suggests that one could get fairly close to the true gains with much lower
data requirements. To compute that formula, one needs total imports and exports, and total
tradeable and non-tradeable output and value added. No sectoral output and trade flows, and no
input-output matrices are required to implement that formula. However, it should be clear from
the discussion above that this a case of “two wrongs make a right.” As shown throughout the
paper, ignoring the dispersion among tradeable sectors leads to a systematic understatement of
the true gains. On the other hand, attributing all of the intermediate usage in the tradeable sector
to tradeables overstates the gains from trade coming from input linkages. Those two opposing
forces apparently largely cancel out. Since this cancelling out is clearly not a general feature of
all models and calibrations, we would be cautious to conclude that one could use this simpler
and easier to calculate formula as a good surrogate when sectoral data and IO matrices are not
available.

4.6

The Role of Ricardian Comparative Advantage

The simple analytical framework in Section 2 illustrates that the one-sector formula will understate
the gains by more the stronger is Ricardian comparative advantage – that is, the greater is the
dispersion in Tij ’s. Column (7) of Table 5 reports the correlation between the error of the formula
relative to the true gains and a simple heuristic measure of how strong is a country’s comparative
advantage, namely the coefficient of variation in sectoral productivities relative to the world
frontier. Countries with a high coefficient of variation are considered to have “strong comparative
advantage,” in the sense that their technology has high relative dispersion across sectors. The
intuition we built using analytical results suggests that in countries with a high coefficient of
variation in technology the one-sector formulas will understate the gains by more: a negative
correlation. This is confirmed in the quantitative exercise: the correlations between the strength
of comparative advantage and the errors in the one-sector formulas are all negative and highly
significant. These negative correlations disappear when we go to the multi-sector formulas (bottom
3 rows). Since the multi-sector formulas take proper account of sectoral heterogeneity, in those
formulas there is no longer a systematically greater understatement of the gains for countries with
stronger comparative advantage.
The negative relationship is depicted graphically in Figure 5. In countries with greater dispersion in sectoral productivity, the one-sector formula understates the true gains by more. This is
the quantitative, productivity estimates-based counterpart of Figure 1(b) in the analytical section.

22

5

Conclusion

The discovery that several models with very different micro-structures deliver closed-form expressions for the gains from trade that are both (i) identical to each other and (ii) computable
based on a small number of observables is a potentially transformative one in the realm of policy
research. If made operational, this approach can at the same time dramatically lower barriers to
quantitative evaluation of trade policy, and render the results much more general.
This paper takes a step toward assessing the applicability of this approach to real-world policy
analysis. It starts from the observation that when there are multiple sectors, a one-sector formula
that only incorporates information on the total trade volume relative to absorption systematically
understates the true gains from trade. The basic economic intuition for this result can be gleaned
from the Ricardian motive for trade: larger sectoral productivity differences will raise the gains
from trade even holding constant the overall trade volume. We then use actual data on sectoral
and aggregate absorption shares in the manufacturing sector in a sample of 79 countries to show
that this effect is large quantitatively: the multi-sector formula implies gains from trade that are
30% higher on average than the gains according to the one-sector formula, and as much as 100%
higher in countries with large dispersion in sectoral trade shares.
Finally, we set up a quantitative model with many features relevant in the real world, such as
multiple factors of production, a non-tradeable sector, and the full set of input-output linkages
between sectors. The model is implemented using actual data on production functions, inputoutput matrices, and trade flows. It matches relative incomes and bilateral and overall trade flows
quite closely. We evaluate whether there are sufficient statistic formulas that, when computed
inside this model, can approximate well the true gains from trade in the model. It turns out that
augmented formulas that take into account input-output linkages but not sectoral trade shares, or
sectoral trade shares but not input-output linkages understate the true model gains substantially.
However, an appropriate combination of information on sectoral trade flows and input linkages
performs quite well relative to others, understating the true model gains by only 11% on average.
We conclude that sectoral heterogeneity in productivity and trade volumes has a first-order
impact on the gains from trade, and that it should be taken into account in exercises that use the
sufficient statistic approach to compute the gains from trade.

23

Appendix A

Procedure for Estimating Tnj , djni , and ωj

This appendix reproduces from Levchenko and Zhang (2011) the details of the procedure for estimating technology, trade costs, and taste parameters required to implement the model. Interested
readers should consult that paper for further details on estimation steps and data sources.

A.1

Tradeable Sector Relative Technology

We now focus on the tradeable sectors. Following the standard EK approach, first divide trade
shares by their domestic counterpart:
j
πni
j
πnn

=

j
Xni
j
Xnn


−θ
Tij cji djni
=
 −θ ,
j
Tn cjn

which in logs becomes:
ln

j
Xni

!

j
Xnn





= ln Tij (cji )−θ − ln Tnj (cjn )−θ − θ ln djni .

Let the (log) iceberg costs be given by the following expression:
j
j
+ RT Ajni + exji + νni
,
ln djni = djk + bjni + CUni

where djk is an indicator variable for a distance interval. Following EK, we set the distance
intervals, in miles, to [0, 350], [350, 750], [750, 1500], [1500, 3000], [3000, 6000], [6000, maximum).
Additional variables are whether the two countries share a common border (bjni ), belong to a
j
currency union (CUni
), or to a regional trade agreement (RT Ajni ). Following the arguments in
j
Waugh (2010), we include an exporter fixed effect exji . Finally, there is an error term νni
. Note

that all the variables have a sector superscript j: we allow all the trade cost proxy variables to
affect true iceberg trade costs djni differentially across sectors. There is a range of evidence that
trade volumes at sector level vary in their sensitivity to distance or common border (see, among
many others, Do and Levchenko 2007, Berthelon and Freund 2008).
This leads to the following final estimating equation:
ln

j
Xni
j
Xnn

!




−θ 
= ln Tij (cji )−θ − θexji − ln Tnj cjn
|
{z
}|
{z
}
Exporter Fixed Effect

−θdjk
|

−

θbjni

−

j
θCUni

{z

Importer Fixed Effect
j
− θRT Ajni −θνni
.
} | {z }

Bilateral Observables

24

Error Term

This equation is estimated for each tradeable sector j = 1, ...J. Estimating this relationship
will thus yield, for each country, an estimate of its technology-cum-unit-cost term in each sector j,
Tnj (cjn )−θ , which is obtained by exponentiating the importer fixed effect. The available degrees of
freedom imply that these estimates are of each country’s Tnj (cjn )−θ relative to a reference country,
which in our estimation is the United States. We denote this estimated value by Snj :
Snj

=

!−θ

Tnj

cjn

j
Tus

cjus

,

where the subscript us denotes the United States. It is immediate from this expression that
estimation delivers a convolution of technology parameters Tnj and cost parameters cjn . Both will
of course affect trade volumes, but we would like to extract technology Tnj from these estimates.
In order to do that, we follow the approach of Shikher (2004). In particular, for each country n,
the share of total spending going to home-produced goods is given by
j
Xnn

Xnj

=

Tnj

Γcjn

!−θ
.

pjn

Dividing by its U.S. counterpart yields:
j
Xnn
/Xnj
j
j
/Xus
Xus,us

=

Tnj

cjn pjus

j
Tus

cjus pjn

!−θ
= Snj

pjus

!−θ
,

pjn

and thus the ratio of price levels in sector j relative to the U.S. becomes:
pjn
pjus

=

j
/Xnj
Xnn

1

j
j
Xus,us
/Xus
Snj

!1
θ

.

(A.1)

The entire right-hand side of this expression is either observable or estimated. Thus, we can
impute the price levels relative to the U.S. in each country and each tradeable sector.
The cost of the input bundles relative to the U.S. can be written as:
cjn
cjus


=

wn
wus

αj βj 

rn
rus

(1−αj )βj

!
J  k γk,j 1−βj  J+1 γJ+1,j (1−βj )
Y
p
p
n

k=1

pkus

n

pJ+1
us

.

Using information on relative wages, returns to capital, price in each tradeable sector from (A.1),
and the nontradeable sector price relative to the U.S., we can thus impute the costs of the input
bundles relative to the U.S. in each country and each sector. Armed with those values, it is

25

straightforward to back out the relative technology parameters:
Tnj
j
Tus

A.2

=

Snj

cjn
cjus

!θ
.

Trade Costs

The bilateral, directional, sector-level trade costs of shipping from country i to country n in sector
j are then computed based on the estimated coefficients as:
j
j
d j + θRT
[
ln dˆjni = θdˆjk + θb̂jni + θCU
Ani + θc
exji + θb
νni
,
ni

for an assumed value of θ. Note that the estimate of the trade costs includes the residual from the
j
gravity regression θb
νni
. Thus, the trade costs computed as above will fit bilateral sectoral trade

flows exactly, given the estimated fixed effects. Note also that the exporter component of the
trade costs ec
xji is part of the exporter fixed effect. Since each country in the sample appears as
both an exporter and an importer, the exporter and importer estimated fixed effects are combined
to extract an estimate of θc
exji .

A.3

Complete Estimation

So far we have estimated the levels of technology of the tradeable sectors relative to the United
States. To complete our estimation, we still need to find (i) the levels of T for the tradeable
sectors in the United States; (ii) the taste parameters ωj , and (iii) the nontradeable technology
levels for all countries.
To obtain (i), we use the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database for the U.S. (Bartelsman
and Gray 1996). We start by measuring the observed TFP levels for the tradeable sectors in the
U.S.. The form of the production function gives
j
j
ln Zus
= ln Λjus + βj αj ln Ljus + βj (1 − αj ) ln Kus
+ (1 − βj )

J+1
X

k,j
γk,j ln Mus
,

(A.2)

k=1

where Λj denotes the measured TFP in sector j, Z j denotes the output, Lj denotes the labor
input, K j denotes the capital input, and M k,j denotes the intermediate input from sector k. The
NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database offers information on output, and inputs of labor,
capital, and intermediates, along with deflators for each. Thus, we can estimate the observed
TFP level for each manufacturing tradeable sector using the above equation.
If the United States were a closed economy, the observed TFP level for sector j would be given
1

j
by Λjus = (Tus
) θ . In the open economies, the goods with inefficient domestic productivity draws

26

will not be produced and will be imported instead. Thus, international trade and competition
introduce selection in the observed TFP level, as demonstrated by Finicelli, Pagano and Sbracia
j
(2013). We thus use the model to back out the true level of Tus
of each tradeable sector in the

United States. Here we follow Finicelli et al. (2013) and use the following relationship:
(Λjus )θ

=

j
Tus

+

X

cji djus,i

Tij

cjus

i6=us

!−θ
.

Thus, we have

j 
(Λjus )θ = Tus
1+

X Tj
i

cji djus,i

j
i6=us Tus

cjus



!−θ 
X j  j −θ
j 
 = Tus
.
1+
Si dus,i

(A.3)

i6=us

j
This equation can be solved for underlying technology parameters Tus
in the U.S., given estimated

observed TFP Λjus , and all the Sij ’s and djus,i ’s estimated in the previous subsection.
Finally, we estimate the nontradeable sector TFP using the relative prices. In the model, the
nontradeable sector price is given by
1

pJ+1
= Γ(TnJ+1 )− θ cJ+1
n
n .
Since we know the aggregate price level in the tradeable sector pTn , cJ+1
n , and the relative price of
nontradeables (which we take from the data), we can back out TnJ+1 from the equation above for
all countries.

27

References
Alvarez, Fernando and Robert E., Jr. Lucas, “General Equilibrium Analysis of the EatonKortum Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, September 2007,
54 (6), 1726–1768.
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “New Trade Models,
Same Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, February 2012, 102 (1), 94–130.
,
, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “The Elusive Pro-Competitive
Effects of Trade,” March 2012. mimeo, Yale University, MIT, and UC Berkeley.
, Svetlana Demidova, Peter J. Klenow, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “Endogenous
Variety and the Gains from Trade,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May
2008, 98 (2), 444–450.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International
Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2010, 118 (3), 433–484.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Wayne Gray, “The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database,”
October 1996. NBER Technical Working Paper 205.
Bernanke, Ben and Refet Gürkaynak, “Is Growth Exogenous? Taking Mankiw, Romer, and
Weil Seriously,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2001, 16, 11–57.
Berthelon, Matias and Caroline Freund, “On the Conservation of Distance in International
Trade,” Journal of International Economics, July 2008, 75 (2), 310–320.
Burstein, Ariel and Javier Cravino, “Measured Aggregate Gains from International Trade,”
January 2012. mimeo, UCLA.
and Jonathan Vogel, “International Trade, Technology, and the Skill Premium,” April
2012. mimeo, UCLA and Columbia University.
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
NAFTA,” January 2010. mimeo, University of Chicago.
Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Steven Durlauf
Philippe Aghion, ed., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, Elsevier-North Holland, 2005,
chapter 9, pp. 679–741.
Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Are structural VARs with longrun restrictions useful in developing business cycle theory?,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
November 2008, 55 (8), 1337–1352.
Corcos, Gregory, Massimo Del Gatto, Giordano Mion, and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano,
“Productivity and Firm Selection: Quantifying the ‘New’ Gains from Trade,” Economic
Journal, June 2012, 122 (561), 754–798.
Costinot, Arnaud and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization,” September 2012. Forthcoming, Handbook of
International Economics.
de Blas, Beatriz and Katheryn Russ, “Understanding Markups in the Open Economy,” July
2012. mimeo, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid and UC Davis.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Putting the Parts Together: Trade, Vertical
Linkages, and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
April 2010, 2 (2), 95–124.
and
, “Firm Entry, Trade, and Welfare in Zipf’s World,” Journal of International
Economics, March 2013, 89 (2), 283–296.
28

di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Jing Zhang, “The Global Welfare Impact
of China: Trade Integration and Technological Change,” May 2013. Forthcoming, American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
Do, Quy-Toan and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Comparative Advantage, Demand for External
Finance, and Financial Development,” Journal of Financial Economics, December 2007, 86
(3).
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
September 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.
,
, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, “Trade and the Global Recession,” January
2011. NBER Working Paper No. 16666.
Feenstra, Robert C., “Measuring the Gains From Trade Under Monopolistic Competition,”
Canadian Journal of Economics, February 2010, 43 (1), 1–28.
Finicelli, Andrea, Patrizio Pagano, and Massimo Sbracia, “Ricardian Selection,” Journal
of International Economics, January 2013, 89 (1), 96–109.
Hall, Robert and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
per Worker then Others,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114, 83–116.
Hauk, William and Romain Wacziarg, “A Monte Carlo study of growth regressions,” Journal
of Economic Growth, June 2009, 14 (2), 103–147.
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, June 2001, 54, 75–96.
Imbs, Jean and Isabelle Méjean, “Trade Elasticities,” August 2011. Mimeo, Paris School of
Economics and Ecole Polytechnique.
Levchenko, Andrei A. and Jing Zhang, “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Measurement and Welfare Implications,” February 2011. NBER Working Paper No. 16806.
and
, “Comparative Advantage and the Welfare Impact of European Integration,”
Economic Policy, October 2012, 27 (72), 567–602.
Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen J. Redding, “Firm Heterogeneity and Aggregate Welfare,”
March 2013. mimeo, Harvard University and Princeton University.
Ossa, Ralph, “Why Trade Matters After All,” May 2012. NBER Working Paper No. 18113.
Ricardo, David, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, Vol. 1 of Works and
Correspondence of David Ricardo, Cambridge University Press, 1817.
Shikher, Serge, “Putting industries into the Eaton-Kortum model,” July 2004. Forthcoming,
Journal of International Trade and Economic Development.
, “Accounting for International Trade,” August 2005. mimeo, Suffolk University.
, “Capital, technology, and specialization in the neoclassical model,” Journal of International
Economics, March 2011, 83 (2), 229–242.
Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh, “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,”
February 2011. UC Davis Working Paper No. 11-2.
Waugh, Michael, “International Trade and Income Differences,” American Economic Review,
December 2010, 100 (5), 2093–2124.
Yi, Kei-Mu and Jing Zhang, “Structural Change in an Open Economy,” April 2010. Mimeo,
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and University of Michigan.

29

Table 1. Welfare Gains from Trade Implied by the One- and Multi-Sector Formulas

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

−ξ
πii θ

−1
 − ξωj
θ
j
− 1, Equal-weighted
j=1 πii
ξω
Q J  j − θ j
− 1, Expenditure-weighted
j=1 πii

0.022

0.010

0.005

0.051

QJ

0.035

0.017

0.006

0.067

0.030

0.016

0.005

0.080

Pct difference, equal-weighted to one-sector
Pct difference, exp.-weighted to one-sector

0.567
0.321

0.421
0.222

-0.069
0.032

1.706
0.990

Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the gains from trade implied by the one-sector formula,
the equal-weighted multi-sector formula, and the expenditure-weighted multi-sector formula in the sample
of 79 countries. The bottom two rows present the summary statistics for the proportional deviations of the
multi-sector formulas relative to the one-sector one.

Table 2. The Fit of the Baseline Model with the Data
model

data

Wages:
mean
median
corr(model, data)
Return to capital:
mean
median
corr(model, data)
j
πnn
mean
median
corr(model, data)
j
πni , i 6= n
mean
median
corr(model, data)

0.387
0.351
0.131
0.150
0.994
0.881
0.939
0.664
0.698
0.946
0.621
0.569
0.682
0.609
0.918
0.0052 0.0056
0.0001 0.0001
0.908

Notes: This table reports the means and medians of wages relative to the U.S. (top panel); return to capital
relative to the U.S. (second panel), share of domestically produced goods in overall spending (third panel),
and share of goods from country i in overall spending (bottom panel) in the model and in the data. Wages
and return to capital in the data are calculated as described in Appendix A.

30

31

ξi

ξi
θ

1

πiij

πiij





βj θ

 −ξi ωj

θ

 −ξi ωj

− 1:

−1

Multi-sector, within-sector linkages

Multi-sector, no linkages

Tradeable and non-tradeable sectors,
within-sector linkages

(6): (5) + sectoral value added
(7): (6) + full IO matrix

share of non-tradeables in aggregate value added

(5): sector-level output, imports, and exports,

(3)
(4): (3) + T/NT IO matrix

(3): (2) + breakdown of gross output and
value added into tradeables and non-tradeables

(2): (1) + aggregate value added

(1): Aggregate imports, exports, gross output

Data requirements

Notes: This table presents the formulas for the gains from trade, underlying models that yield those formulas, and the data requirements
necessary to compute them.

βj = total linkages
βj = tradeable only sectoral linkages

j=1

QJ

j=1

QJ

πii βθ − 1:
β = total interm. use
β = within-sector interm. use

−

πii

−

−

Tradeable and non-tradeable sectors,
no linkages

One-sector, with linkages

πii βθ − 1

−1

One-sector, no linkages

πii θ − 1

−1

Model

Formula

Table 3. Formulas, Underlying Models, and Data Requirements

32
5.81

− 1, β = total linkages

2.46
7.85
4.54

3.65
10.87
6.49

1.90

3.16

1.08

1.67

0.83

4.92

Std. Dev.

0.89

1.45

0.52

0.63

1.05

0.37

0.70

0.35

1.05

Min

20.21

35.30

10.81

9.09

14.83

5.11

8.13

4.11

22.12

Max

79

79

79

79

79

79

79

79

79

No. Countries

Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the gains from trade. In the first row are the true gains computed using the full quantitative
model. The rest of the rows summarize the gains from trade in this sample of countries implied by various formulas.

QJ

3.46

1.97

−1

− 1, β = within-sector linkages
  −ξi ωj
θ
j
−1
j=1 πii
−ξ
ω
QJ  j  βji θ j
− 1, βj = total linkages
j=1 πii
−ξi ωj


QJ
βj θ
j
− 1, βj = tradeable only sectoral linkages
j=1 πii

− 1
πii βθ
ξ
− i
πii θ
ξ
− i
πii βθ
ξ
− βθi
πii

3.62

1.88

πii θ − 1

−1

7.22

True Gains

−1

Mean

Formula

Table 4. Welfare Gains from Trade

33
0.18
0.11

0.48
-0.11

-0.38

0.04

-0.65

-0.78

-0.64

-0.89

-0.78

-0.90

0.23

1.02

-0.27

-0.23

0.28

-0.56

-0.10

-0.50

1.73

23.45

19.50

25.49

9.02

43.60

25.50

46.15

Mean
sq. error

(5)

0.94

3.65

3.58

3.76

1.77

5.25

3.60

5.34

Mean
abs. error

(6)

0.162

0.275**

0.030

-0.273**

-0.287**

-0.300***

-0.438***

-0.531***

Corr
(Error, cv((Tij )1/θ ))

(7)

Notes: This table presents the comparison of the gains from trade implied by each formula and the true gains from trade. The first 4 columns
report the summary statistics for the proportional deviations in the gains from trade according to the formula compared to the true gains.
Columns (5) and (6) present the mean squared error and the mean absolute error for the formula-based gains from trade relative to the true
ones. Column (7) reports the correlation of the error of the formula with respect to the true gains from trade with the coefficient of variation
of a country’s average sectoral productivities (Tij )1/θ ’s relative to the world frontier, along with the level of significance. ***: significant at 1%;
**: significant at 5%.

βj = tradeable only sectoral linkages

0.07

0.22

-0.49

-0.11

− 1, β = total linkages

0.08

0.13

-0.70

−1

0.17

0.09

-0.47

-0.41

−1

− 1, β = within-sector linkages
ξ ω
QJ  j − iθ j
−1
j=1 πii
ξi ωj


−β θ
QJ
j
j
− 1, βj = total linkages
j=1 πii
ξ
ω
i
j
Q J  j − β j θ
− 1,
j=1 πii

− 1
πii βθ
ξ
− i
πii θ
ξ
− i
πii βθ
ξ
− i
πii βθ

−1

-0.69

(4)

πii θ − 1

(3)

Formula

(2)

Prop. Deviation from True Gains
Mean Std. Dev. Min
Max

(1)

Table 5. Comparison of Formula-Implied Gains to True Model-Implied Gains

.08

.1

Gains from Trade
.12
.14

.16

Figure 1. Illustration of Analytical Results

0

.25

.5

a

.75

1

ii

Gains: 1−sector formula

True gains

Deviation of 1−Sector Gains from True Gains (%)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0

(a) Sectoral Trade Shares and the Gains from Trade

0

.05

.1
.15
a
b
Dispersion in {T1 ,T1 } (St. Dev.)

.2

(b) Comparative Advantage and the Gains from Trade
Notes: The top panel depicts the true gains from trade in the 2-sector analytical model as well as the gains
from trade implied by the one-sector formula that only uses aggregate trade as a share of absorption. The
bottom panel displays the percentage difference between the gains implied by the one-sector formula and
true gains as a function of the dispersion in T1a and T1b , with dispersion measured by the standard deviation
among them.

34

0

Gains Implied by the Multi−Sector Formula
.025
.05
.075
.1

Figure 2. Estimated Gains from Trade According to One-Sector and Multi-Sector Formulas

0

.025
.05
.075
.1
Gains Implied by the One−Sector Formula
Equal−weighted Sectors
Expenditure−weighted Sectors

Notes: This figure plots the gains from trade implied by the one-sector formula on the x-axis against the
gains from trade for the same country implied by the equal-weighted (solid dots) and the expenditure-shareweighted (hollow dots) multi-sector formulas, along with the 45-degree line.

35

0

.2

.4

ii

j

.6

.8

1

Figure 3. Dispersion in Sectoral Trade Shares: Bolivia and the Czech Republic

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

Sector (Ranked by Openness for Each Country)
Bolivia

Czech Republic

j
Notes: This figure displays the πii
in the 19 manufacturing sectors for Bolivia and the Czech Republic,
j
ranked for each country by sectoral trade openness (sectors with lower πii
correspond to sectors with lower
shares of spending on domestic goods in the total sectoral spending.

Diff. Between 1−Sector and Multi−Sector Gains (%)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0

Figure 4. Dispersion in Sectoral Trade Shares and the Gains from Trade

.1

.15

.2

j

.25

.3

.35

St.Dev.( ii )

Notes: This figure plots the percentage difference between the gains from trade implied by the one-sector
j
formula relative to the multi-sector formula against the standard deviation of πii
for that country. The curve
through the data is the quadratic fit.

36

−90

Diff. Between
−80

ii

1/

and True Gains (%)
−70
−60

−50

Figure 5. Comparative Advantage and the Gains from Trade

0

.1
.2
.3
.4
j 1/
Coefficient of Variation of (Ti ) Relative to Frontier

.5

Notes: This figure plots the percentage difference in the gains from trade implied by the one-sector formula
1/θ
πii relative to the true gains against the coefficient of variation in the sectoral productivities (Tij )1/θ relative
to the world frontier. The line through the data is the OLS fit.

37

Table A1. Country Coverage
Argentina
Korea, Rep.
Australia
Kuwait
Austria
Latvia
Bangladesh
Lithuania
Belgium-Luxembourg
Macedonia, FYR
Bolivia
Malaysia
Brazil
Mauritius
Bulgaria
Mexico
Canada
Netherlands
Chile
New Zealand
China
Nigeria
Colombia
Norway
Costa Rica
Pakistan
Czech Republic
Peru
Denmark
Philippines
Ecuador
Poland
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Portugal
El Salvador
Romania
Estonia
Russian Federation
Ethiopia
Saudi Arabia
Fiji
Senegal
Finland
Slovak Republic
France
Slovenia
Germany
South Africa
Ghana
Spain
Greece
Sri Lanka
Guatemala
Sweden
Honduras
Switzerland
Hungary
Taiwan Province of China
Iceland
Tanzania
India
Thailand
Indonesia
Trinidad and Tobago
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Turkey
Ireland
Ukraine
Israel
United Kingdom
Italy
United States
Japan
Uruguay
Jordan
Venezuela, RB
Kazakhstan
Vietnam
Kenya
Notes: This table reports the countries in the sample.

38

Table A2. Sectors

ISIC code
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29C
31A
33
34A
36
4A

Sector Name
Food and Beverages
Tobacco Products
Textiles
Wearing Apparel, Fur
Leather, Leather Products, Footwear
Wood Products (Excl. Furniture)
Paper and Paper Products
Printing and Publishing
Coke, Refined Petroleum Products, Nuclear Fuel
Chemical and Chemical Products
Rubber and Plastics Products
Non-Metallic Mineral Products
Basic Metals
Fabricated Metal Products
Office, Accounting, Computing, and Other Machinery
Electrical Machinery, Communication Equipment
Medical, Precision, and Optical Instruments
Transport Equipment
Furniture and Other Manufacturing
Nontradeables

αj
0.290
0.272
0.444
0.468
0.469
0.455
0.351
0.484
0.248
0.297
0.366
0.350
0.345
0.424
0.481
0.369
0.451
0.437
0.447
0.561

βj
0.290
0.490
0.368
0.369
0.350
0.368
0.341
0.453
0.246
0.368
0.375
0.448
0.298
0.387
0.381
0.368
0.428
0.329
0.396
0.651

γJ+1,j
0.303
0.527
0.295
0.320
0.330
0.288
0.407
0.407
0.246
0.479
0.350
0.499
0.451
0.364
0.388
0.416
0.441
0.286
0.397
0.788

ωj
0.166
0.019
0.015
0.059
0.014
0.008
0.012
0.005
0.043
0.006
0.012
0.072
0.002
0.014
0.134
0.074
0.060
0.219
0.067

Mean
Min
Max

0.414
0.244
0.561

0.393
0.243
0.651

0.399
0.246
0.788

0.053
0.002
0.219

Notes: This table reports the sectors used in the analysis. The classification corresponds to the ISIC Revision
3 2-digit, aggregated further due to data availability. αj is the value-added based labor intensity; βj is the
share of value added in total output; γJ+1,j is the share of nontradeable inputs in total intermediate inputs;
ωj is the tradeable sector j’s share of total tradeable expenditure. Variable definitions and sources are
described in detail in the text.

39

