                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              VOLATILITY AND PASS-THROUGH

                                            David Berger
                                           Joseph S. Vavra

                                        Working Paper 19651
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19651


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2013




This research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. We would like to thank seminar participants at Princeton, Chicago Booth, Cleveland
Fed, Duke Macro Jamboree, Chicago Fed, SED, NBER SI IFM, Columbia, Purdue, Northwestern,
Dallas Fed Uncertainty Conference, EIEF, CESifo, and Michigan. We would also like to thank our
discussant Linda Tesar as well as Rudi Bachmann, Nick Bloom, Ariel Burstein, Jeff Campbell, Gabe
Chodorow-Reich, Larry Christiano, Allan Collard-Wexler, Marty Eichenbaum, Tarek Hassan, Matthias
Kehrig, Oleg Itskhoki, Amy Meek, Emi Nakamura, Brent Neiman, Sergio Rebelo, Johannes Stroebel
and Rozi Ulics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by David Berger and Joseph S. Vavra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Volatility and Pass-through
David Berger and Joseph S. Vavra
NBER Working Paper No. 19651
November 2013
JEL No. E10,E30,E31,F31

                                             ABSTRACT

What drives countercyclical volatility? A large literature has documented that many economic variables
are more disperse in recessions, but this could either occur because shocks get bigger or because firms
respond more to shocks which are the same size. Existing evidence that the dispersion of endogenous
variables rises in recessions cannot tell us which of volatility or responsiveness is getting bigger, and
these two explanations have very different policy implications. However, we document new facts in
the open economy environment and show that they can be used to disentangle these explanations.
In particular, we use confidential BLS micro data to show that there is a robust positive relationship
between exchange rate pass-through and the dispersion of item-level price changes. We then argue
that changes in responsiveness can explain this fact while volatility shocks cannot.


David Berger
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
david.berger@northwestern.edu

Joseph S. Vavra
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
joseph.vavra@chicagobooth.edu
1        Introduction


        What drives countercyclical volatility? A large literature has documented that many economic
variables are more dispersed during recessions than in booms.1 The dominant explanation for this
phenomena is that …rms face more volatile shocks during recessions. However, increased dispersion
could occur either because shocks get bigger or because …rms respond more to shocks which are the
same size. The existing evidence that shows that the dispersion of endogenous 2 variables rises in
recessions cannot tell us which of volatility or responsiveness is getting bigger.              Indeed, a recent
theoretical literature has emerged challenging the role of volatility shocks and instead emphasizing
the potential role of the responsiveness channel.3 It is important to distinguish between these two
explanations because they have very di¤erent implications for the source of business cycles and how
policy should mitigate them. However, this is a challenging identi…cation problem, so there exists
little empirical evidence on this point. In this paper, we show that one can directly separate changes
in responsiveness from changes in volatility using the open economy environment.
        We make this argument in two steps: 1) We …rst use con…dential BLS import price data to show
that item-level price dispersion is countercyclical, con…rming the results in Bloom et al. (2012) and
Vavra (2014). Next, we document a strong positive relationship between price change dispersion
and exchange rate pass-through. This positive relationship holds both at the item-level (cross-
section) and at the month-level (time-series). That is: a) Individual items with high dispersion of
price changes across time have greater exchange rate pass-through. b) During times when the cross-
sectional dispersion of price changes across items is high, there is greater exchange rate pass-through.
This provides suggestive "model free" evidence of a positive relationship between responses to the
exchange rate and dispersion. The open-economy is key to this …rst result as it provides a large and
observable cost shock (the nominal exchange rate) which can be used to measure responsiveness.
        2) Next, we expand on this evidence and use these empirical moments to infer the quantitative
role of di¤erent shocks across …rms and time. We build a structural price-setting model with various
sources of heterogeneity and formally estimate their importance for explaining the comovement
between dispersion and pass-through which we document in the …rst part of the paper.                         While
various forces a¤ect pass-through and price change dispersion in isolation, we show that the positive
comovement of pass-through and price dispersion in the data allows us to discriminate between
explanations. We …nd strong evidence that time-variation in responsiveness rather than volatility
explains countercyclical dispersion. In particular, volatility shocks imply a counterfactual negative
or zero relationship between dispersion and pass-through while responsiveness shocks imply a positive
relationship, consistent with the data. This quantitative result is quite robust and holds regardless
of whether price adjustment is frictionless, time-dependent or state-dependent.
    1
     For example, Bloom (2009), Bloom et al. (2012), and Vavra (2014).
    2
     For example, Bloom (2009) (sales growth), Bloom et al. (2012) (revenue based TFP and employment growth), and
Vavra (2014) (prices).
   3
     See Bachmann and Moscarini (2012) and Decker et al. (2015) for some theoretical models in which countercyclical
dispersion arises from greater endogenous responses.



                                                         2
   Given the central role the positive correlation between dispersion and pass-through plays in
our identi…cation strategy, we address its robustness in two complementary ways. First, we do as
much as possible directly in the data to control for observable co-variates that could induce spurious
correlation between pass-through and dispersion. Second, we explicitly take into account censoring
and sample selection biases when estimating our quantitative model to mitigate concerns that our
results are driven by these channels, which are more challenging to address directly in the data.
   Broadly speaking, in the empirical section of the paper our results are robust to controls for
“micro” observables, “macro” observables, and to a variety of measurement error related concerns.
Amongst “micro” controls, we show that the positive relationship between pass-through and dis-
persion is not driven by di¤erences in an item’s frequency of adjustment or product substitution,
degree of product di¤erentiation, country or currency of import or the volatility of that currency.
Our "macro controls" include the average frequency of price changes and product substitution, real
GDP growth, exchange rate volatility, seasonality and long-run trends. We also run a wide range of
placebo checks, outlier robust regressions, and alternative pass-through speci…cations to argue that
our fact is not driven by small samples or other measurement error related issues.
   In our …nal controls for observable di¤erences, we show that the positive correlation between pass-
through and dispersion remains strong, both economically and statistically, even when we exclude
data from the Great Recession. This is an important robustness check because the 2008 recession is a
large outlier in price change dispersion, which makes time-variation in dispersion appear small in the
rest of the sample by comparison. There were also obviously many other ways in which the Great
Recession di¤ered from usual business cycles. Thus, if our results were driven by this extreme event
then it would be di¢ cult to extrapolate our conclusions to other periods. Fortunately, we …nd that
even after excluding 2008, time-variation in pass-through and dispersion is large in both absolute
and statistical terms: constant pass-through speci…cations are overstated by 50 percent during the
mid-1990s and understated by 50 percent during the 2001 Recession. Price change dispersion also
has ‡uctuations of greater than 50 percent in this earlier part of the sample. Thus, the economic
signi…cance of our conclusions does not rely on identi…cation from this extreme period.
   In addition to these empirical robustness checks, we deal with concerns related to sample selec-
tion and censoring explicitly when we estimate our theoretical model using indirect inference. In
particular, when we move from pure empirical results to their theoretical interpretation, we always
a) generate data from our model using the same sample selection procedures that are in the data b)
simulate the model with sample sizes and stickiness as in the BLS data and c) always treat simulated
and actual data identically and we use no information from simulated data that is not available in
actual data in the estimation. Thus, if sampling, selection or censoring drove our empirical results,
they should drive similar e¤ects in our simulated data. Finally, the fact that we …nd similar rela-
tionships in the cross-section and the time-series (as predicted by the structural model) also provides
some reassurance that our results are not spurious.
   The …rst half of the paper is purely empirical and focuses on establishing the positive relationship
between pass-through and dispersion.      In the second half of the paper, we provide a structural
interpretation of this fact and assess the role of many theoretical channels that can a¤ect pass-

                                                  3
through and price change dispersion. The exchange rate pass-through literature often emphasizes
variable markups or strategic complementarities as a channel that can a¤ect …rms’desired exchange
rate pass-through. Changes in the strength of this channel will also a¤ect price change dispersion by
changing …rms’desired responses to idiosyncratic shocks. Thus, this "responsiveness" channel could
generate movements in pass-through and dispersion even with no changes in underlying volatility.
       Conversely, price change dispersion can also move with changes in the volatility of idiosyncratic
shocks, even if there is no change in endogenous responses to those shocks. As previously mentioned,
a large literature including Bloom (2009), and Vavra (2014) uses such "uncertainty" shocks to explain
countercyclical dispersion of outcomes such as …rm growth and price changes. Their ability to explain
time-variation in measured exchange rate pass-through has heretofore been unexplored.
       While the above channels have received the most attention in the literature, they are far from
exhaustive. Di¤erences in the size of adjustment costs, the sensitivity of …rms’ costs to exchange
rates, changes in the volatility of exchange rates, or changes in the “commonality” of aggregate
shocks all have the potential to a¤ect price change dispersion and exchange rate pass-through.
       We use indirect inference to formally estimate the importance of these channels in a quantitative
menu cost model which builds on Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) and Burstein and Gopinath (2013).
While the basic modeling framework is intentionally standard, our emphasis is not on the model
itself but is instead on what it can tell us about the underlying nature of …rm-level shocks. The open
economy environment is key to answering this question as it provides the source of identi…cation in
the model. For example, with only data on outcomes and no data on observable shocks, changes in
“uncertainty” and changes in “responsiveness” are observationally equivalent: an increase in either
implies an increase in the dispersion of observable …rm decisions. However, these two theories have
very di¤erent implications for how …rms will respond to observable exchange rate shocks.
       Using our identi…ed quantitative model, we show that heterogeneous import shares, menu costs,
changes in the volatility of exchange rates, and shocks to the "commonality" of aggregate shocks
are all unable to explain our results.4 The model also strongly rejects uncertainty shocks. In con-
trast, our estimated model assigns an extremely important role to changes in responsiveness arising
from variable markups.5          Together, our new empirical results and their structural interpretation
suggest that the literature studying countercyclical dispersion has embraced time-varying volatility
too quickly. At least for our data, time-varying responsiveness is much more important.
       Our results provide further support for the mechanisms emphasized by Gopinath and Itskhoki
(2010) and Atkeson and Burstein (2008). Our paper is closely related to Gopinath and Itskhoki
(2010), which argues that variable markups (which generate heterogeneous responsiveness) are nec-
essary to explain cross-sectional di¤erences in pass-through. An important distinction between our
empirical work and theirs is that they study only permanent di¤erences across items, while we show
there is also striking time-variation in pass-through.6 In addition, we formally estimate our struc-
   4
     We also model various sources of measurement error and show that these cannot explain our empirical patterns.
   5
     For concreteness, our variable responsiveness arises from strategic-complementarities that arise under Kimball
demand, but this is largely for illustrative purposes. Other forms of strategic-complementarity have similar implications
for responsiveness, price change dispersion, and exchange rate pass-through.
   6
     Our cross-item facts are also distinct in two dimensions: 1) We show that there is a relationship between dispersion


                                                           4
tural model via indirect inference, which allows us to more precisely measure the joint-distribution of
various sources of heterogeneity and to explicitly deal with sample selection and censoring concerns.
    Many recent papers have argued that the distribution of price changes has important implications
for aggregate price ‡exibility. For example, Midrigan (2011) and Alvarez et al. (2014) show that
theory assigns a large role to the price change distribution in shaping the average response of in‡ation
to nominal shocks. Vavra (2014) argues that increases in the dispersion of price changes during
recessions should lead to increases in aggregate price ‡exibility. However, this existing literature
has two limitations: First, the link between the distribution of price changes and price ‡exibility
is theoretical rather than empirical. Second, existing models must make strong assumptions about
the sources of variation in dispersion across time.           In this paper, we address these limitations by
…rst providing model free empirical evidence that time-variation in price change dispersion strongly
predicts time-variation in import price ‡exibility.            We then provide additional insight into the
underlying forces that shape this relationship and argue that time-variation in the competitive
structure of markets or other shocks that induce time-variation in …rm responsiveness appear more
consistent with our data than the "uncertainty" shocks typically assumed. Understanding the source
of time-varying dispersion is important for policy design as policies designed to reduce uncertainty
almost certainly di¤er from policies designed to alter market structure and …rms’responsiveness.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 contains our main empirical …ndings.
Section 3 discusses the implications for time-varying pass-through. Section 4 lays out a basic ‡ex-
ible price model that demonstrates how primitives can potentially generate a positive relationship
between pass-through to price change variance. Section 5 estimates a quantitative structural model
to argue that variation in responsiveness best explains the data, and Section 6 concludes.


2     Empirical Results
2.1    Data Description
In this section we describe the data employed in this study.               We use con…dential micro data on
import prices collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the period 1994-2011. This data is
collected on a monthly basis and contains information on import prices for very detailed items over
time. This data set has previously been used by Gopinath and Rigobon (2008), Gopinath et al.
(2010), Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), Neiman (2010), and Berger et al. (2012). Below, we provide a
brief description of how the data is collected. See the IPP (Import Price Program) Data Collection
and pass-through that is independent of frequency. 2) We study what Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) call medium-
run pass-through (MRPT) rather than long-run pass-through (LRPT). MRPT measures the fraction of exchange
rate movements passed-through into an item’s price after one price adjustment whereas LRPT captures pass-through
over an item’s entire life. While much of the literature has moved towards the use of LRPT, MRPT is the relevant
pass-through concept for measuring time-varying price ‡exibility at business cycle frequencies. MRPT measures how
shocks today are passed into price changes today whereas LRPT measures how shocks will transmit to prices potentially
years into the future. By construction, LRPT cannot measure time-varying aggregate dynamics since LRPT is …xed
across time for each item. Nonetheless, MRPT presents additional empirical challenges because sampling error or
mismeasured timing of price changes are much more important for MRPT than they are for LRPT. We address these
measurement error issues explicitly in both our empirical and modeling sections.


                                                         5
Manual for a much more detailed description (U.S. Department of Labor, 2005).
       The target universe of the price index consists of all items purchased from abroad by U.S.
residents (imports).       An "item" in the data set is de…ned as a unique combination of a …rm, a
product and the country from which a product is shipped. An example of the type of item in our
data is “Lot # 12345, Brand X Black Mary Jane, Quick On/Quick O¤ Mary Jane, for girls, ankle
height upper, TPR synthetic outsole, fabric insole, Tricot Lining, PU uppers, Velcro Strap.”7
       Price data are collected monthly for approximately 10,000 imported items. The BLS collects
"free on board" (fob) prices at the foreign port of exportation before insurance, freight or duty are
added, and almost 90% of U.S. imports have a reported price in dollars.
       The BLS collects prices monthly using voluntary con…dential surveys, which are usually con-
ducted by mail.        Respondents are asked for prices of actual transactions that occur as close as
possible to the …rst day of the month. Typically a company speci…es if a price has been contracted
and the period for which it is contracted, including the months in which actual trade will take
place. For the periods when the price is contracted, the BLS will use the contracted price without
contacting the …rm directly and enters a ‡ag for whether the good is traded or not in those months.8
       As with all surveys, there are some concerns about data quality.                  However, there are many
reasons to believe that reporting is accurate. First, the BLS is very concerned with data quality, so
in the …rst step of data collection, the BLS negotiates with the company over the number of price
quotes reported so that the company is not overburdened. The BLS also contacts a respondent if
the reported price has not changed or the item has not traded for 12 months, which helps reduce
misreporting. Second, Gopinath and Rigobon (2008) uses the Anthrax scare of 2001, which forced
the IPP to conduct interviews by phone, as a natural experiment. They found almost no di¤erence
in reported price setting around these months, which helps reduce concerns about misreporting.
       Nonetheless, in the appendix we explore the robustness of our quantitative results to four types
of measurement error: sampling error in the price collection process, errors in reporting the correct
size of the price change, unreported price changes, and variation in shipping lags of goods. We …nd
that all of our conclusions are robust to various assumptions about the magnitude of these errors.
       We focus on a subset of the data that satis…es the following three criteria: 1) We restrict attention
to market transactions and exclude intra…rm transactions, as we are interested in price-setting driven
by market forces.9 2) We require that a good have at least one price adjustment during its life.10
This is because the goal of the analysis is to relate the standard deviation of price changes to an
item’s pass-through and this requires observing at least one price change. This is the same sample
   7
     This example is taken from Gopinath and Rigabon (2008).
   8
     According to Gopinath and Rigobon (2008), the BLS contacted 87% of the items at least once every 3 months,
with 45% of the items contacted on a monthly basis. 100% of the items are contacted at least once a year.
   9
     Neiman (2010) shows that pass-through depends on whether transactions take place within or between …rms.
  10
     Items with one price change necessarily have a population standard deviation of zero. If we generalize to the
broader population of items from which the BLS is sampling and use the sample standard deviation, dividing by
(#price changes-1) restricts the sample to items with at least 2 price changes. In later results we show that all
results are robust to this restriction as well as restricting to items with many price changes. This choice of sample vs.
population standard deviation makes no substantive di¤erence for our item-level conclusions and is irrelevant for our
month-level dispersion results where we have thousands of price changes per month. We prefer a consistent sample
across both month and item speci…cations and focus on the broadest possible sample in our benchmark results.


                                                           6
restriction used by Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) in their study of frequency and exchange rate pass-
through. 3) We restrict attention to imports whose prices which are invoiced in dollars rather than in
foreign currency. We use data from all countries and all products, however we exclude commodities.
We restrict attention to dollar-priced items, so as to focus on the relationship between dispersion
and pass-through after removing variation due to currency choice. Gopinath et al. (2010) has shown
large di¤erences in pass-through across goods invoiced in di¤erent currencies, but the vast majority
of products in the database are invoiced in dollars rather than foreign currency. Our benchmark
results include all countries and all products excluding commodities so as to include the broadest
possible sample for which there is still some pricing power. Throughout the paper and appendices,
we show that all of our results are robust to a plethora of alternative sample selection criteria.

2.2      Baseline Dispersion Results
2.2.1      Measuring Dispersion and Pass-through

We measure price change dispersion using two distinct but related empirical objects.          First, we
construct a measure of "item-level" dispersion. For each item  we de…ne item-level dispersion as
 = (  j = ). That is, we calculate the dispersion of all non-zero price changes for item
 across time. Since individual items typically have a small number of price changes, we measure
item-level dispersion using the standard deviation of that item’s price changes.
      The second measure of dispersion we construct is "month-level" dispersion. For each month 
we de…ne month level-dispersion as  = (  j = ) To calculate month-level dispersion,
we …x a particular month and then calculate the dispersion of price changes across all items in that
month.11 Since there are thousands of price changes each month, we can calculate various di¤erent
measures of dispersion including the standard deviation and interquartile range of price changes.
      Summarizing our two measures of dispersion, "item-level" dispersion is calculated using a single
item but all time-periods while "month-level" dispersion is calculated using all items but a single
time-period.       Since item-level dispersion varies across items rather than time, we refer to "cross-
sectional" di¤erences in item-level dispersion. Similarly, since month-level dispersion varies across
time-periods rather than items, we refer to "time-series" variation in month-level dispersion.
      There is a very large amount of variation in both item-level and month-level dispersion in our
dataset. For example, item-level dispersion increases from 1.8% to 23.1% when moving from the …rst
quintile of  to the …fth quintile. Similarly, there is a lot of variation in month-level dispersion
across time. Figure 1 shows that the interquartile range of price changes varies from around 8.5%
in the late 1990s to 12% during the 2001 Recession, an increase of 40%. In the Great Recession,
month-level dispersion nearly doubles.
      We measure exchange rate pass-through using micro price data in a standard way. In particular,
we focus on what Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) calls medium-run pass-through (MRPT), which
measures the fraction of exchange rate movements passed through into an item’s price after one
price adjustment. This is the relevant pass-through concept for measuring price ‡exibility at the
 11
      Similar results obtain if we calculate month-level dispersion only within sectors.


                                                             7
                       Figure 1: Cross-Sectional IQR of Price Changes Across Time




business cycle frequencies relevant for studying countercyclical dispersion.                  (See footnote 6 for
additional discussion). Speci…cally, we estimate the following regression on adjusting prices:

                                                               0
                                              =       +  +                                           (1)

       Here,    is item ’s log price change,     is the cumulative change in the bilateral exchange rate
since item ’s last price change, and      0
                                             is a vector of item and country level controls.12 We estimate
this regression with country and sector …xed e¤ects.13             The coe¢ cient        measures the fraction of
cumulated exchange rate movements "passed-through" to an item’s price when adjusting.
       We estimate (1) conditional on price adjustment so that our pass-through estimates are not
contaminated by nominal rigidities. If we did not condition on adjustment, pass-through would be
very close to zero and dominated by variation in the frequency of adjustment. More importantly,
conditioning on adjustment allows us to identify the presence of strategic complementarities since
they a¤ect how …rms want to respond to shocks in the absence of nominal rigidities.
       The results from estimating (1) for all price changes in our sample are shown in Table 1. Con-
sistent with the previous literature, we …nd that average MRPT for dollar denominated items is low.
When a price changes, it passes through only 0.14% of a 1% change in the nominal exchange rate.14
  12
     As usual, there are some concerns about interpreting exchange rate movements as exogenous, which is one reason
for including controls for macro conditions. In addition, we are mainly interested in the relative ranking of pass-
through across …rms and time-periods rather than the absolute level, so endogeneity is less of a concern. Finally, our
monthly data means we are identifying o¤ of high frequency variation in exchange rate movements, which are hard to
relate to anything observable.
  13
     The sector …xed e¤ects are at the primary strata lower (PSL) level, de…ned by the BLS as either the 2 or 4-digit
harmonized tari¤ code. The other baseline controls are U.S. GDP and CPI and foreign country CPI.
  14
     Existing papers typically …nd pass-through coe¢ cients closer to 0.24. Our slightly lower number is due to the
use of bilateral exchange rates, all countries rather than OECD countries, and the use of a moderately longer sample.
Using trade-weighted currencies and OECD countries increases MRPT to close to 0.3.


                                                          8
2.2.2   Item-Level Dispersion Results

In this section, we document empirically that there is a strong relationship between medium-run
pass-through and item-level price change dispersion.

                Figure 2: Medium-run pass-through across item-level XSD quintiles




   Let  = (  ) be the standard deviation of item ’s price changes (conditional on
adjusting).   To explore the relationship between MRPT and item-level dispersion, we split our
sample into  quintiles and estimate equation (1) separately for each quintile. Figure 2 shows
the baseline results with 95% con…dence bands. Average pass-through increases from 2% in the
lowest  quintile to close to 25% for the highest quintile, an increase that is both economically
and statistically signi…cant. While we only show this baseline speci…cation for a very broad set of
countries and products and it includes no additional controls, in the following sections and appendices
we show that this result is extremely robust and is not driven by other item-level features like the
frequency of adjustment or degree of product di¤erentiation.

2.2.3   Month-Level Dispersion Results

We previously documented in …gure 1 that there is large variation across time in price change
dispersion. These changes in dispersion could arise because the size of shocks hitting …rms changes
over time or because …rms responsiveness to shocks varies over time. It is impossible to tell from
…gure 1 which story is correct.   We now take the next step in our argument and show that time
periods characterized by greater price change dispersion also exhibit greater exchange rate pass-
through. In subsequent sections we use this moment to discriminate between these two theories.
   To test for a time-series relationship between price change dispersion and MRPT, we begin by
calculating the cross-sectional interquartile range of price changes for each month in our sample.
Then, just as we did for the item-level dispersion results, we sort our sample into quintiles by this


                                                  9
month-level dispersion and calculate separate pass-through regressions in each quintile.

                 Figure 3: Medium-run pass-through across month-level IQR Quintiles




       Figure 3 shows that pass-through more than triples from the lowest quintile of month-level
dispersion to the highest quintile.          This increase in pass-through is highly signi…cant and the
absolute increase across quintiles is quite similar to that observed for item-level dispersion.15                  We
assess this relationship in more detail in the Appendix 1 and show that this same result obtains
for various alternative measures of month-level dispersion, including the cross-sectional standard
deviation of price changes as well as census level measures of dispersion computed in Bloom et al.
(2012).     If we split the sample into deciles, we …nd even bigger variation across time, with pass-
through in the highest dispersion months approaching 50%. In Section 3 we return to a detailed
discussion of time-series variation in pass-through.

2.3      Robustness of Item-Level Relationship
Figure 2 shows a strong positive relationship between item-level dispersion and MRPT, but it does
not control for any other characteristics that vary across items. We now show that our item-level
result is robust to a host of alternative explanations and controls. This is important, because when
we move from empirics to theory, we will argue that our result re‡ects heterogeneity in fundamental
economic primitives. In particular, we will argue that our result is driven by heterogeneity in the
importance of strategic complementarities which generate variation in responsiveness, rather than
by heterogeneity in volatility. In order to reach this strong conclusion, it is important to show that
our result is not driven by other observable di¤erences across items.
  15
    Standard errors are larger than for the item-level relationships because our panel has a very large number of items
but a much smaller number of time-periods.




                                                          10
2.3.1    Ruling Out Mechanical Explanations


Looking at the MRPT speci…cation in (1), one might be concerned that the positive relationship
between pass-through and item-level dispersion re‡ects a mechanical relationship.                            In particular,
note that the MRPT regression coe¢ cient is equal to

                                    b = (    ) =          +
                                                                         (    )
                                                                                         
                                           (  )                       (  )

    where      is the desired response of prices to exchange rate movements. Taking the variance of
both sides of (1) gives an expression for the variance of price changes across time16 :

                                              2
                           (  ) =           (  ) +  (     )   + 2 (        )                (2)

   Thus, if there is heterogeneity in or (    ), then this can generate a positive relationship
between b and  (  ).17 However, in a ‡exible price environment, it is straightforward to show
that these e¤ects are quantitatively irrelevant.18                The intuition for why these mechanical e¤ects
cannot explain our empirical result is straightforward: generating the variance of price changes
observed in the data requires the variance of idiosyncratic shocks to be two orders of magnitude
larger than the variance of exchange rate shocks. That is,  (                        )     (  )  This implies
that changing only        or (        ) has negligible e¤ects on  (  ) 
    While it is straightforward to rule out the quantitative importance of these e¤ects in a ‡exible
price environment, we also argue that these e¤ects are unimportant even in a more empirically
realistic setting. In particular, when we move to a structural interpretation of our results, we
show that the same ‡ex price intuition applies in a richer quantitative model with price-stickiness.
Importantly, in our indirect inference estimation, we simulate the model with sample sizes and
stickiness as in the BLS data and show that the above mechanical relationship cannot explain our
results. This indirect inference procedure also rules out concerns that our results might be driven
by mechanical statistical confounders, since these should also arise in our simulated data.
    Finally, it is also important to note that the mechanical relationship is irrelevant for our month-
level results in the ‡exible price environment if exchange rate movements are common to items
within a given month, which is the case in our model.19                         That is in month-level regressions with
  16                          0
     Here we suppress the     related terms. These terms have little quantitative importance empirically and so do
not change anything about the qualitative conclusions we derive, but removing them simpli…es the exposition.
  17
        might di¤er due to heterogeneous sensitivity of costs to exchange rates.        Even with no selection e¤ects,
(    ) might vary since in small samples the sampling covariance can di¤er from the population covariance.
  18
     Formally, we have data on  (  ),  (  ), and , so we can use equation 2 to measure  (  ) under the
null hypothesis that our fact is explained by heterogeneity in . Substituting empirical results from the data and
using equation 2 yields = 0144,  (  ) =6.25e-4 and  (  ) =1.83e-2. Using these values for  (  ) and
 (  )  varying from 0.021 to 0.235 (as in the data) generates less than 0.1% of observed variation in dispersion.
  19
     In our model we make the simplifying assumption that exchange rates are common across items. This is not an
important restriction in terms of matching our empirical evidence, because in the empirical appendix we show that all
our results hold within countries with a common currency, hold using a broad trade-weighted exchange rate common
to all items, and are not driven by di¤erences in exchange rate volatility across currencies. Thus, heterogeneity in
exchange rates adds modeling complexity but does not explain our empirical results.


                                                             11
fully ‡exible prices and a shared exchange rate,  (  ) and (                               ) are both identically zero
so that the problematic terms are dropped from (2). We again verify the irrelevance of this channel
in an environment with price-stickiness and realistic sample sizes in our indirect inference procedure.

2.3.2      Item-Level Dispersion Interactions

Is the positive relationship between pass-through and dispersion driven by other observables? To
explore this, we run regressions on continuous measures of price change dispersion instead of the
previous binned regressions. These more structured speci…cations allow us to include a variety of
additional controls. Let the change in an item’s price be given by:

                                                                                      0
                                =            +             (       ) +   +  +                                         (3)

                                                                                                    
The coe¢ cient               captures average pass-through in the sample and                                 gives the e¤ect of item-
level price change volatility on              MRPT.20      Results are shown in Table 2.
       The …rst row shows results for our baseline sample. Average exchange rate pass-through is 14%.
  
        is signi…cantly greater than zero, which means that items with higher price dispersion have
higher MRPT. The price dispersion e¤ect is economically meaningful: a one standard deviation
increase in price dispersion implies a 37% (0.05/0.14) increase in MRPT relative to average.
       In the second row, we explore whether our results are driven by di¤erence in the frequency of
adjustment. It is well-known that the frequency of adjustment varies dramatically across items and
sectors. This means that some items in our MRPT regression will be adjusting after long periods of
stickiness and will have built up large cumulative exchange rate pressure while other items will have
adjusted recently and will have little need to respond to respond to exchange rate movements. If
the frequency of adjustment is correlated with item-level price change volatility, then our volatility
relationship might be proxying for di¤erences in the frequency of adjustment. Row 2 shows that
this is not the case. Speci…cally, we estimate the following extension of (3):

                                                                                                              0
        =          +           (        ) +             +           (        ) +                +  +        

                                                                                                                                  
        Controlling for an item’s frequency of adjustment has no e¤ect on our estimate of                                               .         In
Appendix 1 we provide additional empirical evidence on this point, and we also address it directly
in our structural model, as our estimation directly targets the joint relationship between frequency,
price change dispersion and pass-through.
       In addition to showing that controlling for frequency does not change our results, Table 2 also
shows that our results are not driven by a particular set of products or countries. Restricting to
OECD countries or manufactured items only strengthens the importance of item-level dispersion.
In both subsamples, the price dispersion e¤ect is economically and statistically signi…cant.
  20
    In all speci…cations, the measure of item level price dispersion is the standard deviation of price changes ()
and robust standard errors are clustered by country and primary stratum lower (4 digit import type) pair. Measures of
volatility in this and the following speci…cations are standardized to ease interpretation. This implies that  is equal
to the level of pass-through for an item with average dispersion, which is a natural measure of average pass-through.


                                                                     12
       For brevity, we leave a variety of other item-level robustness checks for the appendix. In those
results, we show that the positive relationship between MRPT and item-level dispersion holds for
individual countries, for various product subsets, using broad rather than bilateral exchange rates,
is robust to controls for outliers and is not driven by small sample issues.

2.4      Robustness of Month-Level Relationship
In this section, we argue that the time-series relationship between month-level dispersion and pass-
through is not driven by various other observables or confounding shocks.                      Since this time-series
relationship is of direct consequence for policy making, it is particularly important to show that it
is a deep relationship in the data rather than a spurious relationship driven by failing to control for
some other observable. However, in contrast to the item-level data, which contain a limited set of
covariates, we are able to show robustness results for a rich set of time-varying macro controls.
       In order to control for other time-varying features of the data, we estimate an interaction speci-
…cation between MRPT and month-level dispersion. More speci…cally, we run the regression

                                                                         0
                            =          +                 + I +  +                               (4)

                                                                                             0 is the
       where  is the interquartile range of all (non-zero) price changes in month  and 
same vector of controls as in the cross-sectional regressions.21 Table 3 shows that increasing 
by one-standard deviation increases pass-through by 43% (0.06/0.14). This positive relationship is
highly signi…cant, with a t-statistic of 7.01. We …nd similar e¤ects when using the cross-sectional
standard deviation instead of the interquartile range, as well as when restricting to OECD countries
and manufactured items. Importantly, we again …nd that controlling for the frequency of adjustment
                                          
has no e¤ect on our estimates of                . That is, the e¤ects of month-level dispersion on pass-through
are unrelated to movements in the frequency of adjustment across time.
       Using speci…cation (4) allows us to control for other things that might vary across time, and
Table 4 shows a number of these results.               An existing literature has debated whether there have
been secular declines in aggregate pass-through over time.                  For example, Marazzi et al. (2005)
argues that aggregate measures of pass-through have declined, but Hellerstein et al. (2006) show
this is largely driven by commodities. Since we exclude commodities from our analysis, we …nd no
trends in pass-through across time. Even more importantly, these studies use only aggregate data
and so are not directly relevant for our results. This is because aggregate pass-through measures
       MRPT rather than just MRPT.22 Since the frequency of adjustment is low, aggregate
pass-through has little relationship to MRPT, our empirical object of interest.23                      Nevertheless, if
there were trends or seasonality in both MRPT and price change dispersion, our time-series results
  21
     As in the cross-sectional regression we standardize all dispersion numbers to ease the interpretation of our results.
  22
     There are other more subtle di¤erences, since we also use bilateral exchange rates and have additional country
and sector controls in our MRPT regressions.
  23
     See Gopinath and Rigobon (2008) for additional evidence that aggregate pass-through is uninformative for
MRPT. As argued in the introduction, MRPT is the relevant object for measuring the importance of strategic-
complementarities and identifying time-varying responsiveness.



                                                            13
could be spurious. We directly address this concern in Table 4 by re-estimating regression 4 with
a linear time-trend and month dummies. These controls do not signi…cantly a¤ect our results.
    Table 4 also shows that our result is robust to controlling for the frequency of product substitu-
tion24 and time-series volatility of exchange rates. Since price change dispersion is countercyclical,
we also check that the positive relationship between dispersion and pass-through is not just proxying
for a recession-pass-through relationship. Again, we …nd it is not: the …nal row of Table 4 shows
that controlling for the state of the business cycle does not signi…cantly a¤ect our main result.25
    Finally, we want to make sure that our results are not just being driven by data from the Great
Recession. We already saw in …gure 1 that price change dispersion in the Great Recession is a
signi…cant outlier. Since our identi…cation strategy relies heavily on the positive correlation between
pass-through and dispersion, it is important that this correlation is a general feature of the data
and not just an artifact of this one large recession.               Are our time-series results then driven by
this particularly dramatic period?            Table 5 shows that they are not.              Restricting our analysis
to data prior to 2008 mildly reduces the relationship between pass-through and dispersion, but it
remains highly quantitatively and statistically signi…cant.26 In particular, a one-standard deviation
increase in  increases pass-through by 30% (0.038/0.125). This is smaller than the 42% increase
observed when using the full sample, but it is still very substantial. Thus, neither the economic nor
the statistical signi…cance of our relationship is an artifact of the Great Recession, so we believe our
results are informative for understanding time-varying dispersion more generally.

2.5    Controls for Composition
While our empirical result holds under a variety of controls, these may not pick up compositional
changes across time in our sample. In this section, we address several potential composition concerns.
For brevity, we leave the actual results to our empirical appendix and summarize them here.
    First, is our item-level fact actually distinct from our month-level dispersion fact? We do not
have a balanced panel due to sample rotation, so it is possible that the high dispersion time-periods
in our data are just times when the sample contains items with unusually high dispersion. In Tables
A3 and A4, we document that our two facts are indeed distinct by showing that in a joint-regression,
cross-item and cross-month dispersion both independently lead to increases in pass-through.                           We
also show that even when restricted to a balanced panel there is a positive relationship between
month-level dispersion and MRPT. This means that pass-through for the same products rises with
   24
      Nakamura and Steinsson (2012) argue that missing price changes at the time of product substitution leads to
downward bias in pass-through. Since our measure of MRPT conditions on price changes, the presence of product
substitution is not directly relevant for our results. Nevertheless, product substitution rises mildly with the dispersion
of price changes. This means that the pass-through increase we document may understate the true increase in
aggregate pass-through: accounting for product substitution would, if anything, amplify our results.
   25
      We …nd similar results using alternative samples and dispersion measures. In particular, using the standard
deviation of price changes instead of the interquartile range and using di¤erent country and product mixes does not
change the conclusion that these additional controls make little di¤erence. In the interest of brevity we do not report
these results, but all results for di¤erent subsamples are available upon request.
   26
      We only have two recessions in our sample, so it is not obvious that excluding data from after 2008 is desirable.
Nevertheless, the next section shows that the moderately lower variation in implied pass-through in the earlier period
is driven by lower variation in dispersion rather than a reduced relationship between dispersion and pass-through.


                                                           14
month-level dispersion so our results cannot be explained by a time-varying product mix.27
       In general, the positive relationship we observe between pass-through and month-level dispersion
could be driven by movements in dispersion across sectors or within a sector. Table A5 shows that
our month level relationship is mostly driven by increases in within sector dispersion rather than
cross-sector dispersion. That is, increases in pass-through are more closely associated with times
when price change dispersion within a sector rises rather than times when sectors become more
di¤erent from each other. Thus, we focus on within sector variation in our quantitative modeling.

2.6      Exchange Rate Appreciations Vs. Depreciations
The 2008 recession was also characterized by an appreciation of the U.S. dollar against most ma-
jor currencies.     However, our pass-through results are not sensitive to the sign of exchange rate
movements. We …nd that both our month-level and our item-level dispersion MRPT relationships
remain highly signi…cant even when restricting our regressions solely to price changes where                    is
always positive or always     negative.28   Thus, our results cannot be explained by changes across time
in whether the dollar is appreciating or depreciating.

2.7      Measurement Error Concerns
2.7.1      Alternative Pass-through Speci…cations

All results thus far have relied on MRPT speci…cations as in (1). This speci…cation directly measures
the extent to which exchange rate movements are passed into current prices, so it provides a snapshot
of price-‡exibility at a moment in time.          This in turn is extremely informative for di¤erentiating
changes in …rms’desired responses from alternative shocks. Nevertheless, there are two potential
concerns with this speci…cation. First, if the timing of price changes is mismeasured, then MRPT
su¤ers from attenuation bias.29 Second, items may di¤er in the number of price changes required
to fully capture pass-through. If that case, estimating pass-through conditional on a single price
change may provide a distorted picture of cross-item price ‡exibility.
       With these measurement concerns in mind, we estimate several alternative pass-through spec-
i…cations.     First, we use a "…xed horizon" pass-through speci…cation where we calculate                   
                                                                                                               =
+ ¬ and     
                       = + ¬ for …xed pass-through horizons . We then rerun our pass-through
regressions using this new measure of price and exchange rate changes. Crucially, this alternative
speci…cation does not condition on price adjustment, so individual items may have between 0 and 
price changes occurring between  and  + . This re‡ects the full extent of an item’s pass-through
over a …xed horizon, whether it occurs through one or many price changes. This speci…cation shares
many of the attractive features of life-long pass-through used in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) but
  27
     Dispersion and pass-through vary more across time in the balanced panel than in our baseline unbalanced panel.
  28
     For brevity we do not report these results, but they are available upon request.
  29
     Mismatched timing can occur when there is a lag between the time an item is purchased and the time it ships. In
the appendix we show that controlling for shipping method does not alter our conclusions. We also simulate various
additional sources of measurement error and show they cannot explain our result.




                                                        15
allows us to calculate time-series variation in pass-through.30 In addition, we also run our baseline
MRPT regression allowing for lagged exchange rate movements to matter for current price changes.31
         Table 6 provides results for these alternative speci…cations. In all cases, increases in item-level
or month-level dispersion leads to economically large and statistically signi…cant increases in pass-
through.32 Thus, our results are insensitive to particular measures of exchange rate pass-through.33

2.7.2        Small Samples

Given the limited time span of our panel data and low average frequency of price adjustment, it is
important to verify that the relationship between pass-through and dispersion is not driven by small
sample issues.        In the previous section, we argued that small samples could lead to biased pass-
through estimates by a¤ecting (                ) since the sample covariance can di¤er from zero even
if the population covariance does not. Our structural modeling addresses this concern head on by
using an indirect inference procedure with sampling procedures that mimic the BLS. If our empirical
results were driven by censoring bias or selection then they should also show up in simulated results.
         Nevertheless, we also try to address these small sample concerns directly in our empirical results.
In Appendix 1, we show that our item-level results are robust to restricting the sample to items
which have at least 3 or at least 5 price changes. We also run placebo regressions to see if our results
are driven by spurious small sample issues. In particular, we substitute a count of an item’s price
changes or its price observations in place of . These placebo regressions show that our results
are not driven by a correlation between measured dispersion and item sample sizes.


3         Time-Variation in Pass-Through
In the previous section we documented a robust link between exchange rate pass-through and mi-
croeconomic price change dispersion.                Before demonstrating how our empirical fact can help dis-
criminate between time-varying volatility and time-varying responsiveness as sources of time-varying
dispersion, we …rst argue that our fact is also interesting per se.                In particular, we show that an
implication of the positive correlation between dispersion and pass-through is that there is large
variation in exchange rate pass-through at business cycle frequencies. That is, pass-through is not
a single number; it varies signi…cantly over time and is high when dispersion is high. In this sense
our empirical results provide model-free evidence that looking at the microeconomic distribution of
price changes is crucial for predicting in‡ation dynamics at a moment in time.
    30
      This …xed horizon pass-through speci…cation also provides yet another piece of evidence that our empirical rela-
tionship is not driven by heterogeneity in the frequency of adjustment, since we no longer condition on adjustment.
                                                 
   31
      That is, we estimate:           =      1    + 1  (         ) + 
                                                                                      1            + 2   ¬ 1 +
                                                                   0
  2    (      ¬ 1 ) + 2          ¬ 1 +  + I +  + 
   32
      Unsurprisingly, there is a very signi…cant increase in the level of pass  with the …xed horizon over which we
measure pass-through. While theory has no strong prediction for how  should vary with the pass-through horizon,
there appears to be a modestly signi…cant increase in  but no change in  with this horizon. The main
takeaway is that all measures of  are signi…cantly positive across all speci…cations.
   33
      We also …nd that life-long pass-through is increasing in item-level dispersion. Since life-long pass-through is only
measured once for each item we cannot measure time-variation, so we do not report these results.



                                                            16
       The results from the previous section allow us to construct implied time-series for exchange rate
pass-through by multiplying observed variables by their estimated e¤ects on exchange rate pass-
through. For example, using regression speci…cation (4) we estimate pass-through in each period 
                              
by computing d   = b     +b      

        Figure 4: Level of Exchange Rate Pass-through Across Time (Parametric Speci…cations)
                             Pass-Through Estimate (IQR effects)                                        Pass-Through Estimate (All Controls)
                      NBER Recessions
              0.4     Level of Pass-through                                             0.4


              0.3                                                                       0.3


              0.2                                                                       0.2


              0.1                                                                       0.1


               0                                                                          0
                    1995m1        2000m1        2005m1         2010m1                         1995m1         2000m1         2005m1         2010m1

                                                         Pass-Through Estimate (All Controls Except IQR)

                                               0.4


                                               0.3


                                               0.2


                                               0.1


                                                 0
                                                     1995m1        2000m1          2005m1              2010m1




       The identifying assumption in this speci…cation is that the only thing that varies across time
that a¤ects exchange rate pass-through is . The left hand panel of Figure 4 shows the resulting
estimates for exchange rate pass-through under this speci…cation.34 During the height of the Great
Recession, this estimate of exchange rate pass-through rises to 44% relative to a low of approximately
7% during the late-1990s.                      The assumption that time-variation in exchange rate pass-through is
solely driven by variation in  is very strong but can be easily relaxed. In the right hand panel
of Figure 4 we allow pass-through to vary with , the frequency of adjustment, the frequency of
product substitution, seasonal month dummies, and real GDP growth.
       Allowing for these additional interactions does not change the conclusion that pass-through rose
markedly during the 2008 recession.                                The main di¤erence relative to the speci…cation with only
 is a large seasonal component. This can be seen most clearly in the bottom panel of Figure 4,
which shows pass-through estimates for a speci…cation with all controls except for . Essentially
all the variation in pass-through at business cycle frequencies is captured by time-series variation
in price change dispersion.                     Interestingly, there is some seasonality in pass-through, from a high
of approximately 0.16 in December to a low of approximately 0.09 in June. Understanding these
seasonal patterns is an interesting topic for future work, but the bottom line is that for understanding
business cycle variation, looking at price change dispersion appears essential.35
  34
     Note that by construction, this pass-through series is perfectly correlated with the dispersion time-series shown in
Figure 1, so the new object of interest is the implied scale of pass-through ‡uctuations.
  35
     Seasonality is unlikely to be explained purely by a spike in the frequency of adjustment at the end of the year. This


                                                                                 17
            Figure 5: Pass-through Estimate (Non-Parametric 12-month Rolling Window)

                     0.6

                     0.5

                     0.4

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                       0

                     -0.1

                     -0.2

                     -0.3

                            1995m1                2000m1                   2005m1             2010m1




    While the above results show that pass-through varies across time in a speci…cation with a variety
of controls, there is always concern that omitted variables might undo this time-series variation.
That is, there may be additional variables we are not controlling for that a¤ect pass-through and
would undo the time-series variation we have found.                        We can assess this concern by allowing
pass-through to vary across time non-parametrically.                      Ideally, we could re-estimate the baseline
pass-through regression (1) with a full set of month dummies. However, small sample sizes make
such regressions infeasible.          Instead, we estimate the baseline regression using a rolling 12-month
window. That is, our estimate of pass-through for period  is given by re-running regression 1 using
only price changes occurring in a window 6 months before and after period :


                                     i; =       + i;0   +    i;   j ¬6           + 6

    This allows us to construct a monthly measure of                     that varies fully non-parametrically across
time. Figure 5 shows the resulting estimates together with 90% con…dence intervals. Overall the
results are quite similar to the parametric speci…cation, and again there is strong variation in pass-
through at business-cycle frequencies. In particular, notice that pass-through is signi…cantly larger
than it was in the late 1990s both in the 2001 and 2008 Recessions. Running annual pass-through or
6-month pass-through regressions instead of using overlapping rolling windows produces very similar
results.36 This speci…cation shows that being completely agnostic about what drives pass-through
movements across time delivers quite similar results to our benchmark speci…cations.
    Overall our results show that exchange rate pass-through varies dramatically across time, with

is because our measure of pass-through conditions on adjustment, so we are …nding variation in how much adjusting
prices respond to exchange rate movements over the season that are unlikely to be explained purely by frequency.
   36
      Quarterly results (available from authors on request) are also similar although small sample sizes mean that the
standard errors become extremely large and estimates are quite noisy.


                                                            18
microeconomic price change dispersion. This means that estimating average pass-through regres-
sions without looking at micro data induces a signi…cant time-varying bias, with pass-through sub-
stantially understated during periods of microeconomic churning. While a large literature tries to
understand average pass-through and its implications for the nominal transmission mechanism, the
above evidence shows that pass-through is not a single number and that concentrating on average
pass-through may be misleading for how prices will respond to nominal shocks at a moment in time.
         Beyond providing direct empirical evidence that the distribution of price changes matters for
predicting pass-through, we now show that our empirical results provide additional identi…cation
that is useful for understanding the nature of heterogeneity and aggregate shocks in the economy.


4         Basic theoretical framework
4.1         Flexible price model
In this section we lay out a simple framework following Burstein and Gopinath (2013) that shows how
economic primitives shape the relationship between exchange rate pass-through and price change
dispersion. In this section, we do so in the simplest possible setting in order to build intuition, by
assuming ‡exible prices, no aggregate shocks and no equilibrium e¤ects. This allows us to develop
simple formulas relating endogenous responsiveness and fundamental volatility to pass-through and
the variance of price changes.37             In the quantitative section which follows, these assumptions are
relaxed but the intuition is similar.
         Consider the problem of a foreign …rm selling items to U.S. importers. The …rm has perfectly
‡exible prices, set in dollars. The optimal ‡exible price (in logs) of item  at the border is the sum
of the gross markup (  ) and dollar marginal cost ( (                         ))   which depends on both the exchange
rate () and an item-speci…c component orthogonal to the exchange rate (  ):

                                                     =       +  (       )                                      (5)

Taking the total derivative of equation (5) gives:

                                              = ¬¬ (  ¬             ) +         +                               (6)

                          
where ¬          ¬ (    ¬ )   is the elasticity of a …rm’s optimal markup with respect to its relative price.
We refer to this parameter as markup "responsiveness". It captures the classic pricing to market
channel of Dornbusch (1987) and Krugman (1987), where …rms may adjust markups in response
to cost shocks, leading to incomplete pass-through. This channel implies a negative relationship
between markups and relative prices,  ¬  which Burstein and Gopinath (2013) show is a robust
                                                                                                                        
implication of various strategic complementarities that generate incomplete pass-through.                               
is the partial elasticity of the dollar marginal cost to the exchange rate,  We refer to this as the
"import intensity" channel.              Finally,      =          captures the innovation of idiosyncratic marginal
    37
         In the appendix, we consider a more general model which includes GE e¤ects and scale-dependent marginal cost.


                                                                    19
cost.38     We call changes in the variance of this idiosyncratic component fundamental "volatility".
Rearranging this equation gives an explicit expression for the direct e¤ect (that is when                                          = 0) of
a change in the exchange rate on prices at the                       border:39

                                                                       
                                                                    =                                                                   (7)
                                                                     1 + ¬


       The …rst factor a¤ecting pass-through is the fraction of marginal cost denominated in dollars. If
marginal cost is entirely denominated in dollars (                           = 0), then ‡uctuations in the exchange rate are
irrelevant for the foreign …rm’s optimal dollar price and pass-through is zero. In general, exchange
rate pass-through is increasing in import intensity.
       The second factor a¤ecting pass-through is the response of the foreign …rm’s optimal markup to
changes in its relative price. If ¬ = 0 (the CES case) the …rm’s optimal markup does not change as
its price deviates from its competitors and pass-through is at its maximum. If ¬  0 then as the
price of the …rm increases relative to its competitors, the elasticity of its demand rises, lowering its
optimal markup. Similarly, when the …rm’s price is relatively low, its optimal markup rises. Thus,
if ¬  0, the foreign …rm will move its price less than one-for-one in response to cost shocks.
       Since lowering ¬ means that …rms will be more responsive to all cost shocks, we refer to lowering
¬ as increasing total "responsiveness". That is, …rms with low ¬ will respond strongly to both
idiosyncratic shocks as well as exchange rate shocks. In contrast, …rms with high                                             will respond
more to exchange rate shocks but not to idiosyncratic cost shocks. We use the term responsiveness
to di¤erentiate general cost pass-through from exchange rate speci…c pass-through.
       In addition to its implications for pass-through, we can also use equation (6) to show how                                      and
¬ a¤ect the variance of          Solving for              and computing its variance gives:
                                                                 2                                  2
                                                                                            1
                           (  ) =                               ( ) +                          (  )                       (8)
                                               1 + ¬                                      1 + ¬

where we have used the fact that exchange rate and idiosyncratic shocks are uncorrelated.
       Intuitively, the variance of the …rm’s optimal price is larger if it faces a more volatile exchange
rate or idiosyncratic shocks. In addition, using equation (8), it follows that factors that increase
exchange rate pass-through (           ", ¬ #) also increase the variance of price changes. Moreover, using
equation (8) it can be shown that for empirically relevant values of                                       and ¬ , changing ¬ has much
larger e¤ects on price change variance than changing                                .40    The intuition, as previously discussed
in Section 2.3.1, is that empirical estimates of (  ) greatly exceed ( ). In addition,                                             is
  38
     Since we do not observe this shock, it is without loss of generality to normalize the price response to                      to be one.
  39
     We also set the innovation of the idiosyncratic shock to its average value (zero).
  40
     More formally, combine the two formulas in elasticity form to get:
                                    (  )    ¬
                                       ¬      (  )                  ¬     1 (  )
                                                                     =       1+ 2
                                    (    )                         1+¬      (  )
                                                  (    )


  Substituting calibrated values from the modeling section yields a ratio of approximately 200.


                                                                      20
typically small. (See Figure 2) This means that the …rst term in (8) contributes little to the overall
variance of price changes, so changing its size also has little e¤ect.                          In the quantitative modeling
section, we show that this simple intuition survives in a realistic model. That is, the mechanical link
between heterogeneity in                   and heterogeneity in (  ) is not empirically important.

4.2      Modeling Price Stickiness
Price stickiness is a pervasive feature of micro price data.                         For example, Gopinath and Rigobon
(2008) …nd that the median price duration for imports to the U.S. is 10.6 months. More importantly,
the price adjustment mechanism can have direct e¤ects on measured pass-through. For example,
in menu cost models, where price adjustment is endogenous, conditioning on price adjustment will
induce a selection bias in MRPT estimates.41 In contrast, this bias is absent in Calvo pricing models
where price adjustment is exogenous.42
       To understand how the primitives of a menu cost model can a¤ect measured pass-through, it is
useful to examine our baseline MRPT regression shown in equation (1). By de…nition, the estimated
MRPT regression coe¢ cient is equal to:

                                      b = (    ) =        + (        )(  )
                                             (  )                |              {z          }
                                                                               selection bias


       where           is the "true" responsiveness of desired prices to exchange rate movements.43 Menu cost
models induce (                 )  0 for …rms that choose to adjust, even if the unconditional covariance
is zero. This is because in a menu cost model, …rms are more likely to choose to adjust when the
idiosyncratic shock and the exchange rate movement reinforce each other. Thus, (          )  0            
                                                                                        b
for adjusters. This implies that estimated pass-through conditional on price adjustment, , is biased
upward relative to true desired pass-through, .44
       Higher menu costs lead …rms to adjust less often and by larger amounts (which increases the
dispersion of price changes) as …rms economize on the number of times they adjust prices. Increases
in the menu cost lead to a wider range of inaction, which leads the importance of selection e¤ects
and (              ) to increase. This then leads to an increase in measured MRPT.
       Conversely, increasing the variance of idiosyncratic cost shocks lowers MRPT because the mag-
nitude of the selection bias is decreasing in the size of these shocks.                          The intuition is simple: as
the size of the idiosyncratic shocks increases, …rms are more likely to adjust their prices for purely
idiosyncratic reasons, which lowers (                      ) conditional on adjustment.         At the same time,
  41
      We are not …rst to notice this bias. See the brief discussion in footnotes 7 and 26 of Gopinath et al. (2010).
  42
      Both models su¤er from attenuation bias in pass-through driven by censoring at sample rotation, but this will not
a¤ect the dispersion of price changes. Furthermore, it is captured explicitly in our model simulation since we rotate
our simulated panel as in the BLS.
   43
      This underlying is determined by           and ¬, as shown in the previous section. It is also declining with price
stickiness if exchange rate movements are not permanent, but exchange rates are close to a random walk in the data
so that the ‡exible price expression provides a close approximation even for …rms with relatively sticky prices.
   44
      It is worth noting that this is only a "bias" if one is interested in measuring desired pass-through in the population.
But if one is interested in measuring how much actual prices will respond to exchange rate movements, the relevant
object is  not 


                                                                   21
larger shocks mean larger price dispersion.                    Thus variation in the size of idiosyncratic shocks in-
duces a counterfactual negative correlation between MRPT and dispersion and so already suggests
that volatility shocks have di¢ culty replicating empirical facts in the open economy environment.
         Reviewing the conclusions from this and the previous section, it follows that heterogeneity in
  ¬ or in the size of menu costs should generate a positive relationship between measured MRPT
and the dispersion of price changes. However, we now show that only the "responsiveness" channel
arising from variation in ¬ is quantitatively successful.


5         Quantitative Model
We now formally assess the theoretical link between price change dispersion and exchange rate pass-
through in an estimable quantitative model.                       The model allows for all the theoretical channels
discussed in the previous section and also includes indirect equilibrium e¤ects that the simple model
in Section 4.1 ignored.             The main model we explore builds heavily on the menu cost model of
Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010).                     This model has been successful at matching a variety of cross-
sectional and steady-state empirical facts. We build on it by formally estimating various forms of
heterogeneity in the cross-section as well as by adding aggregate shocks to explain our month-level
dispersion evidence.            We intentionally build on this workhorse model of incomplete pass-through
to show that it implies extremely tight links between our empirical facts and underlying economic
primitives.       The model features heterogeneity in import sensitivity, idiosyncratic volatility, and
responsiveness with less than full responsiveness driven by the strategic complementarities which
arise under Kimball demand.45 While we model strategic-complementarities using Kimball demand
this is not an important assumption, as other channels such as pricing to market in Atkeson and
Burstein (2008) yield similar reduced form implications. We discuss this more fully in Section 5.4.3.

5.1        Model Description and Calibration
5.1.1        Industry Demand Aggregator

The industry is characterized by a continuum of varieties indexed by  There is a unit measure
of domestic varieties and a measure   1 of foreign varieties available for domestic consumption,
which captures the idea that not all varieties are traded internationally.
         We generate variable markups by utilizing a Kimball (1995) style aggregator:
                                                          Z
                                                     1           j j 
                                                                           = 1                                  (9)
                                                    j j            

with        (1) = 1   0 ()    0 and   00 ()    0  is the quantity demanded of variety  2 , where      is the
set of all varieties available domestically.                  has measure 1 + . Individual varieties are aggregated
into a …nal consumption good . This intermediate aggregator contains the CES speci…cation as a
    45
   A Calvo model delivers similar conclusions about the importance of responsiveness but …ts the data less well.
Results are available upon request.


                                                                  22
special case. The demand function for  implied by equation (9) is:

                                                                                          0¬1
                                     =                         , where ()                    ()                                     (10)
                                                              j j
                                                                                                         hR                           i
                                                                                                                   0   j j   
Here  is the price of variety ,  is the sectoral price index and                                                                 .  is
de…ned implicitly by the following equation
                                                                  Z
                                                         =               


5.1.2       Firm’s problem

Consider the problem of a …rm producing variety . Foreign and domestic …rms face symmetric
problems and we label foreign variables with asterisks. The …rm faces a constant marginal cost:46

                                                                 1¬ ( )
                                                     =
                                                                     

where  is the domestic wage and the parameter                               is the share of foreign inputs in the …rm’s cost
function.  denotes idiosyncratic productivity, which follows an AR(1) in logs:

                            log( ) =     log(¬1 )       +           with       ~   (0        )


Combining yields …rm pro…ts from selling variety  in the domestic market:

                                                                 1¬ ( )
                                                =  ¬                              
                                                                     

Firms are price-setters but face a menu cost                    when adjusting prices. Let the state vector of …rm 
be  = (¬1   ;      ) where ¬1 and  are idiosyncratic state variables and    
and  are aggregate state variables. The value of a …rm selling variety  is characterized by the
following Bellman equation:

                              ( ) =            ( )   + f(+1 ) (+1 )g
                               ( ) = max f               ( )   + f(+1 ) (+1 )gg
                                                  

                              ( )     = maxf  ( )   ( ) ¬ g

where   () is the value function if the …rm does not adjust its price,   () is the value function if
it adjusts, and  () is the value of making the optimal price adjustment decision. (+1 ) is the
stochastic discount factor. Each period the …rm chooses whether to adjust its price by comparing
the value of not adjusting to the value of adjusting net of the menu cost.
  46
       This cost function can be derived from a CRS production function in domestic and foreign inputs.




                                                                  23
5.1.3     Sectoral equilibrium

We de…ne      ln(  ) as the log real exchange rate. Sectoral equilibrium is characterized by
a path of the sectoral price level, f g, consistent with optimal pricing policies of …rms given the
exogenous idiosyncratic productivity process and wage rates in the two countries.                                     This sectoral
equilibrium allows for indirect e¤ects that we shut down in Section 4.1 but explore in our model
appendix. Following Krusell and Smith (1998) and its open economy implementation in Gopinath
and Itskhoki (2010), we assume that  ln +1 =                0   +       1 ln    +       2  .        We then solve the …rm’s
Bellman equation for a given conjecture for         , simulate the model and iterate to convergence. As
in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), this forecasting rule is highly accurate in equilibrium.
   We assume that all prices are set in the domestic currency, since our empirical analysis is re-
stricted to dollar prices. Following Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), we assume that  = 1 and that
all ‡uctuations in the real exchange rate arise from ‡uctuations in   In economic terms, these
assumptions derive from assuming that the value of the domestic currency and real wage are stable
relative to the exchange rate. These are good assumptions for the U.S.

5.1.4     Calibration

While there are a number of strategic complementarities that can generate variable markups (and
thus incomplete pass-through), the speci…c form we explore in our quantitative results is the Klenow
and Willis (2006) speci…cation of the Kimball aggregator (equation 9):

                                                                                               
                                = 1 ¬  ln                       where                     
                                                ¬1                                                

   This demand speci…cation is governed by two parameters:                             1 and   0 The elasticity and
the super-elasticity of demand are given by:

                                                                                              
                        e( ) =                       and e
                                                           ( ) =
                                                                                                     
                                   1 ¬  ln    ¬1                               1 ¬  ln               ¬1


Under these assumptions the markup is given by

                                         e=
                                                                        
                                                ¬ 1 +  ln              ¬1


so that when  ¬! 0, we get a CES demand structure with an elasticity of substitution equal to
and a markup equal to    ¬1 .   The price elasticity of desired markups is given by:

                                            ln e                       
                                   ¬   ¬           =                                      
                                            ln        ¬ 1 +  ln
                                                                                 
                                                                                 ¬1


   Thus, responsiveness is decreasing in  and increasing in                      (if   0). Since we do not directly
observe    or  we cannot separately identify heterogeneity in these two parameters. For simplicity

                                                       24
and following Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010), we assume that variation in ¬ is driven solely by  but
note that variation in         would yield similar results. We return to this point in Section 5.4.3.
       The calibrated values for all parameters are reported in Table 7. The period in our model is one
month so we calibrate the discount rate to generate an annual 4% real interest rate ( = 096112 ).
We set the elasticity of demand, , equal to 5. This implies a steady-state markup of 25%, which
is the middle of the range estimated by Broda and Weinstein (2006) using U.S. import data from
1990-2001.       We assume that the log of the real exchange rate, , follows a random walk in logs.
Empirically this series is highly persistent.             We set the mean increment of the innovation of the
real exchange rate equal to 2.5% following Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010). To calibrate the share of
           
imports,  1+ , we       use the share of imports as a percentage of GDP from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis.47 The          four year average (2008-2011) of this import share for the U.S. is 16.5%, which
implies that  = 02We set the persistence of the idiosyncratic shock process,                          ,   to be equal
to 0.85, which is in between the values used by Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) and Nakamura and
Steinsson (2008), and we set            to target a frequency of 16%.
       Finally, the parameters         and      are jointly calibrated to match three moments of the data:
average pass-through, the        2   from our MRPT regression and the mean standard deviation of item
level price changes. To get intuition for why these moments separately identify our parameters, it
is useful to remember the intuition from our simple model and our baseline MRPT regression:

                                                       =           +                                        (11)



       Decreasing  means that …rms respond more to both exchange rate movements and idiosyncratic
shocks when adjusting prices.            This increases the average level of pass-through and the standard
deviation of price changes but has a negligible e¤ect on the 2 from estimating equation (11). This
is because lowering  increases both explained variance coming from                         and unexplained variance
coming from          by roughly equal amounts so that the ratio of the residual sum of squares to the
total sum of squares remains unchanged. Increasing                          leads to a large increase in the variance of
price change and a decrease in estimated pass-through since the selection bias conditional on price
adjustment is decreasing in        .    Increasing         also leads to a large decrease in 2  since amplifying
    increases the residual sum of squares. Finally, increasing                  leads to large increases in measured
pass-through but has little e¤ect on the variance of price changes since the variance of price changes
is almost entirely driven by idiosyncratic shocks. At the same time, increasing                     leads to an increase
in   2   since it increases the signal to noise ratio in the pass-through regression.
       Thus, movements in these three parameters produce distinctly di¤erent e¤ects on the average
level of pass-through, the 2 from our MRPT regression, and the mean standard deviation of item
level price changes so that these three moments allow us to identify our parameters of interest. We
…nd that the best …t parameters for  and                     are 0.18, 2.5 and 0.07, respectively.
  47
   Calibrating this import share is important to allow for realistic sectoral equilibrium e¤ects, as discussed in the
Modeling Appendix.



                                                                 25
5.2   Simple Comparative Statics
To understand the role of various channels in explaining the empirical relationship between MRPT
and the dispersion of price changes, we begin with a simple comparative statics exercise.                                                                                Each
panel of Figure 6 shows results when we …x three of  ;                                                          and              at their steady state values and
vary the fourth parameter. For each set of parameters, we simulate a panel of …rms with the same
number of observations as in the BLS data and compute MRPT and the standard deviation of price
changes exactly as in Section 2. For comparison, the empirical relationship between the standard
deviation of price changes and MRPT that we documented in the IPP microdata is shown in blue.

                                               Figure 6: Menu Cost Comparative Statics
                                              ε (Markup Elasticity)                                                           κ (Menu Cost)
                                 0.3                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                               data
                                0.25                                                                      0.25                                                 model
                 pass-through




                                                                                           pass-through
                                 0.2                                                                       0.2

                                0.15                                                                      0.15

                                 0.1                                                                       0.1

                                0.05                                                                      0.05

                                  0                                                                         0
                                   0   0.05   0.1        0.15      0.2   0.25   0.3                          0   0.05      0.1        0.15      0.2     0.25       0.3
                                              std dev of price changes                                                     std dev of price changes


                                              α (Import Intensity)                                                      σA (Idiosyncratic Volatility)


                                0.25                                                                      0.25
                 pass-through




                                                                                           pass-through




                                 0.2                                                                       0.2

                                0.15                                                                      0.15

                                 0.1                                                                       0.1

                                0.05                                                                      0.05

                                  0                                                                         0
                                   0   0.05   0.1        0.15      0.2   0.25   0.3                          0   0.05      0.1        0.15      0.2     0.25       0.3
                                              std dev of price changes                                                     std dev of price changes




   The top-left panel of Figure 6 shows the results from varying  from 0 to 100. It is apparent that
variation in  generates a strong positive correlation between price change dispersion and MRPT.
Moreover, the quantitative …t is quite good: the model matches the slope, level and much of the
quantitative variation of this relationship.                                    The bottom-left panel Figure 6 shows what happens
when we vary    from 0 to 1. This leads to large changes in MRPT but negligible movements in the
variance of price changes. This is consistent with the discussion in Section 2.3.1.
   The top-right panel shows the model-simulated results when we vary                                                                             from 0 to 0.2. Consistent
with the discussion in the previous section, variation in                                                        generates a modest positive relationship
between MRPT and the standard deviation of price changes.                                                                          This positive correlation occurs
because higher menu costs lead …rms to tolerate wider price imbalances before adjusting, which
ampli…es selection e¤ects. This increases price change dispersion as well as measured pass-through.
   Finally, the bottom-right side panel shows results when we vary the standard deviation of idio-
syncratic shocks from 0 to 0.2. Variation in                                          generates a strong negative relationship between
MRPT and the standard deviation of price changes for reasons similar to menu cost variation but in


                                                                                      26
reverse: larger       increases price change dispersion but implies that …rms are more likely to adjust
their prices for purely idiosyncratic reasons, which reduces selection e¤ects and MRPT.
    Thus, the comparative statics imply that variation in  or              can potentially replicate the observed
relationship between MRPT and the standard deviation of price changes. However, explaining the
relationship through variation in           yields grossly counterfactual implications for the frequency of
adjustment.       In the data there is a mild positive correlation between adjustment frequency and
price change dispersion. In contrast, variation in                induces an almost perfect negative correlation
between dispersion and frequency: as menu costs rise, the inaction region widens, frequency falls
and price change dispersion rises. We return to this point in our indirect inference results.
    The relation between our comparative statics and those in Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) Propo-
sition 3 bears some mention. They …nd that in a simple static model, pass-through increases with
 , declines with  and is una¤ected by              or    .     Our conclusion for     and  is identical, but our
results for    and        di¤er because we study MRPT while they study LRPT. LRPT is not subject
to the selection e¤ects that induce (              )  0 but these e¤ects are important for MRPT.48
    While we view this comparative statics exercise as highly informative, it has several weaknesses:
1) In the data, we are sorting …rms into bins by the standard deviation of price changes.                        Since
our comparative statics exercise instead computes results for a series of models that vary by a
single parameter, we are implicitly sorting …rms by this (unobserved) parameter rather than by the
standard deviation of price changes. Thus, there is not a perfect match between our comparative
statics simulations and our empirical exercise.                  2) In the data, …rms are likely to di¤er along
many dimensions simultaneously so that heterogeneity is unlikely to be well-captured by a single
parameter.      3) The comparative statics exercise is intrinsically qualitative and informal.                     For
example, both        and  generate positive relationships between MRPT and dispersion and there is
little formal guidance for which is a better …t even along this single moment.
    We now turn to a formal estimation strategy that squarely addresses each of these weaknesses.

5.3    Indirect Inference
In this section, we allow for permanent …rm heterogeneity, which we assume is unobserved by the
econometrician.        We then formally estimate the importance of di¤erent forms of heterogeneity in
explaining our empirical results using indirect inference.49 Motivated by tractability as well as the
results from the comparative statics exercise, we allow for three dimensions of heterogeneity across
…rms. In particular, we allow …rms to di¤er by ;  and                      50
                                                                          .     We assume that each parameter
  48
     In addition, in the working paper version they explore implications for the size of price adjustment. As we showed
in the theoretical results, in a ‡exible price environment, increases in volatility or responsiveness unambiguously
increase price change dispersion. With menu costs this need not occur. Nevertheless, we …nd that the qualitative
result from the frictionless model strongly obtains for all estimated parameters in our quantitative model.
  49
     See Collard-Wexler (2013) and Keane and Anthony (2003) for examples of indirect inference in similar problems.
  50
     While it would also be possible to allow for heterogeneity in , our comparative statics exercise suggests that this
parameter plays no role in explaining the relationship between MRPT and dispersion or in the relationship between
dispersion and frequency. However, shutting down heterogeneity along this dimension substantially reduces the
computational burden involved in estimation.




                                                            27
takes on one of two values uniformly distributed around the previous mean.51                        For example, we
assume that for a particular …rm,           is either equal to        = 043 +       or      = 043 ¬      where
is a parameter to be estimated which governs the degree of menu cost di¤erences across …rms. We
allow for a similar two point symmetric distribution for each source of heterogeneity so that we have
three parameters which must be estimated:              =(            ).
       Fixing          there are then eight di¤erent types of …rms in our model (taking on high or
low values for each parameter), and we assume an equal number of …rms of each type.52                            After
solving for the sectoral equilibrium with these eight …rm types we simulate a …rm panel, which we
sample exactly as in the BLS microdata to account for any small sample issues which might arise
in our empirical speci…cation. From this …rm panel we calculate an auxiliary model that consists
of …fteen reduced form moments  ( ) which capture essential features of the data. We then try to
match these simulated moments to their empirical counterparts.
       This indirect inference estimation procedure explicitly addresses the concerns identi…ed with
the comparative statics exercise: simulated and actual data are treated identically and we use no
information from simulated data that is not available in actual data. In addition, we explicitly allow
for the presence of multiple sources of heterogeneity and formally assess their relative importance.
       To construct our empirical moments, we …rst sort …rms into …ve bins by their standard deviation.
We then calculate the relative standard deviation of price changes, the relative MRPT, and the
relative frequency for each standard deviation bin.53                  The …rst …ve moments test the model’s
ability to capture the heterogeneity in price change dispersion observed in the data.                      The second
…ve moments capture the relationship between this dispersion and pass-through.                            The …nal …ve
moments capture the relationship between dispersion and frequency, which we previously argued
helps identify heterogeneity in menu costs from heterogeneity in responsiveness.54
   Given these 15 moments, we pick our 3 parameters to solve b = arg min  ( )0  ( )  ( ) where
 ( ) is a positive de…nite weight-matrix.55 Table 8 displays resulting parameter estimates as well
as several measures of model …t. The …rst take-away from Table 8 is that the estimated level of 
heterogeneity is large and signi…cant. In contrast, heterogeneity in                 is signi…cant but not strongly
so, and there is no evidence for heterogeneity in . We can also assess the overall model …t. Using
standard over-identi…cation tests our full model cannot be rejected at 99% con…dence levels. We
  51
      When relevant, we bound the value of      at 0.
  52
      While it would be desirable to allow for more than a 2-point distribution of heterogeneity for each parameter,
allowing for a 3-point distribution would require solving the model for 27 di¤erent types of …rms while allowing for a
4-point distribution would require 64 …rm types, so it is clear that the problem rapidly rises in di¢ culty. Since we
want to estimate the model, we must resolve it for a large number of                which rapidly becomes infeasible.
Allowing for di¤erent numbers of each …rm also greatly increases the parameter space.
   53
      We concentrate on the relative values rather than the absolute values because our benchmark calibration is not
perfectly able to match the level of XSD, MRPT and freq. We think of both our empirical exercise and our exercise
with heterogeneity largely as being about matching the relative di¤erences across …rms. Nevertheless, redoing the
results using absolute rather than relative moments did not qualitatively change the conclusions.
   54
      As is standard in indirect inference and in contrast to typical simulated GMM implementations, our auxiliary model
need not have any structural interpretation. For example, we have already noted that our OLS MRPT regression will
pick up both direct e¤ects of parameters on as well as indirect e¤ects on covariance terms.
   55
      We pick  ( ) to be the standard e¢ cient weight matrix so that we can apply asymptotic formulas for standard
errors but using an identity weight matrix did not change our qualitative conclusions.



                                                          28
can also investigate restricted models that turn o¤ various sources of heterogeneity. The results for
the restricted models show that the model with no heterogeneity in  can easily be rejected while
models with no heterogeneity in                                                          or in       cannot be rejected in favor of the full model.

                                                                                  Figure 7: Full and Restricted Model Fits
                                                                    Relative PT by XSD bins       Relative XSD by XSD bins      Relative Freq by XSD bins
                                                                2                                3                           1.5
                                                                      Data
                          Best Fit


                                                                      Model                      2
                                                                1                                                             1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                0                                0                           0.5
                                                                 1       2    3      4    5       1     2    3     4    5       1    2     3     4     5
                 No σ variation No κ variation No ε variation




                                                                2                                3                           1.5
                                                                                                 2
                                                                1                                                             1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                0                                0                           0.5
                                                                 1       2    3      4    5       1     2    3     4    5       1    2     3     4     5
                                                                2                                3                           1.5
                                                                                                 2
                                                                1                                                             1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                0                                0                           0.5
                                                                 1       2    3      4    5       1     2    3     4    5       1    2     3     4     5
                                                                2                                3                           1.5
                                                                                                 2
                                                                1                                                             1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                0                                0                           0.5
                                                                 1       2    3      4    5       1     2    3     4    5       1    2     3     4     5




   The numerical results can be seen more easily in Figure 7, which shows the model …t to all …fteen
moments as well as the …t of restricted models which shut down various sources of heterogeneity.
   The main take-away from this visual inspection is that the …t in the second row is dramatically
worse than the …t in the …rst row. Turning o¤ heterogeneity in  means the next-best model …t does
not generate enough heterogeneity in price change dispersion, fails to generate enough of a positive
relationship between price change dispersion and pass-through, and it implies a negative rather than
positive correlation between dispersion and pass-through. In contrast, turning o¤ heterogeneity in
menu costs or in volatility has only negligible e¤ects on the model …t.

5.4     Aggregate Shocks
5.4.1    Baseline Results

Now that we have shown that variation in responsiveness is crucial for explaining the empirical
relationship between item-level price change dispersion and pass-through, we turn to understanding
our month-level dispersion results. In general, our conclusions about the role of various economic
primitives in the cross-section transfer almost directly to the time-series.                                                                         For this reason, our
discussion of these simulations is intentionally brief.
   In the previous section, we assumed that there was heterogeneity across …rms that was constant
across time. Instead, we now assume that …rms are identical but are subject to various aggregate



                                                                                                            29
shocks.56         We consider aggregate shocks to each of our parameters in turn.                       For expositional
purposes we describe only  shocks, but we treat other shocks analogously.
" For simplicity,
           #      we assume that  follows a two-state Markov process with transition probabilities
       11    12
                    and allow the Krusell-Smith forecast for the sectoral price level to depend on  .57
       21    22
We have little guidance on the size or persistence of our aggregate shocks, so rather than taking a
strong stand, we explore several di¤erent parameterizations. Under the "small" shock calibration,
                                              1
 moves between (1 + 6)  and              1+6      where  is the previous baseline calibration. This small shock
calibration implies that time-series variation in  is roughly one-…fth as large as the cross-sectional
variation estimated in the previous section.                    In addition, we consider a "large" shock calibration
                                             1
that moves  between 4 and                 4   .     This produces time-series variation in  comparable to the
cross-sectional variation in the previous section. We have computed results for both a low monthly
shock persistence of       11   =       22   = 090 and a high persistence of       11   =   22   = 0975. Changing the
persistence barely a¤ected our results, so for brevity we report only the high persistence case.
       Table 9 shows results with di¤erent aggregate shocks. In all cases, we divide months in thirds by
their month-level dispersion and calculate pass-through in high and low dispersion months. Overall,
aggregate shocks to  are most consistent with our empirical time-series results.                          Increases in
 reduce pass-through and the standard deviation of price changes.                           Under the "large shock"
calibration,  variation roughly accounts for the variation in MRPT observed in the data. However,
the movements in price change dispersion across time are somewhat too large: the model produces
a cross-sectional standard deviation of price changes that ranges from 0.05 to 0.13. In the data, the
comparable range is 0.12 to 0.15.58 In ongoing work we plan to explore whether alternative shocks
that relax the binary assumption can provide a better …t to the data.                        Nevertheless, shocks to 
produce variation in pass-through and dispersion that is reasonably consistent with the data.
       In contrast, shocks to          induce the wrong correlation between the standard deviation of price
changes and pass-through.               In addition, they produce time-series variation in both price change
dispersion and frequency that are substantially too large relative to the data.
       Shocks to     generate some comovement between dispersion and pass-through, but they imply a
strong negative relationship between frequency and dispersion. In the data, frequency, dispersion,
and pass-through all comove. Shocks to                      also generate too much time-series variation in frequency.
       Shocks to     induce lots of movement in pass-through but almost no movement in the standard
deviation of price changes.             In addition, the small movement in price change dispersion induced
by       goes in the wrong direction. As                   rises, pass-through rises but the cross-sectional standard
deviation of price changes falls. That is because large                  e¤ectively increases the size of the exchange
rate shocks relative to idiosyncratic shocks. Since the exchange rate shock is common to all …rms,
  56
     Including item-level heterogeneity together with aggregate shocks did not alter our conclusions but makes the
model somewhat more complicated.
  57
     That is, we assume that  ln +1 = 0 + 1 ln  + 2  +  [ 4 + 5 ln  + 6  ]. Again we …nd that the
Krusell-Smith forecasting rule is highly accurate.
  58
     As previously mentioned, our baseline calibration mildly underpredicts the average standard deviation of price
changes in the data



                                                                  30
this reduces the cross-sectional dispersion of price changes.
   Thus, as in the cross-sectional results, only shocks to  do a reasonable job of reproducing the
empirical evidence.

5.4.2   Additional Shocks

In addition to the above aggregate shocks, which we also explore in the cross-section, we study
two additional aggregate shocks which are more applicable to the time-series. First, we allow the
volatility of exchange rates to change across time, since the 2008 recession was also associated with
greater exchange rate volatility. However, we …nd that even large increases in exchange rate volatility
have only mild quantitative e¤ects, and qualitatively have the wrong sign relative to the empirical
evidence.   That is, increasing the volatility of exchange rates mildly increases pass-through, but
(very mildly) decreases month-level dispersion.     This is for the same reason that increases in
decrease the dispersion of price changes.
   It is also possible that the large degree of pass-through observed during the Great Recession was
driven by the fact that the recession was a large shock which a¤ected many …rms.           If a shock is
common to more …rms, then it might have greater general equilibrium e¤ects and generate more
pass-through. To assess the role of the "commonness" of shocks, we introduce time-variation in the
fraction of …rms that are sensitive to the exchange rate, . As  rises, exchange rate shocks a¤ect
more …rms and general equilibrium e¤ects increase in importance. However, the quantitative e¤ect
of changes in  on pass-through is relatively small and there are no e¤ects of  on the dispersion
of price changes: increasing  from 0.2 to 0.9 only increases pass-through from 16% to 23% and
has no e¤ect on dispersion. Thus, general equilibrium e¤ects in our model cannot account for the
empirical relationship between month-level dispersion and exchange rate pass-through.

5.4.3   Interpreting  shocks

Does time-variation in  have a natural economic interpretation? It is di¢ cult to provide direct
evidence of time-varying super elasticity of demand, but Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) argue for the
importance of such variation in the cross-section. It is easy to imagine that forces which drive super
elasticity di¤erences across …rms might also vary across time. Furthermore, it is important to note
that time-variation in the elasticity of substitution rather than super elasticity also delivers similar
                                                         
quantitative results. This is because on average, ¬ =    ¬1    so that   shocks generate time-variation
in responsiveness, as long as …rms exhibit some incomplete markup adjustment (  0).
   What is crucial for explaining the time-series relationship between pass-through and dispersion
is reduced-form time-variation in ¬; the structural source of this time-variation is less important.
For example, business cycle shocks to "market competitiveness" would equally well explain our
time-series patterns through the same ¬ channel. If certain periods of time such as recessions are
characterized by increased competition, with larger     and lower markups, they will also be times of
greater responsiveness and price change dispersion. These cyclical demand elasticity stories have
received some recent theoretical attention in Kaplan and Menzio (forthcoming), and Stroebel and


                                                  31
Vavra (2015) provide microeconomic empirical evidence for exactly this form of markup variation.
       While we model time-varying responsiveness using a Kimball demand framework, this mechanism
is much more general. Any shock to strategic complementarities across time that a¤ects markup
adjustment (¬) will deliver similar predictions.             As reviewed in Burstein and Gopinath (2013),
a number of other mechanisms can also generate less than perfect responsiveness including desire
to maintain market share (Atkeson and Burstein (2008)), customer shopping concerns (Paciello
et al. (2013)), or local distribution costs.         We believe that better understanding the source of
"responsiveness" shocks and time-varying strategic complementarities is an interesting avenue for
future research. While these shocks help …t the data, we think there is much work to be done
exploring their plausibility, size and implications for business cycles more generally.

5.5      Relationship to Existing Studies of Countercyclical Dispersion
Our paper joins a long literature documenting countercyclical dispersion of various economic vari-
ables. At the same time, theory has emerged trying to match this empirical evidence and explore
its macroeconomic implications.          This theoretical work has focused largely on "uncertainty" or
"volatility" shocks that raise the variance of shocks hitting agents in the economy.
       For example, in the context of retail prices Vavra (2014) documents that the dispersion of price
changes in the CPI is countercyclical and explains this fact using volatility shocks.                    However,
looking at equation 8, it is clear that the dispersion of price changes could increase either because
(  ) rises or because ¬ falls.      That is, greater dispersion of price changes could be explained
by greater volatility of shocks and constant responsiveness, or it could be explained by greater
responsiveness and constant volatility. Greater volatility and greater responsiveness both lead to an
increase in aggregate price ‡exibility, but they do so through di¤erent underlying mechanisms with
di¤erent implications for policy. By only looking at data on the dispersion of price changes, it is
fundamentally impossible to di¤erentiate time-varying volatility from time-varying responsiveness, so
existing models such as Vavra (2014) have proceeded by assumption rather than empirical evidence.59
       In contrast to the existing literature, our open economy environment allows us to separately
identify changes in volatility from changes in responsiveness. This identi…cation result was precisely
the point of the previous sections, which showed that our import price data strongly supports
time-variation in responsiveness rather than volatility shocks as an explanation for countercyclical
dispersion.     Increases in volatility are unable to explain increases in pass-through.              In contrast,
greater responsiveness increases both price change dispersion and exchange rate pass-through in a
manner consistent with the data. This result holds across a variety of price-setting environments,
whether price adjustment is frictionless, time-dependent or state-dependent.
       Together, our results suggest that the literature studying countercyclical dispersion has embraced
time-varying volatility too quickly. Time-variation in the strength of strategic complementarities
(and thus responsiveness) appears to be more relevant, at least for import price-setting.                  Under-
  59
    While we frame this discussion in terms of price-setting, an identical argument applies to the dispersion of any
outcome that includes an endogenous component. For example revenue TFP dispersion depends on …rms’ price
decisions.


                                                        32
standing the generalizability and empirical relevance of our results for other sectors of the economy
and other economic outcomes is an important avenue for future research.


6    Conclusion
In this paper, we exploit the open economy environment to provide evidence on the response of
in‡ation to cost shocks at a moment in time and use this response to infer the shocks which drive
price change dispersion. We start by documenting a strong positive relationship between exchange
rate pass-through and the dispersion of item-level price changes. Through a battery of robustness
checks, we argued that this relationship was not driven by other observables or confounding variables.
Furthermore, price change dispersion varies dramatically across time. Ignoring this variation induces
large time-varying bias when estimating pass-through. In other words, pass-through is not a single
number and ignoring time-variation produces a misleading picture of how prices will respond to
shocks at a particular point in time.
    This result has important implications for the nominal transmission mechanism more generally.
One reason for studying exchange rate pass-through is because it can shed light on the nominal
transmission mechanism using a large, observable shock to nominal cost.          Our results provide
"model-free" evidence that the transmission mechanism varies systematically across time with the
distribution of price changes in the economy. We believe this result is important for policy making,
because monetary policy is not conducted at random times.         Monetary easing is likely to occur
during times when we have shown that price ‡exibility is systematically higher than average which
suggests that the e¤ects of monetary policy are time-varying.
    After documenting the empirical relationship between dispersion and pass-through, we estimate
a quantitative price-setting model to understand it. Our estimated model strongly rejects volatility
shocks as a source of countercyclical dispersion but also suggests a promising alternative.        In
particular, time-variation in responsiveness driven by strategic-complementarities better …ts the
data. A large existing literature has argued that imperfect responsiveness is important for explaining
low average pass-through, and we …nd the idea that responsiveness might also vary across time to
be quite plausible.
    While we showed that "responsiveness" matters, there are many mechanisms that map into re-
sponsiveness as a reduced form. Trying to disentangle these mechanisms is an interesting avenue
for future research. Our BLS data has limited …rm-level covariates which can shed light on under-
lying mechanisms, but alternative data sets with more …rm-level characteristics exist. Together our
empirical and modeling results suggest that exploring time-variation in the competitive structure
of markets or in strategic-complementarities and trying to test these ideas in alternative data is a
promising research topic. In contrast, volatility shocks should imply a negative relationship between
pass-through and price change dispersion, which is strongly at odds with the data.
    Our results have both obvious and more subtle implications for policy. Most obviously, if policy
makers want to understand how prices are likely to respond to exchange rate changes or predict
the real responses to nominal exchange rate changes, they cannot ignore individual price-setting

                                                 33
behavior.60      More subtly, if policy makers want to mitigate the adverse e¤ects of price change
volatility then it is important to understand what leads to this volatility. Our results suggest that
policy makers should focus on policies that a¤ect market structure and …rms’responsiveness rather
than on policies that reduce uncertainty and volatility.




References
Alvarez, F., H. Le Bihan, and F. Lippi (2014). Small and Large Price Changes and the Propagation
  of Monetary Shocks. NBER Working Paper 20155 .

Atkeson, A. and A. Burstein (2008). Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International Relative
  Prices. American Economic Review 98 (5).

Bachmann, R. and G. Moscarini (2012). Business Cycles and Endogenous Uncertainty.

Berger, D., J. Faust, J. Rogers, and K. Steverson (2012). Border Prices and Retail Prices. Journal
  of International Economics 88 (1).

Bloom, N. (2009). The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks. Econometrica 77 (3).

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry (2012). Really Uncertain
  Business Cycles. NBER Working Paper 18245 .

Broda, C. and D. Weinstein (2006). Globalization and the Gains from Variety. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 121 (2).

Burstein, A. and G. Gopinath (2013). International Prices and Exchange Rates. Handbook of
  International Economics 4.

Cavallo, A. (2012). Scraped Data and Sticky Prices.

Collard-Wexler, A. (2013). Demand Fluctuations in the Ready-Mix Concrete Industry. Economet-
  rica 81 (3).

Decker, R., P. Derasmo, and H. Boedo (2015). Market Exposure and Endogenous Firm Volatility
  Over the Business Cycle. AEJ: Macro.

Dornbusch, R. (1987). Exchange Rates and Prices. American Economic Review 77 (1).

Gopinath, G. and O. Itskhoki (2010). Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-Through. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 125 (2).
  60
    One might wonder if our empirical observations are implementable for actual predictions. We note that in our
BLS data, dispersion is much more precisely estimated at high frequencies than is pass-through. In addition, new
online data sets such as those in the Billion Prices Project introduced by Cavallo (2012) can potentially calculate daily
measures of price change volatility.


                                                           34
Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki, and R. Rigobon (2010). Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-
  through. American Economic Review 101 (1).

Gopinath, G. and R. Rigobon (2008). Sticky Borders. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2).

Hellerstein, R., D. Daly, and C. Marsh (2006). Have U.S. Import Prices Become Less Responsive to
  Changes in the Dollar? NY Fed: Current Issues in Economics and Finance.

Keane, M. and S. Anthony (2003). Generalized Indirect Inference for Discrete Choice Models.

Klenow, P. and J. Willis (2006). Real Rigidities and Nominal Price Changes.

Krugman, P. (1987). Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes. Real-Financial Linkages
  Among Open Economies.

Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (1998). Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy. The
  Journal of Political Economy 106 (5).

Marazzi, M., N. Sheets, R. Vigfusson, J. Faust, J. Gagnon, J. Marquez, R. Martin, T. Reeve, and
  J. Rogers (2005). Exchange Rate Pass-Through to U.S. Import Prices: Some New Evidence.
  International Finance Discussion Papers.

Midrigan, V. (2011). Menu Costs, Multi-Product Firms and Aggregate Fluctuations. Economet-
  rica 79 (4).

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008). Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost
  Models. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4).

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2012). Lost in Transit: Product Replacement Bias and Pricing to
  Market. American Economic Review 102 (7).

Neiman, B. (2010). Stickiness, Synchronization, and Passthrough in Intra…rm Trade Prices. Journal
  of Monetary Economics.

Paciello, L., A. Pozzi, and N. Trachter (2013). Price Setting with Customer Retention.

Stroebel, J. and J. Vavra (2015). House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices. NBER Working
  Paper 20710 .

Vavra, J. (2014). In‡ation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss Inter-
  pretation. Quarterly Journal of Economics.




                                               35
     Table 1: Average medium-run pass-through
              ( )    -stat               2
     0.144    0.014    10.17    95284         0.067




     Table 2: Interaction Speci…cation: Item-Level Volatility
                                                     Average pass-through          Volatility (Item-Level)             Frequency                       2
                                                                                                                        
                                                                  (          )              (           )                   (            )


     All countries, all items ex petroleum
                                                     0.14         0.01             0.05       0.02                                                 95284   0.07
36




                                                     0.14         0.01             0.05       0.02              0.02            0.01               95284   0.07


     OECD countries, all items ex petroleum
                                                     0.18         0.02             0.09       0.03                                                 53469   0.08
                                                     0.19         0.02             0.08       0.03              0.07            0.02               53469   0.08


     All countries, all manufacturing items
                                                     0.14         0.01             0.06       0.02                                                 78439   0.09
                                                     0.13         0.01             0.06       0.02              0.03            0.01               78439   0.09

     Note: Robust standard errors clustered by country*PSL pair. Primary strata lower (PSL), de…ned by the BLS, represents 2 to 4-digit sectoral
     harmonized codes. In all speci…cations, volatility is measured using the item-level standard deviation of price changes.
     Table 3: Interaction Speci…cation: Month-Level Volatility
                                                   Average pass-through          Volatility (Month-Level)         Frequency                       2
                                                                                                                   
                                                                (          )             (           )                 (            )


     All countries, all items ex petroleum
     - Vol=Month-level IQR                        0.14          0.01             0.06      0.01                                               95284   0.07
                                                  0.14          0.01             0.06      0.01                0.01        0.01               95284   0.07
     - Vol=Month-level XSD                        0.13          0.01             0.05      0.01                                               95284   0.07
                                                  0.13          0.01             0.05      0.01                0.03        0.01               95284   0.07


     OECD countries, all items ex petroleum
     - Vol=Month-level IQR                        0.17          0.01             0.05      0.01                                               53469   0.08
                                                  0.17          0.01             0.05      0.01                -0.01       0.01               53469   0.08
     - Vol=Month-level XSD                        0.17          0.01             0.06      0.01                                               53469   0.08
37




                                                  0.18          0.01             0.07      0.01                -0.03       0.02               53469   0.08


     All countries, all manufacturing items
     - Vol=Month-level IQR                        0.13          0.01             0.05      0.01                                               78437   0.09
                                                  0.13          0.01             0.05      0.01                0.00        0.01               78437   0.09
     - Vol=Month-level XSD                        0.13          0.01             0.05      0.01                                               78437   0.09
                                                  0.13          0.01             0.05      0.01                0.00        0.01               78437   0.09

     Note: Robust standard errors clustered by country*PSL pair. Primary strata lower (PSL), de…ned by the BLS, represents 2 to 4-digit sectoral
     harmonized codes.
     Table 4: Interaction Speci…cation: Month-Level Dispersion Robustness
                                            Average pass-through              Volatility (Month-Level)         Frequency/Subs                        2
                                                                                                                   
                                                         (          )                  (           )                   (            )
     Controls
     - Time trend + Month                  .135          .025                 .058       .012                                                 95284      .075
     - GDP growth                          .146          .013                 .054       .009                                                 95284      .071
     - Erate SD                            .156          .015                 .056       0.010                                                95284      .072
     - Frequency                           .140          .013                 .063       .010                  .011        .012               95284      .072
     - Product subs                        .143          .013                 .062       .010                  .0004       .011               95284      .071
     - Time trend + Month + Frequency      .128          .025                 .054       .012                  .011        .014               95284      .076
     + GDP growth + Erate SD

     Note: Robust standard errors clustered by country*PSL pair. Primary strata lower (PSL), de…ned by the BLS, represents 2 to 4-digit sectoral
     harmonized codes. In all speci…cations month-level price change volatility is measured using the interquartile range. The sample is
     all countries, all items ex petroleum. Erate SD is the std dev of the exchange rate in a 12-month rolling window around current date
38




     Table 5: Interaction Speci…cation: Month-Level Dispersion Robustness: Pre-2008
                                               Average pass-through             Volatility (Month-Level)         Frequency/Subs                        2
                                                                                                                      
                                                            (           )                (             )                 (              )
     Controls
     - Time trend + Month                     .127          .029                .039       .015                                                   74153    .075
     - Frequency                              .118          .014                .042       .011                  .016        .013                 74153    .072
     - Product subs                           .115          .014                .036       .012                  .007        .012                 74153    .071
     - Time trend + Month + Frequency         .121          .029                .040       .015                  .023        .016                 74153    .076
     - Time trend + Month + Product subs      .125          .027                .038       .015                  -.001       .011                 74153    .075
     Note: Robust standard errors clustered by country*PSL pair. Primary strata lower (PSL), de…ned by the BLS, represents 2 to 4-digit sectoral
     harmonized codes. In all speci…cations month-level price change volatility is measured using the interquartile range.
Table 6: Alternative Pass-through Speci…cations
                                  Average                            Item-Level             Month-Level
                            pass-through                             Volatility                  Volatility
                                                                                             
Fixed Horizon:                      (           )                      (          )              (          )        2
1 Month                   .027      .007                      .034       .013             .023       .006             496060   .018
3 Month                   .054      .011                      .048       .023             .026       .007             448400   .049
6 Month                   .085      .016                      .069       .033             .026       .009             384827   .098
12 Month                  .113      .018                      .093       .022             .023       .009             282572   .169
Lagged Speci…cation:
Current Ex. Rate (   1)   .146      .015                      .040       .020             .063       .010
Previous Ex Rate (   2)   .082      .010                      .040       .017             .054       .010             83043    .082
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by country*PSL pair.




Table 7: Parameter Values
Parameter                                             Symbol            Menu Cost Model           Source
Discount Factor                                                         096112                  Annualized interest rate of 4%
Fraction of imports                                   (1 + )         165%                     BEA input-output table
Cost sensitivity to ER shock
      Foreign …rms                                                      018                      Estimation (see text)
      U.S. …rms                                                         0
Menu cost                                                               43%                      Estimation (see text)
markup elasticity                                                      25                       Estimation (see text)
Demand elasticity                                                       5                         Broda and Weinstein (2006)
Std. dev. Exchange rate shock,                                       25%                      Match bilateral RER
Idiosyncratic productivity process, 
      Std. dev. of shock                                               70%                      Estimation (see text)
      Persistence of shock                                             085                      Gopinath and Itshkoki (2010)




                                                              39
Table 8: Estimated Parameters and Fit
Parameter                    Estimate                                       95% Con…dence Interval
                            10                                             (8.14,11.86)
                             .03                                            (.0035,.0565)
                             .014                                           (-.0125,.0405)


Models                       Wald-Statistic/Likelihood Ratio                95% Critical Value           99% Critical Value
Unrestricted Model           25.76                                          21.03                        26.22
 =0                         46.9                                           3.84                         5.63
    =0                       3.23                                           3.84                         5.63
    =0                       3.57                                           3.84          5.63
                                                                                            0        0
Asymptotic s.e.’s for parameters in parantheses. Unrestricted model Wald-Statistic:  b  b  b                      2 (12)

                                    0          0                      0          0
Restricted models:   2  b              b        b ¬  b             b        b    2 (1)




Table 9: Aggregate Shocks
             Data (Low XSD)                           Data (High XSD)
          XSD    MRPT        FREQ                  XSD    MRPT       FREQ
          0.12   0.08        0.14                  0.15   0.17       0.18
                  High                                    Low   
          XSD    MRPT        FREQ                  XSD    MRPT       FREQ
Small     0.08   0.15        0.11                  0.11   0.20       0.13
Large     0.05   0.12        0.08                  0.13   0.22       0.15
                  Low                                     High
          XSD    MRPT        Freq                  XSD    MRPT       FREQ
Small     0.07   0.19        0.08                  0.13   0.14       0.21
Large     0.07   0.20        0.08                  0.23   0.11       0.45
                  High                                     Low
          XSD    MRPT        FREQ                  XSD    MRPT       FREQ
Small     0.10   0.21        0.08                  0.09   0.15       0.16
Large     0.10   0.30        0.04                  0.07   0.13       0.29
                  High                                     Low
          XSD    MRPT        FREQ                  XSD    MRPT       FREQ
Small     0.09   0.29        0.12                  0.09   0.13       0.12
Large     0.08   0.66        0.14                  0.09   0.06       0.13
Small =     0.6 factor, Large =         3.0 factor. Binary agg shock has persistence .975




                                                            40
                 .




Online Appendix Materials - Not For
           Publication




                41
7     Empirical Appendix - Not for Publication

In this empirical appendix, we provide a number of additional robustness checks that extend the
baseline results in the body of the text.

7.1    Additional Item-Level Results
In this section we perform a variety of robustness checks for our item-level results.         We begin by
further discussing the role of adjustment frequency, then return to compositional issues.         Finally,
we discuss a battery of additional robustness checks, alternative samples, and placebo regressions
for our baseline results.
     In the main text we estimate interaction speci…cations to argue that di¤erences in frequency
across items do not explain our relationship between cross-item dispersion and MRPT. However,
that speci…cation assumes that the e¤ects of dispersion are linear and does not allow for the e¤ects
of other controls to vary with item-level characteristics. In this robustness check we provide further
evidence that the relationship between cross-item dispersion and MRPT is not driven by frequency.
This is an important concern to address because Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) showed that there is a
robust relationship between LRPT and the frequency of adjustment. In order to further address this
concern, we split items …rst into equal weighted frequency quintiles then examine the relationship
between MRPT and item-level dispersion within each frequency quintile. In other words, we examine
the relationship between pass-through and dispersion holding the frequency of adjustment (roughly)
constant. The results are shown in Figure 8.

    Figure 8: Medium-run passthrough and XSD controlling for the frequency of price adjustment

                           0.35



                            0.3   Frequency Quintile 1 (Lowest)
                                  Frequency Quintile 2
                                  Frequency Quintile 3
                           0.25   Frequency Qunitile 4
                                  Frequency Qunitile 5 (Highest)
            Pass-Through




                            0.2



                           0.15



                            0.1



                           0.05



                             0
                              1       2                          3                        4   5
                                               Item-Level Standard Deviation: Quintiles




                                                              42
       The relationship between pass-through and dispersion is increasing within each frequency quin-
tile, and the magnitude of the increase is substantial. Average pass-through increases from 3% to
20% as we move from the lowest to highest XSD quintile. This complements the evidence in the
text that the relationship between MRPT and price dispersion does not seem to be driven by dif-
ferences in frequency across items.61 Here it is worth noting that censoring might be an important
concern for explaining di¤erences in pass-through by frequency. That is, the fact that the lowest
frequency items have lower pass-through than the highest frequency items might re‡ect censoring
and thus missing price changes. However, it is di¢ cult to explain why there is an upward sloping
relationship between pass-through and dispersion within frequency bins if this is the only source of
heterogeneity. While variation in strategic-complementarities can generate more complicated rela-
tionships since they a¤ect frequency, pass-through and dispersion, this is exactly the channel which
we explore in our quantitative model. Simulations in this quantitative model explicitly account for
censoring, so censoring e¤ects alone cannot explain our patterns.
           We next address whether our results are driven by choice of which items we sampled. Our
baseline results utilize all of the items in the IPP micro data excluding petroleum. Is the strong
relationship between pass-through and dispersion a¤ected if we split by other observable product
characteristics? To address this question we …rst examine the sub-sample of goods that can be
classi…ed as di¤erentiated, following Rauch’s classi…cation, as well as the sample of goods that are
manufactured.62 For di¤erentiated goods, Figure 9 shows that moving from the lowest to highest-
dispersion quintile raises MRPT from 2% to 27%. Similar results obtain when using all manufactured
goods. In all cases, the di¤erence in pass-through across XSD bins is strongly statistically signi…cant.
       In addition to splitting by product type, we can also split our sample by country of origin.
Perhaps our results are driven by compositional di¤erences in the behavior of items coming from
di¤erent countries. Figure 10 shows this is not the case. For all countries and country groups with
greater than 5000 price observations there is a strong upward sloping relationship between item-
level dispersion and MRPT. While the relationship is insigni…cant for Mexico, the sample size is
small relative to more aggregated country groups and Canada. Among countries with at least 5000
observations, only Japan has fewer observations (and Japan exhibits a signi…cant upward sloping
relationship).63
       In addition to these alternative binned regressions, Table A1 shows the results from estimating
equation 3 for a variety of alternative sub-samples and alternative speci…cations. The …rst robustness
check only uses items which have at least 3 changes. It is di¢ cult to precisely measure dispersion
for items with few price changes, so there is some concern that our baseline speci…cations might be
polluted by outliers and small sample issues. However, the …rst two rows of Table A1 show that our
results are essentially unchanged when restricted to items with at least 3 price changes. We have
  61
     This is not surprising since Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) document a signi…cant relationship between LRPT and
the frequency of price adjustment but …nd no relationship between MRPT and the frequency of price adjustment.
  62
     Items are classi…ed as manufacturing items if their 1-digit SIC 1987 codes begin with a 2 or a 3.
  63
     While it would be desirable to run this speci…cation for each country rather than aggregating to country groups,
our empirical speci…cation requires splitting the data into …fths and then estimating second moments of price-setting
on these bins, so using smaller countries becomes infeasible.



                                                         43
                                             Figure 9: Medium-run passthrough by XSD

                                      0.35

                                                                                     Differentiated Items
                                       0.3                                           Manufactured Items



                                      0.25
             Medium-Run Passthrough




                                       0.2



                                      0.15



                                       0.1



                                      0.05



                                        0
                                         1       2                3              4                             5
                                                              XSD Quintile




also restricted the analysis to items with at least 5 price changes and arrived at similar results.
    In our second and third robustness checks, we use trade-weighted exchange rates (the broad
and major currency one respectively) instead of the relevant bilateral exchange rate. As rows 3-6
show, the price dispersion is again both economically and statistically signi…cant. A one standard
deviation increase in price dispersion causes MRPT to increase relative to average pass-through by
over 50%.64
    Rows 7-10 show the results from our fourth and …fth robustness checks.                          In these robustness
checks, we run placebo regressions to see whether our results are spuriously driven by small sample
issues. In these placebo regressions, when estimating equation 3, we substitute the total number of
price changes observed for an item or the number price observations respectively for . These
placebo regressions test whether our results are driven by a correlation between measured dispersion
                                                                                                
and item sample sizes. Table A1 shows that, as desired, the coe¢ cient on                                   is not signi…cant
when we replace  with placebos. This suggests that the relationship between MRPT and price
dispersion is not being driven by sampling error. Finally, rows 11 and 12 show the results from
estimating equation 3 using a median regression rather than OLS. Median regressions are more
robust to the presence of outliers. Once again, the price dispersion e¤ect is strongly signi…cant.
  64
     Consistent with what was found in Nakamura and Steinsson (2012), average passthrough is signi…cantly higher
when we use broader exchange rates measures. The much larger response of prices to the trade-weighted exchange rate
suggests that items respond to exchange rates beyond the bilateral one, presumably due to the role of intermediate
inputs and strategic complementarities in pricing.




                                                               44
                    Figure 10: Medium-run Passthrough by XSD (Country Level Results)
                                         OECD                                                                Eurozone
                   0.4                                                                 0.4

            MRPT




                                                                                MRPT
                   0.2                                                                 0.2


                    0                                                                   0
                     1           2         3            4              5                 1           2           3             4                 5
                                          Asia                                                                 Mexico
                   0.2                                                                 0.2
            MRPT




                                                                                MRPT
                   0.1                                                                 0.1


                    0                                                                   0
                     1           2         3            4              5                 1           2           3             4                 5

                                        Canada                                                                 Japan
                   0.6                                                                 0.4

                   0.4
            MRPT




                                                                                MRPT
                                                                                       0.2
                   0.2

                    0                                                                   0
                     1         2           3            4              5                 1           2           3            4                  5
                         Item-Level Standard Deviation: Quintile                               Item-Level Standard Deviation: Quintile




7.2   Additional Month-Level Results
In this section, we perform a variety of robustness checks for our baseline month-level results. First,
in the main text, we showed that MRPT was increasing in IQR quintile. However, the standard
errors for this bin approach were large due to limited sample sizes. Thus we want to more formally
test for the presence of a time-series relationship between price change dispersion and MRPT. We
begin by calculating the cross-sectional interquartile range of price changes for each month in our
sample. We then split our sample in thirds by the interquartile range. Let  be an indicator
for the one-third of months with the highest interquartile range in our sample. Similarly, let 
be an indicator for the one-third of months with the lowest interquartile range in our sample. Our
baseline time-series speci…cation is then:
                             h                                     i              h                                      i
                     =                     0
                                           + 
                                                            
                                                                        +                        0
                                                                                                  + 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                              +      

   Table A2 shows that during high dispersion months, MRPT is 21% while in low dispersion
months MRPT is only 8%. This di¤erence is both economically and statistically signi…cant, with
pass-through more than doubling between low and high dispersion months. Table A2 also shows that
these di¤erences remain signi…cant for alternative sample selections as well as alternative measures
of cross-sectional dispersion. In addition to the interquartile range, we sort months by the standard
deviation of price changes. The interquartile range is more robust to outliers, so we view it as a more
reliable benchmark, but using the standard deviation does not change our results. We also split our
sample using Census based measures of cross-sectional TFP dispersion from Bloom et al. (2012).


                                                                           45
When splitting by census based dispersion measures our results become even more signi…cant, with
estimated MRPT more than quadrupling between low and high dispersion months. Finally, Table
A2 shows that the di¤erence between high and low dispersion results remains signi…cant when using
alternative country restrictions as well as when restricting to a more narrow set of products.

7.3     More on Composition
While we have now shown that our empirical result holds under a variety of controls, these controls
may not pick up compositional changes across time in our sample. We discussed various composi-
tional concerns in the body of the text but suppressed the results. We elaborate on the empirical
tests here and present the results.

7.3.1    2 Facts or 1 Fact?

First, is our item-level dispersion fact actually distinct from our month-level dispersion fact? Since
items are periodically rotated out of the sample, we do not have a balanced panel.                  Thus, it is
possible that the high dispersion time-periods in our data are driven by times when the sample
contains items with unusually high price dispersion.              To document that our two facts are indeed
independent we …rst combine speci…cations (3) and (4) to allow for separate e¤ects of cross-item
and cross-month dispersion. That is, we estimate

                                                                                         0
    =           +          (     ) +    +              +   I +  +      (12)

   where  is the standard deviation of item ’s price changes and  is the interquartile
range of all price changes in month .          Table A3 shows that both the cross-item e¤ects captured
by  and the cross-month e¤ects captured by  are highly signi…cant. This conclusion is
again robust to a variety of additional controls.
   In addition to this double-interaction, Table A4 shows results for a binned regression as in Figures
(2) and (3). We split individual items into quintiles by their item-level dispersion of price changes,
and then within each item-level quintile we run a time-series regression to estimate the e¤ect of
month-level dispersion.         Unlike the speci…cation in (12) this "double-binned" regression does not
impose linear e¤ects of dispersion and allows the e¤ect of controls to vary across bins. Nevertheless,
we again …nd that both cross-item and cross-month dispersion e¤ects are highly signi…cant. Thus,
simple changes in sample composition cannot jointly explain both facts.

7.3.2    Within or Between Sector Phenomena

In general, the positive relationship we observe between pass-through and month-level dispersion
could be driven by either movements in dispersion across sectors or dispersion within a sector.
While we believe either explanation would be interesting, they would have di¤erent implications for
models. To address this, we decompose the month-level variance of price changes into a between
and within-sector component:  ( ) =  (within
                                                   
                                                          sector ) +  (between sector ) We then
                                                                            



                                                          46
separately interact pass-through with both between and within sector variance:

                                  _                              _                              0
         =             +             _          +             _            +  +   


   Table A5 displays results using both 2-digit and 4-digit sector de…nitions. For 2-digit sectors,
only within-sector variance is signi…cant while for 4-digit sectors both within and between sector
variance are signi…cant. We next perform a formal variance decomposition to describe how much
of the variation in MRPT is accounted for by within vs. between sector changes in dispersion. The
within-sector contribution is given by
                                                   ¬     _ 2
                                                                     _
                                     =¬                           ¬  _                
                                              _ 2                           2
                                                         _ +                       _

   where  _ is the time-series variance of within-sector price change dispersion and  _ is the
time-series variance of between-sector price change dispersion. Using this decomposition, within-
sector variance accounts for 99% of the time-series variation in pass-through using 2-digit sectors
and 51% using 4-digit sectors.           Thus, even for fairly narrow sectors, the time-series relationship
between month-level dispersion and pass-through seem to be largely a within-sector phenomenon.

7.3.3    Are the Items Changing Prices During High Dispersion Months Special?

Are the items that change prices during high dispersion periods the same as the items that change
prices during low dispersion periods?             We now show that even when restricted to a balanced
panel there is a positive relationship between month-level dispersion and MRPT. This means that
pass-through for the same products rises with dispersion so our results cannot be explained by a
time-varying product mix. Unfortunately, the BLS periodically rotates products in and out of the
sample, so it is not feasible to construct a balanced panel that spans the entire length of our data.
However, we do have enough data to construct a balanced panel that spans the Great Recession in
2008, which is the most important episode in our sample.
   We restrict our analysis to a balanced panel that is in the sample continuously from 2007-2009
and then estimate separate pass-through regressions for 2007, 2008, and 2009. As in the full-sample,
month-level dispersion rises dramatically in 2008. The IQR of price changes in 2007 is .08, it rises
to 0.122 in 2008 and falls to 0.10 in 2009. Pass-through also exhibits large variation, rising from
0.07 in 2007 to 0.64 in 2008 and falling back to 0.22 in 2009. Time-series variation in dispersion
and pass-through for the balanced panel is even stronger and more signi…cant than for our baseline
unbalanced speci…cation.

7.3.4    Exchange Rate Appreciations Vs. Depreciations

The 2008 recession was also characterized by an appreciation of the U.S. dollar against most major
currencies.      Are our pass-through results sensitive to the sign of exchange rate movements?                          We
have re-run all of our empirical speci…cations restricting our regressions solely to price changes where


                                                          47
        is always positive or always negative. We …nd that both our month-level and our item-level
dispersion MRPT relationships remain highly signi…cant even when restricting only to exchange rate
movements of a particular sign.65 Thus, our results cannot be explained by changes across time in
whether the dollar is appreciating or depreciating.


8         Modeling Appendix - Not For Publication
8.1          More General Flexible Price Results
In this section, we show that the intuition from our simple framework in Section 2, survives in a more
general framework that allows for general equilibrium e¤ects. Consider the problem of a foreign …rm
selling goods to importers in the U.S. The …rm has perfectly ‡exible prices that are set in dollars.
The optimal ‡exible price of good  at the border (in logs) can be written as the sum of the gross
markup (  ), the dollar marginal cost ( ) and an idiosyncratic shock (  ):

                                                     =         +  (  )

Taking the total derivative of equation gives:


                                             = ¬¬ (  ¬             ) +        +        

which can be rearranged to give:

                                                      1
                                              =          [          + ¬  +          ]
                                                    1 + ¬

         In Section 2 we explored the case when all indirect GE e¤ects were shut o¤ (  = 0) Here,
we include them to show that most of the simple intuition between about the positive relationship
between MRPT and dispersion survives the introduction of GE e¤ects. The above equation can be
rearranged to give the simple pass-through equation:

                                                             ¬                  
                                                     =       +                                     (13)
                                                     1 + ¬ 1 + ¬                

We can do some comparative statics to see how parameters a¤ect pass-through

                                                         
                                                                  1
                                                              =            0
                                                                  1 + ¬
    65
         For brevity we do not report these results, but they are available upon request.




                                                                   48
                                             
                                                                                        1            
                                                   = ¬                         2    +                                                           (14)
                                         ¬                  (1 + ¬ )                 (1 + ¬ )2       
                                                              
                                                                 ¬                                
                                                   =                       2    0 if          
                                                         (1 + ¬ )                                   

As before, an upper bound on the level of pass-through is given by what fraction of marginal costs
are denominated in units of the foreign currency,                                 The higher this share, the higher the potential
exchange rate pass-through. General equilibrium e¤ects operating through the domestic price level
do a¤ect the comparative static with respect to the mark-up elasticity. All of things equal, if the
mark-up elasticity is higher, then less of the exchange rate shock is passed into prices, which lowers
 
     This is the …rst term in equation (14). However, this is now an additional e¤ect: a higher
¬ means that individual prices are more sensitive to changes in the aggregate price level because
strategic complementarities are higher. This is the second term in equation (14). This term is
                       
positive because           0 since increases in foreign marginal costs also raise the domestic price level.
The total e¤ect is ambiguous in general. However, for realistic cases (for instance all the parameter
                                                       
values we consider in our model),                     .   To see this, remember that                           is the fraction of marginal
cost that is denominated in foreign currency. This gives an upper bound on the level of pass-through
to individual prices from exchange rate shocks. It is hard to see how pass-through to the overall
price level can be bigger than that e¤ect since not all goods domestically are a¤ected by the exchange
rate shock and the overall-passthrough rate is a¤ected by the level of strategic complementarities,
¬ , which lowers the level of pass-through.
          We now show that changes in parameters that increase pass-through also increase the vari-
ance of price changes. The variance of price changes is given by:


                                     2                                          2                                    2
                                                               ¬                                      1
    (  ) =                          (  ) +                                ( ) +                            (     )
                         1 + ¬                               1 + ¬                                  1 + ¬
                               ¬                                                                                    ¬
                       +           2 (   ) +            (                                    )   +               (          )
                          (1 + ¬ )                 (1 + ¬ )2                                                      (1 + ¬ )2

   But the last terms are zero by assumption that idiosyncratic shocks are orthogonal to exchange
rate shocks and will wash out in aggregate so that they do not a¤ect the aggregate price level. This
implies that
                             2                                2                                      2
                                             ¬                              1                                                  ¬
(  ) =                      (  )+                        ( )+                              (         )+                (   )
                1 + ¬                      1 + ¬                          1 + ¬                                          (1 + ¬ )2
                                                                                                                                                (15)
   Using this expression, we get that

(  )       2 2                   2¬                   2                   (1 ¬ ¬ )
           =¬            (  ) +            ( ) ¬            (  ) +              (   )
   ¬        (1 + ¬ )3             (1 + ¬ )3           (1 + ¬ )3
                                                                                (1 + ¬ )3
                                                                                                      (16)



                                                                       49
   We now show that under a mild and empirically realistic restriction, the variance of price changes
is declining in ¬ . Empirically, we know that the variance of idiosyncratic price changes is an order
of magnitude larger than the variance of aggregate price changes and exchange rate movements.
With this in mind, we impose the restriction that

                                          (  )  (  ) + ( )

   We can substitute this restriction into (15) to get that

             2                        2                      2
                             ¬                     1                                  ¬
                 (  )+               ( )+               (        )+                (   )  (  )+( )
  1 + ¬                    1 + ¬                 1 + ¬                          (1 + ¬ )2
   or


                  h                i         h                         i
        (  )  (1 + ¬ )2 ¬ ¬2 ( ) + (1 + ¬ )2 ¬         2
                                                                          (  ) ¬         ¬ (     )         (17)

   Using (16) we have



(  )              2 2                   2¬                   2                   (1 ¬ ¬ )
                  = ¬           (  ) +            ( ) ¬            (  ) +              (   )
   ¬               (1 + ¬ )3             (1 + ¬ )3           (1 + ¬ )3
                                                                                       (1 + ¬ )3
                  / ¬2 2 (  ) + 2¬ ( ) ¬ 2(  ) +  (1 ¬ ¬ )(   )


   Substituting the inequality (17) for (  ) gives


(  )                   2
                   ¬2            ) + 2¬ ( ) +  (1 ¬ ¬ )(   )
                              (
   ¬
                         h               i            h                i
                      ¬2 (1 + ¬ )2 ¬ ¬2 ( ) ¬ 2 (1 + ¬ )2 ¬ 2 (  ) + 2  ¬ (                        )
                        h                      i            h          i
                  =   ¬2 (1 + ¬ )2 ¬ ¬2 ¬ ¬ ( ) ¬ 2 (1 + ¬ )2 (  ) +  [¬ + 1] (                         )
                        h                      i            h          i
                     ¬2 (1 + ¬ )2 ¬ ¬2 ¬ ¬ ( ) ¬ 2 (1 + ¬ )2 (  ) +  [¬ + 1] (                        )
                        h                      i            h          i
                     ¬2 (1 + ¬ )2 ¬ ¬2 ¬ ¬ ( ) ¬ 2 (1 + ¬ )2 (  ) + (1 + ¬ )2 (                       )
                        h                      i          h          i
                  =   ¬2 (1 + ¬ )2 ¬ ¬2 ¬ ¬ ( ) ¬ (1 + ¬ )2 (  )
                   0

   The second inequality uses the result that             moves less than one for one with the exchange
rate.
            In sum, even in the case when indirect GE e¤ects are allowed, our central theoretical pre-
diction still holds: changes in parameters that increase exchange rate pass-through (                           ", ¬ #) also

                                                        50
increase the variance of price changes.

8.2       The Role of Measurement Error
As mentioned in the introduction as well as in Section 3.5, measurement error is a potential concern
for our empirical estimates.          We attempted to address this concern in our empirical results by
estimating various alternative pass-through speci…cations.            While time-series variation in these
alternative pass-through speci…cations is less interpretable as time-variation in price ‡exibility, these
speci…cations have the advantage of reducing measurement error. Since time-series variation in our
benchmark MRPT is more easily interpretable, we now assess the extent to which measurement
error is indeed a serious concern for this empirical speci…cation. To do this, we use our model to
simulate three sources of potential measurement error and show that such errors cannot explain our
results.
       We model three sources of measurement error that are likely to be important in the BLS data:
1) Errors in aligning the timing of measured price changes with the timing of exchange rates. 2)
Mis-reported prices. 3) Failure to report actual price changes.
       Prices are recorded in the BLS at the time they are received rather than at the time they are
ordered. Production and delivery lags mean that this price may have been set several periods in
the past, under a di¤erent prevailing exchange rate.66 To model this timing error, we assume that
while the price at time  is set using information on the exchange rate at time  the price is reported
at time  +  where            [0 ]. That is, there is a potential mismatch between the exchange rate
that is actually relevant for a …rm’s pricing decision and the exchange rate at the time a price is
reported. The left hand column of Figure 11 shows the e¤ects of timing errors on pass-through and
price change dispersion as  is varied between 0 and 6 months. As  increases, measured pass-
through falls as there is additional attenuation bias in the MRPT regression. However, measured
price change dispersion is not a¤ected. This is because mismeasuring the timing of price changes
has no e¤ect on their measured size.
       Thus, changes in timing errors could only explain the time-series relationship between price
change dispersion and pass-through if there was some common factor that increased the dispersion
of price changes at the same time that delivery lags fall. We can roughly assess this possibility by
examining the composition of trade across time. Using data from the U.S. Census, we can compute
the fraction of goods shipped by ocean vessels. These items are likely to have the longest delivery
lags, so it would be concerning if the fraction of items shipped by vessel negatively comoved with the
dispersion of price changes. However, we …nd that there is a positive correlation of 0.13 between the
fraction of items shipped by ocean vessel and the month-level interquartile range of price changes.
Thus, if anything, changes in the composition of trade across time would work against our empirical
results. In the appendix we provide additional discussion of trade composition and evidence that
this does not drive our results.
       In addition to timing error, we allow for reporting errors by assuming that recorded price changes
  66
       See Nakamura and Steinsson (2012) for additional discussion.



                                                          51
                                       Figure 11: Simulating Sources of Measurement Error
                                      Timing Error                                                               Classical ME
                   0.25                                                                         0.25

                    0.2                                                                          0.2
    pass-through




                                                                                 pass-through
                          Data
                   0.15   Model                                                                 0.15

                    0.1                                                                          0.1

                   0.05                                                                         0.05

                     0                                                                            0
                      0   0.05        0.1         0.15          0.2    0.25                        0   0.05      0.1         0.15    0.2    0.25
                                   std of price changes                                                       std of price changes

                                                                      Non-reporting Error
                                                        0.25

                                                         0.2
                                         pass-through




                                                        0.15

                                                         0.1

                                                        0.05

                                                          0
                                                           0   0.05     0.1          0.15              0.2     0.25
                                                                      std of price changes




are equal to the true price plus classical measurement error.                                                 The second column of Figure 11
shows results for measurement error standard deviations ranging from 0 to 0.18.                                                            Increases in
measurement error can dramatically increase the dispersion of measured price changes. However,
greater measurement error leads to a decline in pass-through due to standard attenuation bias.
Thus, classical measurement error is unable to explain our results.
   Finally, we assume that when a price change actually occurs it is only recorded with some
probability  1.                  The third column of Figure 11 simulates results for non-reporting probabilities
ranging from 0 to 0.9.                         Even huge non-reporting errors barely a¤ect either pass-through or price
change dispersion. They do not a¤ect pass-through because once a price change is actually measured,
it will re‡ect all of the previous pass-through that was not recorded. Furthermore, non-reporting
does not a¤ect the dispersion of price changes as long as the probability of a price change not being
reported is independent of the size of the price change. The one statistic that declines dramatically
with non-reporting error is the frequency of adjustment. Thus, if non-reporting error were a cause
of concern for our results, this explanation would need to contend with the much smaller frequency
pass-through relationships observed empirically.




   Appendix Tables


                                                                                52
     Table A1:Interaction Speci…cation - Cross-Item: Robustness
                                                  Average pass-through            Volatility                 Frequency                           2
                                                                                                                 
                                                               (          )              (           )               (            )


     At least 3 price changes                    0.15          0.02             0.05      0.02                                              88964    0.06
                                                 0.15          0.01             0.05      0.02               0.01        0.01               88964    0.06


     Using trade-weighted broad xrate            0.41          0.03             0.26       0.04                                             87383    0.08
                                                 0.44          0.03             0.21      0.04               0.27        0.03               87383    0.08


     Using trade-weighted major country xrate    0.28          0.02             0.21       0.03                                             96512    0.07
                                                 0.29          0.02             0.18      0.03               0.15        0.02               96512    0.07


     Placebo num changes                         0.15          0.01             0.00       0.01                                             100871   0.09
53




                                                 0.15          0.02             -0.00     0.01               0.02        0.01               100871   0.09


     Placebo num obs                             0.15          0.02             -0.00      0.01                                             100871   0.09
                                                 0.15          0.02             -0.00     0.01               0.02        0.01               100871   0.09


     Median regression                           0.16          0.00             0.07       0.00                                             95284
                                                 0.16          0.00             0.07      0.00               0.01        0.00               95284

     Note: Robust standard errors clustered by country*PSL pair. Primary strata lower (PSL), de…ned
     by the BLS, represents 2 to 4-digit sectoral harmonized codes
     Table A2: "Binned" time series results
                                              High volatility           Low volatility             Di¤erence                   2
                                                                                          
                                                      (           )          (          )           ¬         -stat


     All countries, all items ex petroleum
     - Interquartile range                    0.21    0.03              0.08   0.02             0.12              4.35     62395   0.09
     - Cross-sectional std                    0.17    0.02              0.08   0.02             0.10              3.89     63095   0.09
     - Bloom uncertainty                      0.26    0.03              0.06   0.02             0.20              6.33     64204   0.08


     OECD, all items ex petroleum
     - Interquartile range                    0.22    0.03              0.12   0.03             0.10              2.88     34790   0.09
     - Cross-sectional std                    0.22    0.03              0.10   0.03             0.12              3.17     35288   0.09
     - Bloom uncertainty                      0.25    0.03              0.07   0.03             0.18              4.37     35398   0.09
54




     All countries, all manufact. items
     - Interquartile range                    0.18    0.03              0.08   0.02             0.10              3.41     51157   0.11
     - Cross-sectional std                    0.15    0.02              0.08   0.02             0.07              2.75     51943   0.11
     - Bloom uncertainty                      0.23    0.02              0.05   0.02             0.18              5.83     52661   0.10

     Note: Robust standard errors clustered by country*PSL pair. Primary strata lower (PSL), de…ned by the BLS, represents
     2 to 4-digit sectoral harmonized codes
     Table A3: Interaction Speci…cations with both Cross-Item and Cross-Month Dispersion

                                    Average pass-through               Item-Level Volatility                 Month-Level Volatility           2
                                                                                                                 
     Controls                                       (           )                    (          )                    (          )
     - No additional controls       .141            .013               .043            .017                  .060        .009             95284   .072
     - Item level frequency         .139            .013               .041            .017                  .060        .009             95284   .072
     - Aggregate frequency          .137            .013               .041            .017                  .060        .009             95284   .073
     - Time trend + Month           .137            .024               .042            .017                  .055        .012             95284   .076
     - All above controls           .125            .024               .042            .017                  .055        .012             95284   .077

     Note: Robust standard errors clustered by country*PSL pair. Primary strata lower (PSL), de…ned by the BLS, represents 2 to 4-digit sectoral
     harmonized codes. The sample is all countries, all items ex petroleum.




     Table A4: Month-Level IQR Regressions by Item-Level XSD Quintiles
                                                                    
     Item-Level XSD Quintile                                                      ¬                 -stat            2
55




     1 (Lowest)                      .035            .029             .005                          0.29      6096     .64
     2                               .083            .052             .031                          1.46      12522    .24
     3                               .133            .053             .079                          2.24      16630    .15
     4                               .277            .127             .150                          3.41      16470    .13
     5 (Highest)                     .417            .112             .304                          2.92      10942    .12




     Table A5: Within and Between
                                         _                        _
     Sector De…nition                                -stat                          -stat 
     2-digit                .141      .056           5.95             .010            0.82
     4-digit                .141      .036           3.29             .034            2.59
     Within is month-level variance of price changes within sectors. Between gives variance of in‡ation rates across sectors
