NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOSTERING AND MEASURING SKILLS:
INTERVENTIONS THAT IMPROVE CHARACTER AND COGNITION
James J. Heckman
Tim Kautz
Working Paper 19656
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19656

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

This research was supported in part by the American Bar Foundation, the Pritzker Children's Initiative,
the Buffett Early Childhood Fund, NICHD 5R37HD065072, 5R01HD054702, the Human Capital
and Economic Opportunity Global Working Group--an initiative of the Becker Friedman Institute
for Research in Economics--funded by the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET), and an anonymous
funder. We acknowledge the support of an European Research Council grant hosted by the University
College Dublin, DEVHEALTH 269874. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the funders or commentators mentioned here. We thank Linor Kiknadze
and Edward Sung for valuable research assistance. We received helpful comments from Richard Boyle,
Ron Diris, Maryclare Grin, Robert Lerman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Dan Moran, Maria Rosales, and
Indra Wechsberg. A version of this paper appears in Heckman, Humphries, and Kautz (2014b): see
Heckman and Kautz (2014b). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by James J. Heckman and Tim Kautz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Fostering and Measuring Skills: Interventions That Improve Character and Cognition
James J. Heckman and Tim Kautz
NBER Working Paper No. 19656
November 2013
JEL No. D01,I20,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the recent literature on measuring and boosting cognitive and noncognitive skills.
The literature establishes that achievement tests do not adequately capture character skills--personality
traits, goals, motivations, and preferences--that are valued in the labor market, in school, and in many
other domains. Their predictive power rivals that of cognitive skills. Reliable measures of character
have been developed. All measures of character and cognition are measures of performance on some
task. In order to reliably estimate skills from tasks, it is necessary to standardize for incentives, effort,
and other skills when measuring any particular skill.
Character is a skill, not a trait. At any age, character skills are stable across different tasks, but skills
can change over the life cycle. Character is shaped by families, schools, and social environments. Skill
development is a dynamic process, in which the early years lay the foundation for successful investment
in later years.
High-quality early childhood and elementary school programs improve character skills in a lasting
and cost-effective way. Many of them beneficially affect later-life outcomes without improving cognition.
There are fewer long-term evaluations of adolescent interventions, but workplace-based programs
that teach character skills are promising. The common feature of successful interventions across all
stages of the life cycle through adulthood is that they promote attachment and provide a secure base
for exploration and learning for the child. Successful interventions emulate the mentoring environments
offered by successful families.
James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
Tim Kautz
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
tkautz@uchicago.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19656

Contents
1 Introduction

3

2 Measures of Cognitive and Character Skills

9

2.1

Cognitive Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

2.2

Measuring Character . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

2.3

A Task-Based Framework for Identifying and Measuring Skills . . . . . . . .

13

2.4

Reference Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

2.5

Measuring Skills Using Behaviors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

2.6

Are Character Skills Stable? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

3 Predictive Power of Character

23

4 The Skills Needed for Success in the Labor Market

29

5 A Framework for Understanding Interventions

31

6 Summary of Empirical Evidence on the Efficacy of Interventions

33

7 Early-Life Interventions that Begin Before Formal Schooling

36

7.1

7.2

Infant Programs and Model Preschools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

36

7.1.1

Nurse-Family Partnership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

36

7.1.2

Jamaican Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41

7.1.3

Perry Preschool Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

43

7.1.4

Abecedarian Program

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

47

Large-Scale Infant and Young Child Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

7.2.1

Head Start . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

7.2.2

Chicago CPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

50

8 Education and Interventions in Kindergarten and Elementary School

1

52

8.1

Targeted Character Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

52

8.1.1

The Seattle Social Development Project (SSDP) . . . . . . . . . . . .

53

8.1.2

Cambridge-Somerville Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

56

8.1.3

Project STAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

56

9 Education and Interventions Targeted Toward Adolescents and Young
Adults

57

9.1

Adolescent Mentorship Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

58

9.1.1

Quantum Opportunity Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

58

9.1.2

Big Brothers Big Sisters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

9.1.3

EPIS Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

Residential-Based Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

9.2.1

Job Corps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

9.2.2

National Guard ChalleNGe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

Workplace-Based Adolescent Intervention Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

65

9.3.1

Career Academies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

67

9.3.2

Year-Up Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

69

9.3.3

Dominican Youth Employment Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

9.3.4

Self-Sufficiency Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

72

9.2

9.3

10 Apprenticeship Programs

74

11 Other Curricula that Have Been Applied to Multiple Age Groups

78

11.1 Tools of the Mind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

78

11.2 Studies that Teach the Incremental Theory of Intelligence

78

. . . . . . . . . .

12 The Effects of Education and Parental Investment on Character and Cognition

81

13 Summary

88
2

1

Introduction

Modern societies rely on written tests. Achievement tests have come to play an especially
prominent role. They are used to sift and sort people, to evaluate schools, and to assess
the performance of entire nations.1 The No Child Left Behind Act requires that public
schools administer achievement tests and that the test results influence local school policy.
In the US, high school dropouts can take a 7-and-a-half hour achievement test—the General
Educational Development (GED) exam—to certify that they are equivalent to high school
graduates.2
Despite their widespread use, achievement tests are not well understood. Achievement
tests were developed in the mid-twentieth century as a way to measure “general knowledge”
that would be useful inside and outside of the classroom.3 Their developers claimed to have
designed pencil-and-paper tests that would predict success in the labor market, in education,
and in many other aspects of life. However, achievement tests are typically validated in
a circular fashion using IQ tests and grades, and not in terms of their ability to predict
important life outcomes. Their validity in predicting success in outcomes that matter is not
well established.
Achievement test scores predict only a small fraction of the variance in later-life success.
For example, adolescent achievement test scores only explain about 15% of the variance in
later-life earnings.4 It is unlikely that measurement error accounts for most of the remaining
variance.5 Something fundamental is missing.
Achievement tests do not adequately capture character skills such as conscientiousness,
1

The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) evaluates student performance in math,
science, and reading across countries, and its results attract a lot of media attention and influence policy.
Scores from the year 2000 PISA test led Germany to reevaluate its educational system and introduce a
variety of reforms (Grek, 2009).
2
See Heckman et al. (2014b) for a detailed discussion of the GED program and an evaluation of its
benefits.
3
For histories of achievement tests see Heckman and Kautz (2014a); Quinn (2014).
4
See Heckman and Kautz (2012).
5
See Bound, Brown, and Mathiowetz (2001). At most 25%–30% of the variance in hourly wages is due
to measurement error.

3

perseverance, sociability, and curiosity, which are valued in the labor market, in school, and
in many other domains. Until recently these skills have largely been ignored. However, in
recent research economists and psychologists have constructed measures of these skills and
provide evidence that they are stable across situations and predict meaningful life outcomes.6
Skills are not set in stone at birth. They can be improved. Cognitive and character
skills change with age and with instruction. Interventions to improve skills are effective to
different degrees for different skills at different ages. Importantly, character skills are more
malleable at later ages.
This paper reviews the recent evidence from economics and personality psychology on
the predictive power of cognition and character and the best available evidence on how to
foster them. A growing body of empirical research shows that character skills rival IQ in
predicting educational attainment, labor market success, health, and criminality.7
Character skills are universally valued across all cultures and societies. Recognition of
the importance of skills other than raw intelligence is deeply embedded in folk wisdom.
Children everywhere are taught character-building stories like The Tortoise and the Hare
and The Little Engine That Could. Even the enthusiastic creators of the early IQ tests,
such as Alfred Binet, Charles Spearman, and Edward Webb, recognized the importance of
character skills beyond cognition in predicting academic success.8
Because both cognition and character can be shaped, and change over the life cycle, we
refer to them as “skills” throughout this paper. An older terminology refers to them as
“traits,” conveying a sense of immutability or permanence, possibly due to their heritable
nature. Our distinction between skills and traits is not just a matter of semantics. It suggests
6

See the studies by Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel (2008) and Almlund, Duckworth,
Heckman, and Kautz (2011). The modern literature traces back to Bowles and Gintis (1976), and Bowles,
Gintis, and Osborne (2001). An important study in sociology is the work of Peter Mueser reported in Jencks
(1979). Work in psychology going back to Terman, Baldwin, Bronson, DeVoss, Fuller, Lee Kelley, Lima,
Marshall, Moore, Raubenheimer, Ruch, Willoughby, Benson Wyman, and Hazeltine Yates (1925) shows that
personality skills predict life outcomes (see also Murray, 1938; Terman, Oden, Bayley, Marshall, McNemar,
and Sullivan, 1947; and the analysis in Gensowski, 2012).
7
See Heckman and Kautz (2012), Almlund et al. (2011), Borghans et al. (2008), and Roberts, Kuncel,
Shiner, Caspi, and Goldberg (2007) for reviews.
8
Binet and Simon (1916); Webb (1915).

4

new and productive avenues for public policy.
Skills enable people. They are capacities to function. Greater levels of skill foster social
inclusion and promote economic and social mobility. They generate economic productivity
and create social well-being. Skills give agency to people to shape their lives in the present
and to create future skills.
An effective strategy for promoting human development should be based on three factually based insights:
1. The powerful role of families in shaping skills;
2. The multiplicity of skills required for successful functioning in society. A core set of
skills promotes success in many aspects of life. Different tasks require different skills in
different levels and proportions. People tend to pursue the tasks where their skills give
them comparative advantage;
3. The technology of skill formation: that skills together with investment beget further skills.
Effective policies to promote skills straddle the missions of cabinet agencies and draw
on the wisdom of many academic disciplines. They require broad thinking. Both cognition
and character are important ingredients of successful lives. They are malleable to different
degrees at different stages of the life cycle. They cross-fertilize each other. Focusing on one
dimension of human skills to the exclusion of other dimensions misses fundamental aspects of
human performance and development. Narrowly focused policies fail to capture synergisms
in the expression and development of skills.
Many policymakers share a common desire to develop human potential. However, current
policy discussions focus on promoting skills by improving schools. In this very narrow view,
the success of schools is measured by scores on exams used to monitor performance under
No Child Left Behind. This focus is a consequence of a very limited conceptualization of
human capabilities that assumes that achievement tests capture the important life skills.

5

This emphasis misses important dimensions of human flourishing. It does not recognize
that skills are multiple in nature. Nor does it recognize the importance of families and
communities in creating skills. While schools are important, they are not the sole producers
of the skills that matter.
Both cognitive and character skills are crucial to success in economic and social life.
Character skills include perseverance (“grit”), self-control, trust, attentiveness, self-esteem
and self-efficacy, resilience to adversity, openness to experience, empathy, humility, tolerance
of diverse opinions, and the ability to engage productively in society.
Our emphasis on character skills does not arise from any agenda to impose Western
middle-class values on society. A strong base of cognitive and character skills is universally
valued across different cultures, religions, and societies. There are reliable ways to measure
them, and there are proven ways to enhance them and to evaluate efforts to foster them.
Recent research establishes the existence of critical and sensitive periods in the formation
of skills over the life cycle. Sensitive periods are those when investment is especially productive; critical periods are those when investment is essential. Critical and sensitive periods
differ across skills. Investments should target those periods.
In designing effective human development strategies, it is essential to discard obsolete
views about the origin and malleability of “traits.” What used to be regarded as traits
fixed at conception are now understood to be skills that can be augmented through guidance
and instruction. Raw intelligence is not fixed solely by parental genes, although heritability
plays an important role. It is boosted by quality parenting and by caring environments.
It becomes solidified around the time of puberty. Character skills can also be shaped.
Compared to raw intelligence, they are more malleable until later ages. Neuroscience shows
that this malleability is associated with the slow development of the prefrontal cortex.9 When
attempted, adolescent remediation should focus on boosting character skills.
Skill development is a dynamic process. For example, boosting character skills early in
9

Walsh (2005).

6

life increases the benefits of education later in life: More persistent students learn more. The
levels of cognitive and character skills at any age depend on levels of those skills at younger
ages and earlier investments.10
Inequality among families in parenting and lack of support given to children in schools
are major contributors to inequality in skills. In light of this evidence, it is of great concern
that so many American children are being born into disadvantage as measured by the quality
of parenting and that the trend appears to be accelerating.11 The traditional family with its
secure environment for rearing children is under challenge. A major casualty of this trend
is the quality of parenting available to disadvantaged children. It is unreasonable to expect
schools to take on the huge burden of supplementing compromised family environments in
addition to their traditional job of educating children.
Evidence from the social and biological sciences establishes the importance of the early
years in fostering the skills that promote human flourishing. Families do much more than
pass on their genes or put food on the table. Human development is a dynamic process of
nature/nurture interactions that starts in the womb. Environments and skills interact to
foster the development of later life skills and create who we are and what we become.
The foundations for adult success are laid down early in life. Many children raised in
disadvantaged environments start behind and stay behind. Poverty has lasting effects on
brain development, health, cognition, and character. Gaps in skills emerge early, before
formal schooling begins. Waiting until kindergarten to address these gaps is too late. It
creates achievement gaps for disadvantaged children that are costly to close.
Family disadvantage is poorly assessed by conventional measures of poverty that focus on
family income flows and parental education. The absence of parental guidance, nourishment,
and encouragement is the most damaging condition for child development. Absence of quality
parenting—stimulation, attachment, encouragement, and support—is the true measure of
child poverty.
10
11

Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2008); Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010).
See McLanahan (2004) and Heckman (2008).

7

Children from disadvantaged homes are much more likely to drop out of high school.
Single-parent families, compared to two-parent families, give less cognitive and emotional
stimulation to their children (Moon, 2012), and as a consequence their children have diminished cognitive and character skills.12 The evidence summarized in this paper suggests that
skill deficits can be prevented by improving the early lives of disadvantaged children.
Yet, while important and often neglected in American public policy, the early years do
not fully determine adult success. Children are resilient and quality parenting throughout
childhood fosters the development and expression of skills. Schooling shapes both cognitive
and character skills. Certain adolescent remediation programs appear to be effective.
A variety of adolescent interventions attempt to remediate early-life skill deficits. Alternatives to the traditional high school curriculum provide potential dropouts with training
suitable to their interests and skills. Such programs can mold character, even if it is not
their primary goal. Other interventions attempt to directly remediate character deficits after
students drop out of school.
We aim to provide a sober account of what is known. We compare different skill enhancement strategies and consider the features that make some programs more successful than
others. Unfortunately, the field of human development is marred by overzealous advocates
who claim miracle fixes from their favored programs. They focus on one slice of the life cycle
to the exclusion of others.
Slogans often replace hard evidence. Most evaluations of interventions have only shortterm follow-ups. Many differ in their measures of outcomes and skills and target different
demographic groups, so it is difficult to compare alternative programs. Despite these limitations, several studies suggest that interventions during the preschool years or in kindergarten
improve character in a lasting way, some with annual rates of return (per annum yields)
that are comparable to those from investment in the stock market in normal times.13 Sev12

See, for example, Carneiro and Heckman (2003), Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006), and
Cunha and Heckman (2009).
13
See Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz (2010b).

8

eral adolescent interventions are promising, particularly those that combine education with
work-related experience.14
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines cognitive and character skills and
discusses how they are measured. Section 3 summarizes the evidence on the predictive power
of character skills. Section 4 presents an analysis of the skills needed in the workforce, as
garnered from surveys of employers. Section 5 presents a framework for analyzing investment
in skills over the life cycle. Sections 6– 12 review evidence about the efficacy of education,
parental investment, and interventions in improving character skills from preschool, elementary school, and adolescence. Section 13 summarizes the paper.

2

Measures of Cognitive and Character Skills

2.1

Cognitive Skills

Measures of cognition have been developed and refined over the past century. Cognitive
ability has multiple facets.15 Psychologists distinguish between fluid intelligence (the rate at
which people learn) and crystallized intelligence (acquired knowledge).16 Achievement tests
are designed to capture crystallized intelligence,17 whereas IQ tests like Raven’s progressive
matrices (1962) are designed to capture fluid intelligence.18,19
This new understanding of cognition is not widely appreciated. Many use IQ tests,
standardized achievement tests, and even grades as interchangeable measures of “cognitive
14

See, for example, Kemple and Willner (2008) and Roder and Elliot (2011).
See Carroll (1993) and Ackerman and Heggestad (1997) for discussions.
16
See, for example, Nisbett, Aronson, Blair, Dickens, Flynn, Halpern, and Turkheimer (2012).
17
Roberts, Goff, Anjoul, Kyllonen, Pallier, and Stankov (2000).
18
Raven, Raven, and Court (1988). The high correlation between scores on intelligence tests and scores on
achievement tests is in part due to the fact that both require intelligence and knowledge. Fluid intelligence
promotes the acquisition of crystallized intelligence. Common developmental factors affect the formation of
both skills.
19
Carroll (1993) and Ackerman and Heggestad (1997) discuss more disaggregated facets of cognitive
ability.
15

9

ability” or intelligence.20 Scores on IQ tests and standardized achievement tests are strongly
correlated with each other and with grades.21 However, these general indicators of “cognition” measure different skills and capture different facets of cognitive ability.22,23 In the
following section we show that scores on these tests are also influenced by effort and character
skills.

2.2

Measuring Character

Throughout this paper we use the term character skills to describe the personal attributes not
thought to be measured by IQ tests or achievement tests. These attributes go by many names
in the literature, including soft skills, personality traits, non-cognitive skills, non-cognitive
abilities, character, and socio-emotional skills. These different names connote different properties.24 “Traits” suggests a sense of permanence and possibly also of heritability. “Skills”
suggests that these attributes can be learned. In reality, the extent to which these personal
attributes can change lies on a spectrum. Both cognitive and character skills can change and
be changed over the life cycle, but through different mechanisms and with different ease at
different ages. We generally use the term skill throughout this paper because all attributes
can be shaped.
Although character skills are overlooked in most contemporary policy discussions and
in economic models of choice behavior, personality psychologists have studied these skills
for the past century. Psychologists primarily measure character skills by using self-reported
surveys or observer reports. They have arrived at a relatively well-accepted taxonomy of
character skills called the Big Five, with the acronym OCEAN, which stands for: Openness
20

This practice is true even among leading professional psychologists. For example, all of these measures
are used as measures of intelligence in Flynn (2007), Nisbett (2009), and Nisbett et al. (2012).
21
See Heckman and Kautz (2012).
22
See Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman, and Humphries (2011a).
23
It is an irony of the testing literature that high school grades are more predictive of first-year college
performance than SAT scores (Bowen, Chingos, and McPherson, 2009). The SAT and related tests were
once thought to be a more objective measure of student quality than high school grades (Lemann, 1999).
24
See Almlund et al. (2011) and Borghans et al. (2008) for comparisons of some of these different taxonomies.

10

to Experience, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. Table 1
defines these skills and their multiple facets.25 Some argue that the Big Five are the longitude and latitude of character skills, by which all more narrowly defined skills may be
categorized.26
While the Big Five measures are now widely used in psychology, there are several other
taxonomies, including the Big Three, the MPQ, and the Big Nine. They are conceptually
and empirically related to the Big Five.27 Other taxonomies, including psychopathology
as measured by the DSM-IV and measures of temperament, have also been related to the
Big Five.28 Almlund et al. (2011) and Becker, Deckers, Dohmen, Falk, and Kosse (2012)
summarize evidence showing that economic preference parameters are not closely related to
the Big Five measures and apparently represent different skills that, along with the skills
measured by psychologists, govern behavior.29

25

See, for example, Borghans et al. (2008).
Costa and McCrae (1992a).
27
See Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011) for comparisons of these taxonomies.
28
See, for example, Cloninger, Svrakic, Bayon, and Przybeck (1999).
29
A deeper issue, as yet not systematically investigated in the literature in economics or psychology, is
whether the “traits” captured by the alternative measurement systems are the expression of a deeper set of
preferences or goals. McAdams (2006) adds goals to the list of possible traits. Almlund et al. (2011) and
Heckman and Kautz (2012) develop a model in which preferences and endowments of skills determine the
effort applied to tasks. As shown in the next section, performance on tasks is the source of any measurement
of a trait. Hence, in their framework, measures of traits are determined, in part, by preferences.
26

11

12

“The tendency to be open to
new aesthetic, cultural, or
intellectual experiences”

“An orientation of one’s
interests and energies toward
the outer world of people
and things rather than the
inner world of subjective
experience; characterized by
positive affect and
sociability”

“The tendency to act in a
cooperative, unselfish
manner”

Openness to
Experience

Extraversion

Agreeableness

Trust (forgiving), Straight-forwardness
(not demanding), Altruism (warm),
Compliance (not stubborn), Modesty
(not show-off), and
Tender-mindedness (sympathetic)

Warmth (friendly), Gregariousness
(sociable), Assertiveness
(self-confident), Activity (energetic),
Excitement seeking (adventurous),
and Positive emotions (enthusiastic)

Fantasy (imaginative), Aesthetic
(artistic), Feelings (excitable), Actions
(wide interests), Ideas (curious), and
Values (unconventional)

Competence (efficient), Order
(organized), Dutifulness (not careless),
Achievement striving (ambitious),
Self-discipline (not lazy), and
Deliberation (not impulsive)

Facets (and correlated skill adjective)

Empathy, Perspective
taking, Cooperation, and
Competitiveness

Grit, Perseverance, Delay of
gratification, Impulse
control, Achievement
striving, Ambition, and
Work ethic

Related Skills

Childhood

Temperament

Irritability∗ , Aggressiveness, and Willfulness

Surgency, Social dominance, Social vitality, Sensation seeking, Shyness*, Activity*, Positive emotionality, and Sociability/affiliation

Sensory sensitivity, Pleasure in lowintensity activities, Curiosity

Attention/(lack of) distractibility, Effortful control, Impulse control/delay of
gratification, Persistence, Activity∗

Analogous
Skills

Neuroticism/
Emotional
Stability

Internal versus External, LoEmotional stability is
Anxiety (worrying), Hostility
cus of control, Core selfFearfulness/behavioral
inhibition,
“Predictability and
(irritable), Depression (not contented),
evaluation,
Shyness∗ , Irritability∗ , Frustration,
Self-esteem, Self-efficacy,
consistency in emotional
Self-consciousness (shy), Impulsiveness
(Lack of) soothability, Sadness
Optimism, and Axis I
reactions, with absence of
(moody), Vulnerability to stress (not
psychopathologies (mental
rapid mood changes.”
self-confident)
disorders) including
Neuroticism is “a chronic
depression and anxiety
level of emotional instability
disorders
and proneness to
psychological distress”
Notes: ∗ These temperament attritbutes may be related to two Big Five factors. Facets specified by the NEO-PI-R personality inventory (Costa and McCrae, 1992b). Adjectives
in parentheses from the Adjective Check List (Gough and Heilbrun, 1983).
Source: Table adapted from John and Srivastava (1999).

Conscientiousness

American Psychology
Association Dictionary
Description
“The tendency to be
organized, responsible, and
hardworking”

Big Five
Personality Factor

Table 1 The Big Five Domains and Their Facets

2.3

A Task-Based Framework for Identifying and Measuring Skills

One leading personality psychologist defines personality (character) traits (skills) as follows:
Personality traits are the relatively enduring patterns of thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors that reflect the tendency to respond in certain ways under certain circumstances. (Roberts, 2009, 140)
Roberts’ definition of personality (“character”) suggests that all psychological measurements
are calibrated on measured behavior or “tasks” broadly defined. A task could be an IQ test,
a personality questionnaire, job performance, school attendance, completion of high school,
participation in crime, or performance in an experiment. Figure 1 depicts how performance
on a task can depend on incentives, effort, and cognitive and character skills. Performance
on different tasks depend on these components to different degrees. People can compensate
for their shortfalls in one dimension by having strengths in other dimensions.
Figure 1 Determinants of Task Performance

Incentives

Effort

Character
Skills

Task
Performance

Cognitive
Skills

Many believe that personality skills can only be assessed by self-reported questionnaires
that elicit skills like the Big Five. However, performance on any task or any observed behavior
13

can be used to measure skills.30 For example, completing high school requires many other
skills besides those measured by achievement tests, including showing up in school, paying
attention, and behaving in class.31
Figure 1 suggests that inferring skills from performance on tasks requires standardization
for all of the other contributing factors that produce the observed behaviors. The inability to
parse and localize behaviors that depend on a single skill or ability gives rise to a fundamental
problem of assessing the contribution of any skill to successful performance on a task. This
problem is commonly ignored in empirical research that studies how psychological skills
affect outcomes.32
There are two issues here. First, behavior depends on incentives created by situations.
Different incentives elicit different amounts of effort on the tasks used to measure skills.
Accurately measuring character skills requires standardizing for the effort applied in any
task. Second, performance on most tasks depends on many skills. Not standardizing for
incentives and other relevant skills can produce misleading estimates of any particular skill.
These problems are empirically important. For example, incentives partly determine
scores on IQ tests. A series of studies conducted over the past 40 years show that incentives,
like money or candy, can increase IQ scores, particularly among low-IQ individuals. The
black–white gap in IQ can be completely eliminated by giving M&M candies for correct
answers.33 However, there is no evidence that this performance persists. It has not been
shown that creating incentives for performance on one test improves performance on subsequent tests, and there is some evidence that it, in fact, may worsen subsequent performance
(Deci and Ryan, 1985; Ryan and Deci, 2000). Duckworth, Quinn, Lynam, Loeber, and
30

See Almlund et al. (2011).
The idea of using behaviors to measure character is old. Ralph Tyler suggested using measures of
behavior to capture character skills in his first proposal for the National Assessment of Educational Progress
tests. See Tyler (1973) and Rothstein, Jacobsen, and Wilder (2008). This idea is being been pursued in the
recent literature (Heckman, Humphries, Urzúa, and Veramendi, 2011; Jackson, 2013).
32
See Borghans et al. (2011a), Almlund et al. (2011), and Heckman and Kautz (2012) for discussions of
this problem.
33
See Ayllon and Kelly (1972); Borghans, Meijers, and ter Weel (2008); Breuning and Zella (1978);
Clingman and Fowler (1976); Edlund (1972); Holt and Hobbs (1979); Larson, Saccuzzo, and Brown (1994);
Segal (2008). This evidence is summarized in Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011).
31

14

Stouthamer-Loeber (2011) have supplemented these studies by showing that observer-rated
motivation predicts IQ scores.
Not all persons respond with equal strength to incentives. Research by Borghans et al.
(2008) and Segal (2008) shows that the responsiveness of persons to incentives on IQ and
achievement tests depends on their character skills.
The recent literature shows that character skills predict standardized achievement test
scores, which many analysts assume are good measures of intelligence.34 Figures 2 and 3
show how the variance in the scores on two achievement tests, the Armed Forces Qualifying
Test (AFQT) and the closely related Differential Aptitudes Test (DAT),35 can be decomposed into IQ and character measures. Character skills explain a substantial portion of the
variability in both AFQT scores and DAT scores.36 Character skills explain the variance in
achievement scores above and beyond the variance that IQ explains when both character and
IQ are included in a regression. These findings caution the interpretation that standardized
achievement tests only measure cognitive ability. They also capture character skills.37 Ironically, The Bell Curve by Herrnstein and Murray, which uses achievement tests as a measure
of intelligence, implicitly shows the power of both character and cognition in shaping life
outcomes.
34

See, for example, Nisbett (2009).
The correlation between DAT and AFQT scores in the National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979
(NLSY79) is 0.75 (Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman, and Humphries, 2011b). Friedman and Streicher (1985)
estimate correlations between 0.65 and 0.82 in a sample of high school sophomores and juniors. Kettner
(1976) estimates correlations between DAT and the AFQT subtests of 0.76 to 0.89 in a sample of juniors
and seniors.
36
The lower explained variance in the sample with DAT is likely a consequence of restriction on range.
The DAT data come from a single school, whereas the AFQT data come from a national sample.
37
In the Stella Maris data, Openness to Experience is strongly correlated with IQ. See Borghans et al.
(2011b).
35

15

Figure 2 Decomposing Variance Explained for Achievement Tests and Grades into IQ and
Character [NLSY79]
0.60
0.50

Grades

Achievement
0.48
0.43

R-Squared

0.40
0.30

0.23
0.20

0.16

0.19
0.10

0.10
0.00

Grades

AFQT

IQ, Rosenberg, and Rotter

IQ

Rosenberg and Rotter

Source: Borghans et al. (2011a).
Notes: Personality is measured by the Rotter and Rosenberg personality inventories. These are only a subset of the personality
inventories described in Table 1. Locus of Control is based on the four-item abbreviated version of the Rotter Internal- External
Locus of Control Scale. This scale is designed to measure the extent to which individuals believe that they have control over
their lives through self-motivation or self-determination (internal control) as opposed to the extent to which individuals believe
that the environment controls their lives (external control). The self-esteem scale is based on the 10-item Rosenberg SelfEsteem Scale. This scale describes a degree of approval or disapproval toward oneself. Rotter was administered in 1979. The
ASVAB and Rosenberg were administered in 1980. AFQT is constructed from the Arithmetic Reasoning, Word Knowledge,
Mathematical Knowledge, and Paragraph Comprehension ASVAB subtests. IQ and GPA are from high school transcript data.
AFQT, Rosenberg, and Rotter have been adjusted for schooling at the time of the test conditional on final schooling, as laid out
in Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004). IQ is pooled across several IQ tests using IQ percentiles. GPA is the individual’s core
subject GPA from 9th grade. Sample excludes the military oversample. R-squared is a measure of the proportion of variance
in the outcome explained by the designated variable.

16

Figure 3 Decomposing Variance Explained for Achievement Tests and Grades into IQ and
Character: Stella Maris Secondary School, Maastricht, Holland

Source: Borghans et al. (2011a).
Note: Grit is a measure of persistence on tasks (Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews, and Kelly, 2007).

17

2.4

Reference Bias

Answers from self-reports can be misleading when comparing levels of personality skills across
different groups of people. Most personality assessments do not anchor their measurements in
any objective outcome.38 For example, the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP) survey
asks respondents to rate themselves on the following statement:“I see myself as someone
who tends to be lazy” (Lang, John, Lüdtke, Schupp, and Wagner, 2011). The scale ranges
from 1 = “strongly disagree” to 7 = “strongly agree.” In answering this question, people
must interpret the definition of “lazy,” which likely involves comparing themselves to other
people. If different groups have different standards or reference points, comparing traits
across groups can be highly misleading. Laziness may mean different things to different
groups of people.
This measurement problem—sometimes called reference bias—is empirically relevant.39
Schmitt, Allik, McCrae, and Benet-Martı́nez (2007) administer a Big Five personality questionnaire to groups of people in a variety of different countries. Using their estimates, Figure 4
shows how Organization of Economic Cooperation of Development (OECD) countries rank
in Conscientiousness (from high to low). The bars display the average number of hours that
people work in the country. The results are surprising. South Korea ranks second to last in
terms of Conscientiousness but also ranks first in the number of hours worked. South Korea
is not an anomaly. Country-level reports of Big Five Conscientiousness are unrelated to the
number of hours worked. The rank correlation between hours worked and Conscientiousness
across countries is negative, though statistically insignificant.40
38

These are called Likert scales (Likert, 1932).
Reference bias is also problematic in health surveys that use self-reported, subjective health assessments.
See Groot (2000).
40
r = −0.07 (p = 0.73).
39

18

Rank in Big Five Conscientiousness
(High to Low)

Figure 4 National Rank in Big Five Conscientiousness and Average Annual Hours Worked

Finland 1
United States 2
Chile 3
France 4
Slovenia 5
Canada 6
Turkey 7
Italy 8
Portugal 9
Greece 10
United Kingdom 11
Spain 12
Austria 13
Germany 14
Poland 15
Australia 16
Estonia 17
Mexico 18
Switzerland 19
New Zealand 20
Netherlands 21
Belgium 22
Czech Republic 23
Slovakia 24
South Korea 25
Japan 26
1300

1500

1700

1900

2100

2300

2500

Annual Hours Worked

Source: The Conscientiousness ranks come from Schmitt et al. (2007). These measures were taken in 2001 (Schmitt, 2002).
The hours worked estimates come from Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (2001).
Note: Several countries are omitted due to lack of data.

These findings are relevant for constructing measurements of character skills. Achievement tests miss important skills, suggesting that students, teachers, and schools should not
be evaluated solely by achievement tests. Would the self-reported Big Five be a useful supplement to school evaluations? The possibility of reference bias suggests that it might not.
Self-reports of Conscientiousness might measure different things for different schools.
Psychologists have attempted to address the problem of reference bias.41 Some surveys
include vignette-based questions that attempt to standardize for aspects of the culture or
situation. They attempt to frame questions so that the people in the survey answer within
a common situation. However, this approach might not work well for evaluating schools,
especially if teachers have incentives to coach children on taking these tests so that they
score better and give answers perceived to be positive. Direct use of standard psychological
41
For further discussion of reference bias, see Duckworth (2012) and her references: Goldammer (2010);
Heine, Buchtel, and Norenzayan (2008); Heine, Kitayama, Lehman, Takata, Ide, Leung, and Matsumoto
(2001); Heine, Lehman, Peng, and Greenholtz (2002); Naumann and John (2011); Peng, Nisbett, and Wong
(1997); and Schmitt et al. (2007).

19

measures can be problematic.42

2.5

Measuring Skills Using Behaviors

Ralph Tyler, a pioneer of achievement testing, recognized its limitations. He suggested
using measures of behavior such as performance, participation in student activities, and
other observations by teachers and school administrators to complement achievement tests
when evaluating students and schools. Several recent papers show that this is a promising
approach. Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) show that teacher ratings of elementary
schoolchildren’s behaviors are strong predictors of adult outcomes and that early childhood
interventions promote the character skills measured by these ratings. Heckman et al. (2011)
estimate the causal effect of cognitive and socio-emotional (character) skills on a variety of
outcomes. They measure socio-emotional (character) skills using risky and reckless behaviors
measured in the adolescent years.43 Motivated by findings such as those reported in Figure 2
and Figure 3, they develop and apply methods to use high school grades to measure both
cognition and character. They show that character skills promote educational attainment,
beneficial labor market outcomes, and health.
Jackson (2013) studies the effect of teachers on student cognition and character. In a
fashion similar to Heckman et al. (2011), Jackson measures cognitive skills using achievement test scores, while measuring noncognitive (character) skills using absences, suspensions,
grades, and grade progression. These measures of character predict adult outcomes with a
strength similar to measures of cognitive ability. His measures of character are commonly
available from the administrative records of schools.
Similar to Ralph Tyler’s suggestion to use participation in extracurricular activities,
42

In an attempt to address reference bias, some psychologists measure skills using behaviors. Heine
et al. (2008) examine cross-country differences in Conscientiousness using objective measures, including
walking speed, postal workers’ speed, and the accuracy of clocks in public banks.To measure walking speed,
researchers timed how long it took for a random sample of people to walk 60 feet in public areas. Postal
workers’ speed was assessed by measuring how long it took for postal workers to sell stamps.
43
The measure of risky and reckless behavior is based on whether adolescents engaged in any of the
following behaviors: stealing from a store, purposefully damaging property, taking something worth less
than $50, or conning someone.

20

Lleras (2008) measures noncognitive (character) skills in part by using tenth grade participation in sports, academic clubs, and fine arts activities. Participation in these activities
predicts educational attainment 10 years later, even after controlling for cognitive ability as
measured by achievement tests.
Criminologists have also debated about whether it is better to measure self-control with
self-reported psychological scales or with objective behaviors. The publication of Gottfredson
and Hirschi’s A General Theory of Crime (1990) launched a series of studies on the link
between self-control and crime. In that study, they posit that a single factor, self-control,
predicts much of the variance in criminal outcomes.
There is a divide in this literature. Subsequent studies have measured self-control using
psychological scales, while others have used behavioral measures. A meta-analysis by Pratt
and Cullen (2000) finds that behavioral measures are at least as good at predicting crime as
are measures based on self-reported taxonomies. In a similar vein, Benda (2005) uses both
types of measures in the same study and finds that behavioral measures predict crime better
than psychological scales.
Hirschi and Gottfredson (1993) suggest that objective behavioral measures might be
preferred to self-reports, partly because the act of filling out a survey requires some level of
self-control. Answering survey questions is another task that relies on skills beyond the ones
targeted by the survey.
Some criticize this approach and argue that it is tautological to use measures of behavior
to predict other behavior even though the measures are taken early in life to predict later life
behaviors.44 As suggested by Figure 1, all tasks or behaviors can be used to infer a skill as
long as the measurement accounts for other skills and aspects of the situation. Self-reported
scales should not be assumed to be more reliable. The question is which measurements are
most predictive and can be implemented in practice. The literature suggests that there are
objective measurements of character that are not plagued by reference bias.
44

See the discussion in Pratt and Cullen (2000) and Benda (2005).

21

2.6

Are Character Skills Stable?

Many have questioned whether there are stable character skills. The publication of Walter Mischel’s 1968 book, Personality and Assessment, gave rise to a heated “personality–
situation” debate within psychology, which pitted social psychologists who favored situational factors as primary determinants of behavior against personality psychologists who
considered stable personality (character) traits (skills) as more consequential. Mischel argued that aspects of situations overshadow any effect of personality (character) traits (skills)
on behavior.45 Ironically, Mischel himself later demonstrated the stability of character skills
over the life cycle in his celebrated “marshmallow experiment.”46
A large body of evidence reviewed in Almlund et al. (2011) shows that stable character
skills exist and are predictive of many behaviors.47 An early paper by Epstein (1979) presents
compelling evidence that, averaging over tasks and situations, people act in a predictable
fashion with a high level of reliability of average behavior (“measured character”) across
situations.48
In addition, measures of character skills tend to be about 30%–60% heritable, suggesting
that something tied to the person, rather than the situation, influences behavior (Bouchard
and Loehlin, 2001).49 Evidence from neuroscience suggests that expression of different skills
is linked to different regions of the brain (see Canli, 2006, and DeYoung, Hirsh, Shane,
Papademetris, Rajeevan, and Gray, 2010).
45

This point is echoed in behavioral economics. See Thaler (2008).
A participant (usually a child) was given a marshmallow. The experimenter left the room and told
the participant that he or she would receive a second marshmallow if he or she resisted consuming the
marshmallow until the experimenter returns. The length of time that the participant waits is a measure
of short-term discounting. The children who could wait had much better lifetime outcomes. (For a recent
discussion of this study, see Mischel, Ayduk, Berman, Casey, Gotlib, Jonides, Kross, Teslovich, Wilson,
Zayas, and Shoda, 2011.)
47
See the special issue of Journal of Research in Personality (43) entitled “Personality and Assessment
at Age 40 ” for a recent discussion.
48 2
R of 0.6–0.8, where R2 is a measure of variance explained.
49
Devlin, Daniels, and Roeder (1997) suggest that traditional estimates of the heritability of IQ may be
inflated because they fail to take into account the effect of the environment on conditions in the maternal
womb. See also Rutter (2006) and an emerging literature on epigenetics (Jablonka and Raz, 2009).
46

22

3

Predictive Power of Character

A substantial body of evidence shows that character skills predict a wide range of life outcomes, including educational achievement, labor market outcomes, health, and criminality.
For many outcomes, the predictive power of character skills rivals that of measures of cognitive ability. Of the Big Five, Conscientiousness—the tendency to be organized, responsible,
and hardworking—is the most widely predictive across a variety of outcomes.50
Given that school requires hard work and perseverance, it is not surprising that Conscientiousness is associated with educational attainment. Figure 5 shows standardized coefficients
from a regression of the Big Five on educational attainment from the German Socioeconomic
Panel (GSOEP). The darker lines show effects without adjusting for measures of intelligence,
and the lighter lines show effects after additionally adjusting for measures of fluid and crystallized intelligence. Conscientiousness predicts years of schooling with the same strength as
the measures of intelligence.
50

See Almlund et al. (2011); Borghans et al. (2008); Heckman and Kautz (2012); Roberts et al. (2007).

23

Figure 5 Association of the Big Five and Intelligence with Years of Schooling in GSOEP

(a) Males

(b) Females

Source: German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP), waves 2004–2008, Almlund et al. (2011).
Notes: The figure displays standardized regression coefficients from a multivariate regression of years of school attended on the
Big Five and intelligence, controlling for age and age squared. The bars represent standard errors. The Big Five coefficients are
corrected for attenuation bias. The Big Five were measured in 2005. Years of schooling were measured in 2008. Intelligence was
measured in 2006. The measures of intelligence were based on components of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS).
The data is a representative sample of German adults between the ages of 21 and 94.

Aspects of job performance are also related to academic performance. Both require com24

pleting work on a schedule and involve intelligence to varying degrees. As with academic
performance, numerous studies and meta-analyses have found that Conscientiousness is associated with job performance and wages (Barrick and Mount, 1991; Hogan and Holland,
2003; Nyhus and Pons, 2005; Salgado, 1997). Figure 6 presents correlations of the Big Five
and IQ with job performance. Of the Big Five factors, Conscientiousness is the most strongly
associated with job performance but is about half as predictive as IQ. Conscientiousness,
however, may play a more ubiquitous role than IQ. The importance of IQ increases with job
complexity (the information processing requirements of the job). Cognitive skills are more
important for professors, scientists, and senior managers than for semiskilled or unskilled
laborers (Schmidt and Hunter, 2004). The importance of Conscientiousness does not vary
much with job complexity (Barrick and Mount, 1991); this suggests that it applies to a wider
spectrum of jobs.

25

Hanushek_2011 978-0-444-53

Personality Psychology and Economics
Figure 6 Associations with Job Performance

Emotional stability
Agreeableness
Extraversion
Conscientiousness
Openness
Intelligence
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Correlation

Figure 1.16 Associations with Job Performance.

Source: The correlations reported for personality traits come from a meta-analysis conducted by Barrick and Mount (1991).
The correlation reported for intelligence comes from Schmidt and Hunter (2004).
Notes: The values for personality are correlations that were corrected for sampling error, censoring, and measurement error. Job
performance was based on performance ratings, productivity data, and training proficiency. The authors do report the timing
of the measurements of personality relative to job performance. Of the Big Five, the coefficient on Conscientiousness is the only
one statistically significant, with a lower bound on the 90% credibility value of 0.10. The value for intelligence is a raw correlation.

Notes: The values for personality are correlations that were corrected for sampling error, censoring,
and measurement error. Job performance was based on performance ratings, productivity data,
and training proficiency. The authors do report the timing of the measurements of personality relative
to job performance. Of the Big Five, the coefficient on Conscientiousness is the only one statistically
significant with a lower bound on the 90% credibility value of 0.10. The value for IQ is a raw
correlation.Measures of character skills rival IQ and measures of socioeconomic status in predicting
Source: longevity.
The correlations
for review
personality
traits
come
from astudies
meta-analysis
conducted by
51
Robertsreported
et al. (2007)
evidence
from
34 different
on the predictive
Barrick and Mount (1991). The correlation reported for IQ and job performance come from Schmidt
validity
of the Big Five personality measures, relative to that of cognitive ability and socioeand Hunter
(2004).
conomic status. Most studies in their meta-analysis control for relevant background factors,

Facets related to Emotional Stability (the opposite of Neuroticism) are also important
including gender and severity of disease. Roberts and colleagues convert the results of each
for labor market success. However, accounting for reverse causality is particularly imporstudy into
correlation
coefficients
that can
compared
acrossparticipation
studies. Figure can
7 presents
tant because
strong
evidence
suggests
thatbelabor
market
affect traits
from their analyses.
Conscientiousness
stronger predictor
longevity
than8).
anySeveral
relatedresults
to Neuroticism
(see the
discussion ofis aGottschalk,
2005,of in
Section
52
studiesother
haveBigaddressed
thisa problem
by using
personalitystatus.
measured
Five trait and
stronger predictor
thanmeasures
either IQ orofsocioeconomic
In well
before general,
individuals
enter the labor market and find that locus of control and self-esteem,
skills related to Conscientiousness, Openness to Experience, and Agreeableness are
two facets of Emotional Stability, predict wages ( Judge and Hurst, 2007; Drago, 2008;
associated with longer lives, whereas those related to Neuroticism are associated with shorter
Duncan and Dunifon, 1998). Table 1.11 presents results from the structural model of
51
For a recent study, see Friedman and Martin (2011).
Heckman,
52 Stixrud, and Urzua (2006), suggesting that standardized adolescent measures
The timing of the measurements of character relative to the outcomes varies by study.
of locus of control and self-esteem predict adult earnings to a similar degree as cognitive
26
ability. However, the effects vary across educational
levels. In general, their measure of
noncognitive ability (personality) affects wages to a similar degree across all education
levels, whereas cognitive ability tends to have little effect for GED recipients, high-school

1

lives.53 The magnitudes of the relationships vary across studies.

Hanushek_2011 978-0-444-53444-6 00001

Figure 7 Correlations of Mortality with Character, IQ, and Socioeconomic Status (SES)
Personality Psychology and Economics

113

0.30

0.25

Correlation

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0
SES

f0095

IQ

C

E/PE

N

A

Figure 1.18 Correlations of Mortality with Personality, IQ, and Socioeconomic Status (SES).

Notes: The
figure
represents results from a meta-analysis of 34 studies. Average effects (in the correlation
Source: Roberts
et al.
(2007).
metric)
low socioeconomic
status
(SES), low IQ,of low
Conscientiousness
(C), low
Notes: The
figureofrepresents
results from
a meta-analysis
34 studies.
Average effects
(inExtraversion/Positive
the correlation metric) of low
socioeconomic
status
(SES),
low IQ, low
Conscientiousness
(C), low(A)
Extraversion/Positive
(E/PE),
Neuroticism (N),
Emotion
(E/PE),
Neuroticism
(N),
and low Agreeableness
on mortality. Error Emotion
bars represent
standard
and low Agreeableness
(A) on
mortality.
bars represent
standard
errors.
The lengths of the studies represented vary
error. The lengths
of the
studies Error
represented
vary from
1 year to
71 years.
from 1 year to 71 years.
Source: Roberts, Kuncel, Shiner, Caspi, and Goldberg (2007).

p1495

Personality may affect health-related behavior, such as smoking, diet, and exercise.
For Big
example,
Goldberg, and
Vogt,Agreeableness
and Dubanoskiare
(2007)
that highofscores
Of the
Five,Hampson,
Conscientiousness
mostfind
predictive
criminality.
of teacher assessments of Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness during
Figure elementary
8 illustrates
that predict
in a sample
at-risk
youth, during
boys who
committed
severe
delinquent
school
overallofhealth
behaviors
midlife
(less smoking,
more
exercise, better self-rated health) and indirectly affect health through educational attainbehaviors
were
203 more than three quarters of a standard deviation lower in Agreeableness and
ment.
The effects that were statistically significant at the 5% level or less ranged from
0.06
for
the
of Extraversion
on physical
activity
0.12
Con-who had
Conscientiousness, effect
as measured
by mothers’
reports
at to
age
12 for
or the
13, effect
than ofboys
scientiousness on self-reported health status. Both the initial level and the growth in
hostility
(a facet of behaviors
Neuroticism)
school Robins,
predict cigarette,
alco- 1994).
minor or
no delinquent
upthroughout
to that ageelementary
(John, Caspi,
and Moffitt,
hol, and marijuana use in high school, and sociability (a trait related to Extraversion)
53
See Boyle, Williams, Mark, Brummett, Siegler, and Barefoot (2005); Friedman and Martin (2011); Kern
predicts drinking but not smoking (Hampson, Tildesley, Andrews, Luyckx, and
and Friedman (2008); Kubzansky, Sparrow, Vokonas, and Kawachi (2001); Martin, Friedman, and Schwartz
Mroczek,and
2010).
Fig. 1.19
illustrates,
Heckman,
(2006)
find .that
(2007); Mroczek
SpiroAs
(2007);
Schulz,
Bookwala,
Knapp, Stixrud
Scheier, and
and Urzua
Williamson
(1996)
their personality factor affects the probability of daily smoking for males. The gradient is
steepest at the high and low quantiles of the distribution.

fn1020

203

Conti, Heckman, and Urzua (2010a,b) and Heckman, Humphries, Urzua, and Veramendi (2011) present evidence
on the causal relationship between education and health, and also survey the previous literature on this question.

27

p1520

and Moffitt, 1994).
Much of the literature in criminology focuses on the effects of self-control on crime.
People with low self-control are “impulsive, insensitive, physical (as opposed to mental),
risk taking, short sighted, and nonverbal” (Gottfredson and Hirschi, 1990, p. 90).
Measures of self-control are associated with Big Five Conscientiousness (O’Gorman
and Baxter, 2002).
Several
studies have
confirmed that
is associated with
Figure
8 Juvenile
Delinquency
and self-control
the Big Five
criminal activity. In an international sample, controlling for basic demographics, a measure
Delinquents

0.5

Nondelinquents

Juvenile delinquency

0.4
Standard scores

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5
Extraversion

f0110

Agreeableness

Conscientiousness

Neuroticism

Openness

Figure 1.21 Juvenile Delinquency and the Big Five.

Source: John
et Delinquents
al. (1994). are those who have committed at least one of the following: breaking and entering,
Notes:
Notes: Delinquents
are those
who have
committed
at least one
of the
following:
strong-arming,
strong-arming,
or selling
drugs.
Nondelinquents
have
committed
at breaking
most oneand
of entering,
the following:
stealing or selling
drugs. Nondelinquents have committed no more than the following crimes: stealing at home, vandalism at home, or theft of
at home, vandalism at home, or theft of something less than $5. The y-axis reports mean differences in
something less than $5. The y-axis reports mean differences in standardized scores of the Big Five measures based on mothers’
standardized
scores
of the
Big Five
measures
based
on mother’s
reports.
The measures were taken at
reports. The
measures were
taken
at ages
12–13
and reflect
cumulative
delinquent
behavior.

ages 12–13 and reflect cumulative delinquent behavior.
Source: John, Caspi, Robins, and Moffitt (1994).

As with most studies in personality psychology, the evidence presented in Figures 5– 8
fn1030

205

This section summarizes the more comprehensive survey of the literature on personality and crime prepared by

does not Amanda
address
the
ofSection
causality;
that
is, do measured skills cause (rather than
Agan.
See question
Web Appendix
A7.2 for her
survey.
just predict) outcomes? Empirical associations are not a reliable basis for policy analysis.
As previously noted and summarized in Figure 1, multiple skills, effort, and acquired skills
generate performance in a given task. Many studies in personality psychology do not control
for all of the factors that produce performance on measured tasks. They equate measures
of outcomes with the skill being measured.54 This practice can lead to a substantial bias

in inference about the importance of any particular skill. Our survey of the intervention
literature in the next sections presents evidence on the causal relationship between skills and
outcomes.
54

Selecting measures and verifying them is part of the mysterious and inherently subjective process of
“construct validity” in psychology. For a discussion, see Borghans et al. (2008)

28

The Skills Needed for Success in the Labor Market55

4

Another perspective on the importance of character skills comes from surveys of employers
and workers. In 1991, the Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS)
conducted an extensive analysis of which skills workers needed in the American workforce.56
The Commission researched the literature, consulted with experts, and conducted detailed
interviews with workers and/or supervisors in 50 occupations. The interviews rated the importance of various skills in the context of illustrative tasks and tools on the job. Using these
sources, the Commission categorized necessary skills into basic skills, thinking skills, personal
qualities, and a set of workplace competencies. In addition to reading, writing, and math
skills, basic skills include listening and speaking. The thinking skills cover creative thinking,
decision making, problem solving, reasoning, and the ability to learn. SCANS specifies that
personal qualities include responsibility, self-esteem, sociability, self-management, integrity,
and honesty. SCANS identifies five groups of workplace competencies: the ability to allocate
resources (time, money, facilities), interpersonal skills (such as teamwork, teaching others,
leadership), the ability to acquire and to use information, the ability to understand systems,
and the ability to work well with technology.
Employer surveys reinforce the importance of skills that go well beyond academic skills.
In a survey of 3,200 employers in four large metropolitan areas conducted in the 1990s, employers reported that such personal qualities as responsibility, integrity, and self-management
are as important as or more important than basic skills (Holzer, 1997). In another employer
survey undertaken in the mid-1990s of 3,300 businesses (the National Employer Survey),
employers ranked attitude, communication skills, previous work experience, employer recommendations, and industry-based credentials above years of schooling, grades, and test
scores as part of the skills needed for success in the workplace (Zemsky, 1997).
Nonacademic skills are especially critical for entry level and hourly workers. Of employers
55

We have benefitted from the commentary of Robert Lerman in preparing this section. See Lerman
(2013).
56
Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (1992).

29

drawn from a national sample in the United States in 1996, 69% reported rejecting hourly
applicants because they lacked basic employability skills, such as showing up every day,
coming to work on time, and having a strong work ethic. This percentage is more than
double the percentage of rejecting applicants due to inadequate reading and writing skills.
Rejections for not passing a drug test were almost as common as rejections for lack of
literacy skills.57 In a 2007 survey of employers in Washington State, about 60% reported
difficulty in hiring. They experienced less difficulty finding workers with adequate reading,
writing, and math skills than with appropriate occupational, problem solving, teamwork,
communication, and adaptability skills as well as positive work habits and a willingness to
accept supervision.58
Evidence from the United Kingdom supports these findings. A 1998 survey of 4,000
employers found that the four skills found most lacking in 16 to 24-year-olds were technical
and practical skills, general communication skills, customer handling skills, and teamwork
skills.59 At the bottom of the list were numeracy and literacy skills. In a 2002 survey of 4,000
employers in the UK, 23% of employers reported a significant number of their staff were less
than fully proficient at their jobs. Skill shortfalls were most common in communication,
teamwork, other technical and practical skills, customer handling, and problem solving and
least common in numeracy and literacy.60
Consistent with these findings, the Confederation of British Industry defines employability as (1) values and attitudes compatible with the work, including a desire to learn, to
apply that learning, to improve, and to take advantage of change; (2) basic skills (literacy
and numeracy); (3) key skills (communication, application of numbers, information technology, improving one’s own learning and performance, working with others, problem solving)
sufficient for the needs of the work; (4) other generic skills such as modern language and
customer service skills; and (5) job-specific skills and the ability to manage one’s own career.
57

Barton (2006).
Washington Workforce Training Board (2008).
59
Westwood (2004).
60
Hillage, Regan, Dickson, and McLoughlin (2002).
58

30

An ethnographic approach provides some revealing examples of how skills are used in
context and how nonacademic skills are often developed and used as part of a “community
of practice”.61 In addition to formal knowledge, Nelsen (1997) points out that workplaces require not only formal knowledge, facts, principles, theories, and math and writing skills, but
also informal knowledge embodied in heuristics, work styles, and contextualized understanding of tools and techniques. In her revealing case study of auto repair workers, Nelsen argues
that social skills of new workers are very important for learning the informal knowledge of
experienced workers, as captured in stories, advice, and guided practice.

5

A Framework for Understanding Interventions

A variety of strategies have been advocated for promoting character and cognitive skills.
Different advocates press their favorite strategies. Policymakers have limited resources, so
it is important to identify which programs are most effective. The rate of return—the
per-period yield of an investment—provides a convenient and interpretable summary of the
efficacy of competing programs. An alternative to funding an early education program might
be to invest the resources in the stock market and to use the resources plus the accrued
interest to fund a program for adolescents.
In this section, we present a conceptual scheme for understanding the dynamics of skill
development.62 Figure 9 illustrates the basic idea. In this framework, cognitive and character
skills are produced by investments at different stages of the life cycle. Skills at birth depend
on prenatal investments and inherited traits. Skill formation at later ages depends on the
stock of skills acquired earlier as well as prior investments. For example, a child who has a
better attention span more easily acquires more cognitive skills from classroom instruction.
This concept is called self-productivity and is summarized by the motto “skills beget skills.”
Investments (parenting, environment, and schools) also affect skills. The efficacy of in61
62

Stasz (2001).
These ideas are formalized in Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2008); Cunha et al. (2010).

31

vestment is moderated by the stock of skills at any age. The benefits of an investment
depend on the current level of skills—a phenomenon that economists call static complementarity. More motivated children learn more. In addition, investment today increases the
stock of future skills, which in turn increases the return to future investments. Economists
call this phenomenon dynamic complementarity. This channel increases the returns to early
investments because it makes future investments more productive. For this reason, Cunha
et al. (2010) show that it is economically efficient to invest in the most disadvantaged young
children because it raises their payoffs from future investments. See Heckman and Mosso
(2013) for a more complete discussion of static and dynamic complementarity.
Figure 9 Framework for Understanding Skill Development

Prenatal

Inherited
Traits

Prenatal Investments

Skills

Birth

Skills

Childhood

Skills

Adulthood

Parenting,
Environment, School

Parenting,
Environment, School

Higher Education

Earnings

Crime

32

Health

This framework recognizes that different skills might be relatively easy to shape at different stages of the life cycle. Sensitive periods for a given skill are periods when investments are
relatively more productive. Critical periods for a particular skill are periods when investment
during any other period is not productive.
Figure 9 illustrates why understanding the effects attributable to specific interventions
is such a challenging task. Most of the empirical studies that we review only investigate the
interventions received in a slice of the life cycle. They do not connect the links or correct for
the effects of later investment in producing the outcomes attributed to early investments.

6

Summary of Empirical Evidence on the Efficacy of
Interventions

This section summarizes the empirical evidence from a variety of interventions ranging from
targeting prenatal infants to targeting young adults. In the subsequent sections, we discuss some of these programs in greater detail. In these discussions, we focus on programs
that have been well studied, have long-term follow-ups, have been widely adopted, or offer
unique insights. Descriptions and discussions of other programs can be found in the Web
Appendix.63
For three reasons, evaluating and comparing the evidence from intervention programs
is challenging. First, many interventions are only evaluated with short-term follow-ups,
which could lead to upward-biased estimates of returns if the benefits eventually dissipate
or to downward-biased estimates of the returns if the effects of the programs appear later
in life. Second, not all studies measure the same outcomes. Ideally, all studies would report
outcomes in terms of the rate of return of the program. Reported outcomes often differ
across studies. Many studies only consider the effect of an intervention on a few outcomes.
Without knowing the range of outcomes affected, it is difficult to calculate a rate of return.
63

See https://heckman.uchicago.edu/fostering_skills_appendix.

33

Third, many programs target specific demographic groups. Applying the findings from one
group to another might be problematic if groups differentially benefit from programs.
Table 2 summarizes the effects of each intervention discussed in this section. The table
displays information about the nature of the intervention, the quality of the evaluation,
the effects on later life outcomes, and estimates of the rate of return and cost-benefit ratio
when available. The squares in the “Components” columns indicate the extent to which the
program and the evaluation of it have the features defined in the table. The dots in the
“Effects on Outcomes” columns indicate the extent to which the program influenced skills
and outcomes. (The notes at the bottom of the table define the symbols and abbreviations
used.)
Three striking patterns emerge about the nature of the programs and the quality of
the available evaluations of them. First, as a group, early childhood and elementary school
programs have longer follow-ups. All of the early childhood or elementary school programs in
Table 2 have evaluations that follow participants for at least 10 years and many follow them
more than 20 years, whereas only two evaluations of adolescent programs follow participants
for at least 10 years (the longest is 12).
Second, early childhood programs tend to measure cognitive and character skills in addition to a variety of later-life outcomes, whereas many of the adolescent evaluations focus
solely on labor market outcomes. Because of these features of data availability, we can better understand the sources of the effects on adult outcomes of early childhood programs
by considering how these interventions produce skills. Due to the absence of measures of
skills for many adolescent interventions, understanding these programs requires examining
the curricula of the programs themselves, for example, whether the program seeks to foster
cognitive or character skills.
Third, selection into programs differs by the age of intervention. In most early childhood
evaluations, the programs first contact parents to participate and then parents opt into the
program. In contrast, in most adolescent evaluations, participants themselves chose to enter

34

the program.
Table 2 also suggests certain features of effective programs. Only very early interventions
(before age 3) improve IQ in a lasting way, consistent with the evidence that early childhood is
a critical period for cognitive development (see Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron, and Shonkoff,
2006). The most successful interventions target preschoolers and primary school children.
They improve later-life outcomes by developing character skills.
Programs that target adolescents have not been established to be as effective as programs
that target earlier ages, in part because there have been fewer long-term evaluations of them.
Several of the successful adolescent mentoring or residential programs improve labor market
and social outcomes, but have relatively short follow-ups. The two programs with the longest
follow-ups improve outcomes in the short run, but the benefits fade after a few years. These
programs alter participants’ environments and incentives during the intervention, which
could influence their behavior in the short term without having a lasting effect.
The most promising adolescent programs integrate aspects of work into traditional education. Such programs break down the rigid separation between school and work that
characterizes the American high school.
High schools create an adolescent society with values distinct from those of the larger
society and removed from the workplace.64 Even in affluent communities, the adolescent
society has an anti-academic, anti-achievement bias. It was not until 1940 that more than
half of each birth cohort graduated from high school.65 In earlier times, adolescents took
apprenticeships and jobs where they were supervised and mentored by adults. Mentoring involved teaching valuable character skills—showing up for work, cooperating with others, and
persevering on tasks. These skills could be fostered in high schools, but with the relaxation
of discipline in the schools, it is more difficult to do so.66
The apparent success of apprenticeship programs might arise in part from their cultivation
64

See Coleman (1961).
See Goldin and Katz (2008).
66
See Arum (2005).
65

35

of character skills. The attachment of a supervisor to an apprentice helps create character
in a version of the attachment bond between parent and child.67

7

Early-Life Interventions that Begin Before Formal
Schooling

This section discusses the most influential interventions listed in Table 2 that start before
children enroll in kindergarten. We divide the early interventions into two categories: (1)
infant programs and model preschools that target infants by directly providing cognitive and
socio-emotional stimulation to children, by instructing young mothers or by providing centerbased care to a specific population and (2) large-scale programs that have been implemented
in schools and are relatively less expensive than center-based care. Many early interventions
have successfully boosted cognitive skills, character skills, or both.
Given that there are more differences among evaluations than there are evaluations,
it is difficult to understand exactly why some programs are more successful than others.
Nevertheless, certain patterns emerge. Only programs that start before the age of 3 have
had lasting impacts on IQ. Some of the most successful programs have had no long-term
impact on IQ but have improved later-life outcomes by improving character skills. As a
general rule, large-scale programs have been less successful than smaller-scale programs, but
the large-scale programs differ from small-scale programs in important ways.

7.1

Infant Programs and Model Preschools

7.1.1

Nurse-Family Partnership

Evidence from the Nurse-Family Partnership (NFP) program shows how improving prenatal
conditions and early parenting can improve child skills and outcomes. NFP aims at first67

See Bowlby (1951); Sroufe (1997); Sroufe, Egeland, Carlson, and Collins (2005).

36

37

3–4
3,5
5–6

CPC
TEEP
STAR

14–15
14–15
14–15
13–16

16–18
16–24
18–24

SAS
STEP
QOP
Academies

ChalleNGe
Job Corps
Year-Up

1Y
1Y
1Y

5Y
2Y
5Y
4Y

1Y
7Y
3Y
2Y

6Y
5Y
6Y

2Y
2Y
4Y

2Y
2Y
2Y
2Y

2Y
5Y
3Y
5Y

Tar
g

et

Dropout
SES
SES

Schl, SES
Schl, SES
Schl
Schl, SES

SES
SES
Schl
Schl

SES
Behav
Crime

SES
SES
SES

SES
Health
SES, IQ
SES

SES
SES
Health
SES

Sel
ec

tion

Self
Self
Self

Schl
Self
Prgrm
Self

Self
Prgrm
Schl
Schl

Schl
Refer
Prgrm

Prnt
Prgrm
Prgrm

Prgrm
Prgrm
Prgrm
Prnt

Prgrm
Refer
Prgrm
Prgrm

p
Fol
low
-U

3Y
9Y
2Y

6Y
4Y
10Y
12Y

1Y
8Y
2Y
2Y

12Y
35Y
21Y

25Y
22Y
22Y

15Y
22Y
37Y
23Y

19Y
30Y
18Y
15Y

ple
Sam

1,200
15,300
200

430
4,800
1,070
1,460

960
180
45,070
261,420

19,320
510
610

1,290
260
11,000

170
160
120
4,170

640
90
640
110

IQ

Ho
me
He
alth
P
a
r
ent
al
O
n
Sit
e
Gro
up

Effects on Outcomes
Sch
ool
C
h
ara
cte
r
E
d
uca
tion
He
alth
Cri
me
E
a
r
nin
gs

Return/Benefits

6.4

6.2

18

7–10

2.66
0.22

0.42

0.9–3.0

1.0

3.1

0.9

10.8

7.1–12.2

2.9
3.8

Notes:
– Does not include intervention component.
– Includes intervention component.
– No effects.
– Positive effects.
– Weakly positive effects.
– Mixed effects
(either different studies find different results or only particular sub-populations benefited).
– Negative effects.“ ” – Not measured. “Age” – The age at which participants entered
the program. For programs that targeted grades, rather than ages, it was assumed that children entered kindergarten at ages 5–6 and the age range advanced one year for each
subsequent grade. “Duration” – Length of the treatment. In cases where the treatment length varied for participants, the longest duration was presented. “Target” – Population
that was targeted by the program. SES – socioeconomic status or disadvantage. Behav – Behavior. Schl – School Performance. Crime – local crime rates. IQ – low IQ. “Selection”
– The party that acted first in joining the sample. Prgrm – Evaluation program contacted participants. Refer – Other party referred participants to program. Prnt – Parent applied
to program. Self – Participant applied to program. Schl – School selected participants. “Follow-Up” – Duration of longest follow-up evaluation in years. “Sample” – Largest sample
size from the studies examined (rounded to nearest 10). “Home” – Included home visits. “Health” – Included a nutritional component. “Parental” – Involved parents. “On Site” –
Took place at an on site location. “Group” – Whether the intervention combined participants in groups. “IQ” – IQ score. “School” – school performance. “Character” – measured
character skills. “Education” – educational attainment. “Health” – health (including drug use). “Crime” – crime. “Earnings” – earnings or related outcomes. “Return” – Annual
rate of return. “Benefit/Cost” – Estimated benefits divided by costs.

10-16
11–12
13–15
14

BBBS
IHAD
EPIS
xl club

Adolescence

LA’s Best
CSP
SSDP

5–6
5–13
6–7

1
1–2
3
3

PCDC
JSS
Perry
Head Start

Elementary

<0
0
0
0

NFP
ABC
IHDP
FDRP

Early

Program

e

Ag

ion
rat

Du

Components
urn

Participant/Evaluation Characteristics

Ret

Table 2 Summary of Effects for Main Interventions

Ben
efi
Co t
st

38

Sources: NFP – Eckenrode, Campa, Luckey, Henderson, Cole, Kitzman, Anson, Sidora-Arcoleo, and Olds (2010); Kitzman, Olds, Cole, Hanks,
Anson, Arcoleo, Luckey, Knudtson, Henderson, and Holmberg (2010); Olds (2006); Olds, Kitzman, Cole, Hanks, Arcoleo, Anson, Luckey, Knudtson,
Henderson, Bondy, and Stevenson (2010); Olds, Kitzman, Cole, Robinson, Sidora, Luckey, Henderson, Hanks, Bondy, and Holmberg (2004); Olds,
Kitzman, Hanks, Cole, Anson, Sidora-Arcoleo, Luckey, Henderson, Holmberg, Tutt, Stevenson, and Bondy (2007); Olds, Robinson, Pettitt, Luckey,
Holmberg, Ng, Isacks, Sheff, and Henderson (2004). ABC – Breitmayer and Ramey (1986); Heckman, Moon, and Pinto (2012); Temple and Reynolds
(2007). IHDP – McCormick, Brooks-Gunn, Buka, Goldman, Yu, Salganik, Scott, Bennett, Kay, Bernbaum, Bauer, Martin, Woods, Martin, and
Casey (2006). FDRP – Lally, Mangione, and Honig (1987). PCDC – Besharov, Germanis, Higney, and Call (2011); Bridgeman, Blumenthal, and
Andres (1981); Johnson and Walker (1991). JSS – Gertler, Heckman, Pinto, Zanolini, Vermeersch, Walker, Chang, and Grantham-McGregor (2013);
Grantham-McGregor, Powell, Walker, and Himes (1991); Walker, Chang, Powell, and Grantham-McGregor (2005); Walker, Chang, Powell, Simonoff,
and Grantham-McGregor (2007). Perry – Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz (2010a); Heckman et al. (2010b, 2013). Head Start –
Carneiro and Ginja (2012); Currie and Thomas (1995); Deming (2009); Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002); Ludwig and Miller (2007); Westat (2010).
CPC – Niles, Reynolds, and Nagasawa (2006); Reynolds (1994); Reynolds and Temple (1998); Reynolds, Temple, Ou, Arteaga, and White (2011);
Reynolds, Temple, Robertson, and Mann (2002); Reynolds, Temple, White, Ou, and Robertson (2011). TEEP – Kagitcibasi, Sunar, and Bekman
(2001); Kagitcibasi, Sunar, Bekman, Baydar, and Cemalcilar (2009). STAR – Chetty, Friedman, Hilger, Saez, Diane, and Yagan (2011); Krueger
(2003). LA’s BEST – Goldschmidt and Huang (2007); Huang, Gribbons, Kim, Lee, and Baker (2000); Huang, Kim, Marshall, and Pérez (2005).
CSP – McCord (1978). SSDP – Hawkins, Catalano, Kosterman, Abbott, and Hill (1999); Hawkins, Kosterman, Catalano, Hill, and Abbott (2005,
2008). BBBS – Tierney, Baldwin-Grossman, and Resch (1995). IHAD – Kahne and Bailey (1999). EPIS – Martins (2010). XL Club – Holmlund
and Silva (2009). SAS – Johnson (1999). STEP – Walker and Vilella-Velez (1992). QOP – Rodrı́guez-Planas (2010, 2012). Academies – Kemple
and Snipes (2000); Kemple and Willner (2008). ChalleNGe – Bloom, Gardenhire-Crooks, and Mandsager (2009); Millenky, Bloom, and Dillon
(2010); Millenky, Bloom, Muller-Ravett, and Broadus (2011). Job Corps – Schochet, Burghardt, and Glazerman (2001); Schochet, Burghardt, and
McConnell (2008). Year Up – Roder and Elliot (2011).

time, low-income, unmarried, and/or adolescent mothers without previous births. In the
program, nurses visit young mothers from the first or second trimester of the mother’s
pregnancy until the second birthday of her first child. The program encourages mothers to
reduce smoking, teaches mothers how to care for their children, and helps mothers to pursue
education and find jobs. It was introduced, as a pilot, at Elmira, New York. Later, the
program was introduced at Memphis, Tennessee, and Denver, Colorado.68 At Elmira and
Memphis, mothers receive around 30 to 35 visits of around 75–90 minutes each. By 2006, it
operated in 26 states and served more than 20,000 families each year. It is evaluated by the
method of randomized assignment (Howard and Brooks-Gunn, 2009; Olds, 2006).
NFP reduces risky behaviors of mothers and their children (see Table 3). Children exhibit
persistently higher IQ scores through age 6 (Olds, Kitzman, Cole, Robinson, Sidora, Luckey,
Henderson, Hanks, Bondy, and Holmberg, 2004).69 At age 12, the children in the treatment
group have lower rates of substance abuse and exhibit lower levels of internalizing behavior
(e.g. anxiety, depression, and withdrawal).70 When the children are 12, mothers are much
less dependent on welfare.71 By age 19, children are less likely to engage in crime.72,73
Importantly, the program improves measures of criminal activity, even though there are
only weak effects on achievement test scores or grades in the long run. This suggests that
the program works by improving character skills.
68
Our discussion will focus on the effects of the program up to age 12 for the Memphis sample and the
effects at age 19 for the Elmira sample.
69
Measured by the mental processing domain of the Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (KABC).
70
Kitzman et al. (2010). The measure of internalizing behavior is based on self-reports from the Achenbach
Child Behavior Checklist (Achenbach and Rescorla, 2001). See Almlund et al. (2011) for a discussion of the
relationship between internalizing behavior and the Big Five.
71
Olds et al. (2010).
72
Eckenrode et al. (2010).
73
Illustrated by the strong discrepancy in Table 3 between estimates for “Ever Arrested” versus “Arrested
in Last Year.”

39

Table 3 Summary of Effects of the Nurse-Family Partnership

Outcome

Treatment

Control

Treatment
Effect

Age 6(1)
Vocabulary Skills(ES)
Internalizing Disorders(%)
Externalizing Disorders(%)

14.7
20.2

0.17∗∗∗
−2.1∗∗∗
−2.8∗∗∗

12.4

0.09∗∗∗
−0.03∗∗∗
3.6∗∗∗

24.9
22.1
19.7
1.7
3.1
8772

20.8
30.9
17.8
5.1
3.1
9797

0.08∗∗∗
1.09∗∗∗
4.1∗∗∗
−8.8∗∗∗
1.9∗∗∗
−3.4∗∗∗
0.0∗∗∗
−1025∗∗∗

21.3
8.2
48.7
70.6
71.4

37.4
5.5
51.9
74.5
68.3

−16.1∗∗∗
2.7∗∗∗
−3.2∗∗∗
−3.9∗∗∗
3.1∗∗∗

12.6
17.4

Age 9(2)
GPA(ES)
Antisocial Behavior(%)
Grade Retention(%)
Age 12

16.0

(3)

GPA
Achievement Tests(a)
Grade Retention(%)
Internalizing Disorders(%)(b)
Externalizing Disorders(%)(c)
Used Substance Last 30 Days(%)
Ever Arrested(%)
Welfare Benefits Mother(d)
Age 19(4)
Ever Arrested(%)
Arrested in Last Year(%)
Illicit Drug Use(%)
Has HS Diploma(%)
Economically Productive(%)(e)

Notes: The estimates are coefficients from regressions that control for sample member characteristics. %
refers to treatment effects in terms of changes in prevalence in outcome variable in percentage points. ES
indicates Effect Size, reporting the treatment effect in standard deviations of the outcome variable. The
Age 6–12 estimates come from the Memphis site. The Age 19 estimates come from the Elmira site. (a)
Is based on group reading and math achievement test scores and is in percentile units. (b) Uses student
self-reports on domains such as anxiety, depression, somatization, and withdrawal to assess if students pass
a clinical threshold, based on the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist (Achenbach and Rescorla, 2001).
(c) Uses student, teacher, and parent reports on domains such as conduct problems, aggression, and total
problems to assess if students pass a clinical threshold, based on the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist.
(d) Measures the average yearly receipt of welfare during the child’s first 12 years of life, in US$. (e) Measures
if someone is involved in education, a job, the military, or job training.
∗∗
Attains 5% significance level.
Sources:(1) The estimates at Age 6 come from Olds et al. (2004). (2) The estimates at Age 9 come from
Olds et al. (2007). (3) The estimates at Age 12 come from Kitzman et al. (2010). (4) The estimates at Age
19 come from Eckenrode et al. (2010).

40

7.1.2

Jamaican Study

Many childhood programs have been introduced in less developed countries. The Jamaican
Supplementation Study was one of the few with a long-term follow-up.74 This randomized
program consisted of a two-year nutritional and stimulation program for stunted children
(low height for age), aged 9-24 months at the start of the program. Participants either
received supplementation (milk formula), stimulation (encouraged mother to play with kids
in an effective manner), or both (Grantham-McGregor et al., 1991).
In general, the stimulation intervention outperformed the supplementation intervention
(see Table 4). Both interventions improved early cognitive development in the short-term,
but only the stimulation intervention improved cognitive and character skills in the long
run (Gertler et al., 2013; Grantham-McGregor et al., 1991). As with the NFP program, the
stimulation program improved internalizing behavior (Walker et al., 2005). The stimulation
intervention improved educational attainment and earnings. The effects on migration and
earnings at age 22 are substantial (Gertler et al., 2013).75

74

Most programs lack long-term follow-ups (even beyond age 10), or any follow-up at all, and few employ
methods of random assignment. Short-term effects are generally positive; intervention leads to better cognitive skills and, in most cases, lower grade retention in the early years of primary school. For an overview,
see Engle, Fernald, Alderman, Behrman, O’Gara, Yousafzai, Cabral de Mello, Hidrobo, Ulkuer, Ertem,
and Iltus (2011); Grantham-McGregor, Cheung, Cueto, Glewwe, Richter, and Strupp (2007); GranthamMcGregor et al. (1991); Jolly (2007); Lake (2011); Myers (1992); Walker, Wachs, Grantham-McGregor,
Black, Nelson, Huffman, Baker-Henningham, Chang, Hamadani, Lozoff, Meeks Gardner, Powell, Rahman,
and Richter (2011); Walker et al. (2005); Walker, Chang, Vera-Hernández, and Grantham-McGregor (2011);
Walker, Wachs, Gardner, Lozoff, Wasserman, Pollitt, Carter, and The International Child Development
Steering Group (2007); Young (1996) Engle, Black, Behrman, Cabral de Mello, Gertler, Kapiriri, Martorell,
Eming Young, and The International Child Development Steering Group (2007).
75
The supplementation program might have been ineffective in the long run because the supplement was
relatively weak, contained few micronutrients, and had no fortified formula. Some of the interventions referred
to in Myers (1992) and Young (1996) also reported stronger effects of stimulation over supplementation.

41

Table 4 Summary of Treatment Effects from the Jamaican Study

Outcome

Supplementation

Stimulation

0.76∗∗∗

0.91∗∗∗

−0.03∗∗∗
0.04∗∗∗
−0.05∗∗∗
−0.05∗∗∗

0.58∗∗∗
0.51∗∗∗
0.50∗∗∗
0.66∗∗∗
0.39∗∗∗
0.22∗∗∗

Age 2(1)
Mental Development(ES)

(a)

Age 17–18(2)
Full Scale IQ(ES)
Performance IQ(ES)
Verbal IQ(ES)
Reading Score(ES)(b)
Internalizing Behavior(ES)
Externalizing Behavior(ES)
Age 20–22(3)
0.66∗∗∗
0.14∗∗∗
0.33∗∗∗
8.0∗∗∗

Years of Education
Currently in Education(ES)
Log Earnings of Last Job
Employment(%)

Notes: The estimates are coefficients from regressions that control for sample member characteristics.
Grantham-McGregor et al. (1991) and Walker et al. (2005) test and do not reject the hypothesis
that “stimulation only” and “supplementation only” treatment effects add to produce the “both”
treatment effect. We report the effects of separate treatment streams: “stimulation only” and
“supplementation only.” Gertler et al. (2013) do not use the supplementation group at all and pool
the stimulation and “both” groups into a single treatment group. % refers to treatment effects in
terms of changes in prevalence in outcome variable in percentage points. ES indicates Effect Size,
reporting the treatment effect in standard deviations of the outcome variable. (a) Assessed with
Griffiths Mental Development Scales (Griffiths, 1954). The values have been divided by the standard
deviation of the control group. (b) The reading score is based on the sentence completion portion
of the Group reading test 2, revised. The effect is divided by the standard deviation of the control
group.
∗
10% significance;∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.
Sources: (1) The estimates at Age 2 come from Grantham-McGregor et al. (1991). (2) The estimates
at Age 17–18 come from Walker et al. (2005) and Gertler et al. (2013). (3) The estimates at Age
20–22 come from Gertler et al. (2013).

42

7.1.3

Perry Preschool Program

Evaluations of the Perry Preschool program provide some of the most compelling evidence
that character skills can be boosted in ways that produce adult success. The Perry Preschool
program enriched the lives of 3- and 4-year-old low-income black children with initial IQs
below 85 at age three.76 They attended 2.5 hours of center-based preschool five days a week
for two years. In addition, home visits promoted parent-child relationships. The program
ended after two years of enrollment, and both treatment and control groups entered the same
school.
Participants were taught social skills in a daily “plan-do-review” sequence in which children first planned a task, executed it, and then reviewed it with teachers and fellow students.
They learned to work with others when problems arose.77 The program was evaluated by
the method of random assignment.
The program did not improve IQ scores in a lasting way. Figure 10 shows that, by age
10, treatment and control groups had the same average IQ scores. Many critics of early
childhood programs seize on this finding and related evidence to dismiss the value of early
intervention studies.
76

We draw on the analysis of Heckman et al. (2010a,b, 2013).
Sylva (1997) describes the Perry program as a program that fosters character skills. It has features in
common with the Tools of the Mind intervention discussed below. See Bodrova and Leong (2001) for the
Tools of the Mind curriculum. See Heckman and Pinto (2013) for a discussion of the Perry curriculum and
the Tools of the Mind curriculum.
77

43

Hanushek_2011 978-0-444-53

Figure 10 Perry Preschool Program: IQ, by Age and Personality
TreatmentPsychology
Group and Economics
100
95.5
95

94.9
91.3

91.7

IQ

90
85
80

86.3
79.6

83.3

87.1

88.1

87.7

86.9

86.8

83.5

84.6

Treatment group

78.5

Control group

75
Entry

85

4

5

7

6

8

9

10

Age

Figure 1.1 Perry Preschool Program: IQ, by Age and Treatment Group.
Source: Cunha et al. (2006) and Heckman and Masterov (2007), based on data provided by the High Scope
Notes: IQ
measured on the Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scale (Terman and Merrill, 1960). The test was
Foundation.
administered
entry
at each Intelligence
of the ages
indicated.
Notes: at
IQ program
measured on
the and
Stanford-Binet
Scale
(Terman and Merrill, 1960). The test was
administered
at
program
entry
and
at
each
of
the
ages
indicated.
Source: Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006) and Heckman and Masterov (2007) based on
data provided by the High Scope Foundation.

Nevertheless, the program improved outcomes for both boys and girls, resulting in a
11
traits ofstatistically
the participants
improved
in aannum
lasting
chapter is
significantwere
rate ofbeneficially
return of around
7%–10% per
for way.
both boysThis
and girls
about those traits.
(see Heckman et al., 2010b). These returns are in the range of the post-World War II, prePersonality psychologists mainly focus on empirical associations between their mea2008 meltdown stock market returns to equity in the U.S. labor market, estimated to be
sures of
personality traits and a variety of life outcomes. Yet for policy purposes, it is
78
6.9% to
perknow
annum.mechanisms
important
of causation to explore the viability of alternative poli12
cies. We
use economic
theory
to (2013)
formalize
personality
psychology
Heckman,
Pinto, and
Savelyev
show the
thatinsights
the Perryoftreatment
effects
arise pri- and
to craftmarily
models
that are useful for exploring the causal mechanisms that are needed for
from lasting changes in character skills, not from changes in IQ. Figure 11 shows
policy analysis.
histograms of measures of character skills for the treatment and control groups. The treatWe interpret personality as a strategy function for responding to life situations. Personment groups
bothother
gendersinfluences,
improved their
teacher-reported
externalizing
behavior,
skill
ality traits,
along ofwith
produce
measured
personality
as thea output
of
relatedstrategy
to Agreeableness
and Conscientiousness.
Forpsychologists
girls, the program
improved Open- of the
personality
functions.
We discuss how
usealsomeasurements
performance
of persons
on tasks
or in motivation).
taking actions
traits and
ness to Experience
(proxied
by academic
Figureto11identify
also showspersonality
that the program
cognitive traits. We discuss fundamental identification problems that arise in applying
improved scores on the California Achievement Test (CAT), even though it did not have a
their procedures
to infer traits.
78
See DeLong and Magin (2009).
Many economists, especially behavioral economists, are not convinced about the
predictive validity, stability, or causal status44of economic preference parameters or personality traits. They believe, instead, that the constraints and incentives in situations

lasting effect on IQ. This evidence is consistent with the evidence summarized in Figures 2
and 3 showing that achievement test scores depend strongly on character skills (see Borghans
et al., 2008; Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman, and Meijers, 2009). Achievement tests measure
general knowledge. The acquisition of general knowledge (crystallized intelligence) depends
on persistence, curiosity, and focus.

45

Figure 11 Histograms of Indices of Noncognitive Skills and CAT Scores

Control Group

Treatment Group
.8

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Control Group

Treatment Group
.5
.4
.3
.1
0

0

.1

.2

.3

density

.4

.5

.6

(d) Academic Motivation

.6

(c) Academic Motivation

.2

density

.6
0

.2

.4

density

.6
0

.2

.4

density

.8

1

(b) Externalizing Behavior

1

(a) Externalizing Behavior

1

2

3

4

5

1

(e) CAT Control Group

2

3

4

5

(f) CAT Treatment Group

.04

density

.02

.04

0

0

.02

density

.06

.06

.08

.08

(Rank in Terms of Position in the National Distribution)

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

percentile

20

40

60

80

100

percentile

Source: Heckman et al. (2013).
Notes: Indices for Externalizing Behavior and Academic Motivation are based on items of the Pupil Behavior
Inventory (PBI), teacher ratings of student behavior. The units are expressed in terms of standard deviations.
The scale on “Externalizing Behavior” is normalized so that a higher score corresponds to better behavior.
The PBI includes whether the student disrupts classroom. “CAT” is the California Achievement Test score
expressed in percentiles of the general population distribution of the scores. The one-sided p-values for
difference in means are 0.001, 0.043, and 0.000 for Externalizing Behavior, Academic Motivation, and CAT
scores, respectively. Histograms are based on the pooled sample of males and females.

46

7.1.4

Abecedarian Program

The Abecedarian (ABC) program was another program aimed at disadvantaged black children. It started earlier, lasted much longer, and was much more intensive than the Perry
program, combining a preschool intervention that started when children were as young as 6
weeks old with school-age treatment through grade three.79 The preschool component was
full-day child care five days per week, 50 weeks a year. The curriculum focused on a series
of “educational games” that emphasized language, emotional development, and the development of cognitive skills. It also had a medical and nutritional component.80 For grades
one through three, the curriculum was tailored to the individual strengths of the students.
During this phase, teachers and parents interacted on a bi-weekly basis.
In contrast to Perry, ABC led to lasting improvements in IQ.81 For girls, the program
improved IQ through age 21 (see Figure 12). The effect for boys was positive but was less
precisely estimated. Girls and boys also scored better on achievement tests. ABC likely
improved IQ because it started at an earlier age than Perry. Very early childhood appears
to be a critical period for shaping IQ.
As with Perry, the benefits of the ABC program differ across genders. For girls, the
program improved educational attainment, reduced participation in criminal activity, decreased substance abuse, and improved internalizing and externalizing behavior. Like the
Perry program, ABC improved employment and health for males and produced substantial
improvements in character skills.82
79

It is easy to exaggerate the difference in intensity between the Perry program and the ABC program.
While the ABC program starts earlier and spends more time each day with the child, the amount of time
per day spent on essentially the same type of learning activities is very similar at ages 3 and 4. See Griffin,
Heckman, and Moon (2013).
80
See Campbell, Pungello, Miller-Johnson, Burchinal, and Ramey (2001); Campbell, Ramey, Pungello,
Sparling, and Miller-Johnson (2002).
81
We report on the treatment effects of the preschool component from Heckman et al. (2012).
82
Campbell, Conti, Heckman, Moon, and Pinto (2013) report substantial beneficial effects of the program
on adult health for both genders.

47

Figure 12 Cognitive Tests by Gender and Daycare Treatment Status
(a) Females
120
115
110

Treatment

105
100
95
90

Control

85

Age
0 5 0.75
15 2
0 25 0.5
3 5 4 4.5
45 5
65 7
0 75 1 1.5
0.25
3 3.5
6 6.5
8
12 15 21
Treatment
96.4 111.6111.3113.0110.4 98.3 102.0104.7100.1101.6102.7101.5 99.5 97.5 99.0 96.5 92.7 90.3
Control
97.7 101.7109.9106.0 94.8 86.7 87.7 95.5 92.8 92.6 96.3 96.1 93.4 91.7 93.1 89.3 87.7 83.7
Treatment + SD 98.29114.2114.2115.4112.7100.2104.4106.7102.0103.5104.8104.7102.4100.1101.798.7395.4592.52
Treatment - SD 94.55109.0108.4110.6108.196.3399.60102.798.1399.56100.598.1596.5194.8396.2294.3490.0088.12
Control + SD 100.4104.3112.7108.696.7988.3090.0597.4294.9894.9098.7097.9895.2694.4294.8891.1990.6385.57
Control - SD 95.0199.01107.1103.392.7385.0485.2993.6190.6690.3493.8094.2591.4589.0491.3187.3384.8581.82
80

(b) Males
120
115
110
105

Treatment

100
95
90

Control

85

Age

80

5 0.75
15 2
0 25 00.5
3 5 4 4.5
45 5
65 7
0 75 1 1.5
0.25
3 3.5
6 6.5
8
12 15 21
Treatment
94.4 103.6106.6111.2108.8 97.0 101.7102.1102.1101.2101.7106.0 99.5 99.0 97.6 93.8 96.9 87.2
Control
94.9 102.0105.0106.1 95.3 87.6 89.5 93.9 90.9 93.6 93.6 95.2 93.7 92.6 93.5 93.8 93.2 86.6
Treatment + SD 96.90105.9109.3113.7111.298.89103.5103.6103.7102.6103.2109.1101.3101.099.3695.1998.6888.92
Treatment - SD 91.93101.1103.8108.7106.395.1699.80100.5100.399.74100.0102.897.7496.8195.9092.3295.0985.54
Control + SD 97.50104.1108.6108.597.8489.4691.8296.1693.1795.8096.2599.0396.2895.3096.2496.1295.8388.37
Control - SD 92.2899.96101.4103.792.7385.8287.2791.6288.5391.3691.0291.2991.2089.8990.7091.4790.5584.77

Source: Heckman et al. (2013).
Notes: All the cognitive tests have been standardized to population mean of 100 and standard deviation of
15. The measures used in this figure are Bayley Mental Development Index at age 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, and 1.5;
Stanford Binet Intelligence Scale at age 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6; McCarthy Index at age 3.5, 4.5, and 7; WPPSI IQ
Score at age 5; WISC-R Intelligence Scale at age 6.5, 8, 12, and 15; WAIS-R Adult Intelligence Scale at age
21.

48

7.2
7.2.1

Large-Scale Infant and Young Child Programs
Head Start

The Head Start program receives considerable attention both in the evaluation literature
and in public discussion. Head Start children are eligible for enrollment from ages three to
five, although they generally enter at age four and receive one year of treatment. In addition
to a center-based (preschool) intervention, Head Start includes medical services and parental
assistance (Ludwig and Miller, 2007). Its implementation differs greatly across sites, making
it difficult to evaluate its overall effectiveness (Deming, 2009). Parental participation was
not mandatory, and there is some evidence that many do not participate.83
There have been no long-term evaluations of Head Start based on randomized assignment.
Instead, most evaluations of Head Start compare siblings with different enrollment statuses84
or use regression discontinuity designs.85 Empirical evidence on Head Start is mixed. Many
studies find that Head Start improves IQ scores and achievement test scores, but that the
improvements fade by age 10 (Deming, 2009; Ludwig and Miller, 2007). For some subgroups,
there is evidence of persistent gains in test scores and reductions in retention rates.86 Garces
et al. (2002) find that Head Start improves outcomes for educational attainment for whites
and reduces criminality for blacks, whereas Deming (2009) finds that Head Start improves
educational attainment for blacks.
A short term experimental study by Westat (2010) based on randomized assignment offers
a more pessimistic view. The study finds that most positive impacts on achievement tests87
83

Schumacher (2003)
For example, Deming (2009); Garces et al. (2002).
85
For example, Carneiro and Ginja (2011); Ludwig and Miller (2007).
86
Deming (2009) reports persistent gains for males and those with higher ability mothers as measured
by summary test score that includes the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), Peabody Individual
Achievement Math (PIATMT), and Reading Recognition (PIATRR). Retention rates were lower for boys,
blacks, and students with low maternal AFQT.
87
Including the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test and several batteries of the Woodcock-Johnson III test.
84

49

and socio-emotional development88 fade by first grade. This evaluation likely underestimates
the true program effects. Many members of the control group joined the program at sites
other than where they initially applied or were enrolled in other childhood programs that
were more intensive than Head Start.

7.2.2

Chicago CPC

The Chicago Child–Parent Center (CPC) is an apparently successful large-scale preschool
program. It is directed toward disadvantaged, predominantly black, inner-city children in
Chicago. The program provides a half- or full-day preschool program for 3- and 4-year-olds.
The program was designed to develop basic reading, writing, and math skills. In contrast
to other large-scale programs, parents are required to visit the centers and receive advice on
good parenting behavior (Reynolds, 2000).
CPC has not been evaluated by the random assignment method. All evaluations are based
on samples of children attending CPC kindergarten matched to “comparable” children attending non-CPC kindergarten. Based on these methods, the program appears to improve
education and reduce criminal behavior (see Table 5). Although it is difficult to tell what
causes the improvement in adult outcomes, some evidence suggests that boosts in character
play a role. At age 13, the participants have higher levels of social and emotional competence. The program also improves achievement test scores (Iowa Tests of Basic Skills),89 but
improvements in character can lead to improvements in achievement tests without affecting
IQ, as was the case with the Perry program.
CPC might have been more successful than other similar programs, like Head Start,
because it encouraged parental involvement. Parents are induced to visit the centers, and
the staff teaches them various forms of stimulative play that they can do at home and assists
88
Including parent- and teacher-reported measures of aggression, hyperactivity, withdrawn behavior, and
total problem behavior. They use several test batteries, including the Achenbach Classroom Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach and Rescorla, 2001) and the Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention (ASPI;
Lutz, Fantuzzo, and McDermott, 2000).
89
Hieronymus, Lindquist, and Hoover (1980).

50

parents interested in pursuing further education and seeking jobs (Reynolds, 2000).
Table 5 Summary of Effects from the Chicago Child-Parent Center
Outcome

Treatment

Control

Treatment
Effect

Age 13(1)
0.36∗∗∗
0.32∗∗∗
0.19∗∗∗
−0.17∗∗∗
−0.3∗∗∗

Reading Achievement(ES)
Math Achievement(ES)
Social and Emotional Competence(ES)
Problem Behavior(ES)
Grade Retention(ES)
Age 18–20(2)
Has HS Diploma(%)
Number of Arrests
Number of Violent Arrests

49.7
0.45
0.22

38.5
0.78
0.35

11.2∗∗∗
−0.33∗∗∗
−0.13∗∗∗

79.7
0.32
14.3
36.8

72.9
0.44
18.8
33.5

6.8∗∗∗
−0.12∗∗∗
−4.5∗∗∗
3.3∗∗∗

44.3
47.9
13.7
11,582

36.6
54.3
18.9
10,796

7.7∗∗∗
−6.4∗∗∗
−5.2∗∗∗
786∗∗∗

Age 22–26(3)
Has HS Diploma(%)
Number of Adult Felony Arrests
Substance Abuse(%)
Full-time Employment (%)
Age 28(4)
On Time HS graduation(%)
Any Adult Arrest(%)
Substance Abuse(%)
Annual Income($)

Notes: The estimates are coefficients from regressions that control for sample member characteristics.
Estimates apply to the pre-school part of CPC, excluding extended treatment. ES indicates Effect
Size, reporting the treatment effect in standard deviations of the outcome variable.
∗
10% significance;∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.
Sources: (1) The estimates at Age 13 come from Reynolds (1995) and Niles et al. (2006). (2)
The estimates at Age 18–20 come from Reynolds, Temple, Robertson, and Mann (2001). (3) The
estimates at Age 22–26 come from Reynolds et al. (2011). (4) The estimates at Age 28 come from
Reynolds et al. (2011).

51

8

Education and Interventions in Kindergarten and Elementary School

150 years ago, moral education, rooted in Protestant Christianity, was taught in American
public schools.90 Moral and character education disappeared from the curriculum of public
schools. However, moral education is featured in Catholic education. Some private schools
teach a secular version of moral education. For example, the Knowledge Is Power Program
(KIPP) Charter Schools enforce strict codes of discipline and give character training to their
participants (The KIPP Foundation, 2011). In contemporary society, discussions of moral
and character education provoke controversy even among its advocates. Scholars disagree
about the origins of character and morality and how they can best be fostered.91
In this section, we survey the evidence on secular versions of moral and character education. This does not reflect any antireligious bias on our part. Instead, it reflects the absence
of convincing evaluations of the effectiveness of character education/moral development programs in religious schools.

8.1

Targeted Character Interventions

Few well-evaluated interventions have targeted children in elementary school. Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, and Schellinger (2011) present a meta-analysis of 213 school-based
social and emotional learning programs. While their study suggests that these programs have
been successful, many of the evaluations they review suffer from substantial methodological
problems. For example, only 15% of the studies have follow-ups that last beyond 6 months.
For the studies with longer follow-up, the mean impact is positive and statistically signif90

See the discussions in Heckman and Kautz (2014a) and Kaestle (1984).
The conceptualizations of morality and character differ in the literature. Character is usually viewed as
a skill acquired through habituation and practice. In its perfected state it becomes a gut reaction. Morality
is viewed as a consequence of conscious choices. Many dismiss discussions of morality and character out of
hand because of their religious connotations or because they suggest a prudish vision of society that does
not tolerate cultural pluralism. Lapsley and Yeager (2012) survey the controversies in the field, the curricula
available and evidence on their effectiveness.
91

52

icant. However, these follow-ups are still short compared to those for the Perry Preschool
program and ABC.92 Although these programs appear promising, evidence on their long-run
effectiveness is lacking.

8.1.1

The Seattle Social Development Project (SSDP)

Of all of the programs reported by Durlak et al. (2011), the Seattle Social Development
Project (SSDP) has been evaluated the most thoroughly. The program targeted public
elementary schools in high-crime areas of Seattle. The full program lasted from first grade
through sixth grade.
The program emphasized attachment between children and their parents and teachers.
Throughout elementary school, the participants’ teachers received five days of training per
year that included proactive classroom management, interactive teaching, and cooperative learning. The first-grade teachers received additional lessons based on the Cognitive
Problem-Solving curriculum, which teaches children to resolve conflicts with peers (Shure
and Spivack, 1988). In first and second grade, parents were offered a seven-session course
on behavioral management training.93 In second and third grade, parents were offered a
four-session course to support their children’s academic achievement.94 Finally, in fifth and
sixth grade, parents were offered a five-session course designed to reduce drug use.95 Parents
of 43% of the children participated in parenting classes.96
The program improved a variety of long-run outcomes. Table 6 shows that SSDP improved grades and behavior during adolescence. At age 21, participants were 10 percentage
points more likely to have graduated from high school (or have earned an equivalency de92

The largest federal study to date on character education programs failed to find evidence for improvements in behavior or academic performance (see Social and Character Development Research Consortium,
2010).
93
The course followed the “Catch ’Em Being Good” curriculum (Hawkins, Von Cleve, and Catalano Jr,
1991).
94
The course consisted of four sessions that followed the “How to Help Your Child Succeed in School”
curriculum (Abbott, O’Donnell, Hawkins, Hill, Kosterman, and Catalano, 1998).
95
The course followed the “Preparing for the Drug (Free) Years” curriculum (Haggerty, Kosterman,
Catalano, and Hawkins, 1999).
96
Hawkins et al. (1999).

53

gree). By age 24, this effect faded, but this likely occurred because members of the control
group earn GED certificates.97 GED certificates do not confer the same benefits as a traditional high school diploma.98 By ages 24 and 27, the participants were 12 percentage points
more likely to earn an associate’s degree. The treatment group had higher earnings at ages
24 and 27, although treatment effects on income are not precisely determined. The program
improved self-efficacy at age 21 and 24 but did not have a statistically significant effect on
achievement test scores. The program improved mental health in the long run. Like many
other programs, if one judged it solely on the basis of achievement tests, SSDP would be
unsuccessful. Considering meaningful life outcomes and character outcomes presents a far
more positive picture.
97
98

Few people earn a traditional high school degree between age 21 and 24.
See Heckman, Humphries, and Kautz (2014a) and the literature they review.

54

Table 6 Summary of Treatment Effects from the Seattle Social Development Project
Age
(h)

Outcome

Age 18

GPA
CAT(ES)(a)
Grade Repetition(%)
Dropout(%)
School Misbehavior(b)
Violent Crime(%)
Ever Arrested(%)
Arrested past year(%)
Smoking(%)
Pregnancy(%)
Anxiety(%)(c)
Depression(%)(c)
High School Graduate/GED(%)
More than 2 Years of College(%)
Self-efficacy(d)
Associate’s Degree(%)
Bachelor’s Degree(%)
Substance Abuse Index(e)
Mental Health Disorder Index(f )
Income(in thousands)(g)

0.24∗∗∗
0.05∗∗∗
−8.7∗∗∗
−7.3∗∗∗
−1.41∗∗∗
−11.4∗∗∗
−6.0∗∗∗
−0.7∗∗∗
−9.3∗∗∗

(i)

Age 24(j)

Age 27(j)

−2.0∗∗∗

1.0∗∗∗

1.0∗∗∗

−9.0∗∗∗

−8.0∗∗∗

6.0∗∗∗

6.0∗∗∗

0.13∗∗∗
12.0∗∗∗
7.0∗∗∗
3.0∗∗∗
−9.0∗∗∗
3.51∗∗∗

−0.01∗∗∗
12.0∗∗∗
6.0∗∗∗
−3.0∗∗∗
−11.0∗∗∗
3.12∗∗∗

Age 21

∗∗∗

−2.0
−8.0∗∗∗
10.0∗∗∗
8.0∗∗∗
0.17∗∗∗

Notes: The estimates are coefficients from regressions that control for sample member characteristics. % refers to treatment effects in terms of changes in prevalence in outcome variable in
percentage points. ES indicates Effect Size, reporting the treatment effect in standard deviations of
the outcome variable. (a) CAT stands for California Achievement Test score and combines reading,
language, and mathematics subtests. It has been standardized based on the sample of ninth-grade
Seattle students. (b) Measures frequency of occurrence of skipping, cheating, and being sent from
class. (c) Anxiety, social phobia, and depression were measured using the DSM-IV (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994). The mental health disorder index groups this for anxiety, social
phobia, posttraumatic stress disorders, and major depressive episodes. (d) Measured as mean
score on six items concerning perceived future opportunities, on a scale of 1–4. (e) The Substance
Abuse Index measures dependence on substances (tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drugs) using DSM-IV
criteria. (f ) The Mental Health Disorder Index summarizes problems of anxiety, social phobia,
posttraumatic stress and depression, using DSM-IV criteria. (g) Refers to income from all sources,
before taxes. Includes zero-earners; income is top-coded at $200,000. (h) Hawkins et al. (1999). (i)
Hawkins et al. (2005). (j) Hawkins et al. (2008).
∗
10% significance; ∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.

55

8.1.2

Cambridge-Somerville Program

The Cambridge-Somerville Program is an example of a primary school program that harmed
participants. This five-year intervention targeted five to thirteen year-old boys with behavioral problems. The program was evaluated by the method of random assignment. The
treatment among participants differed, but included medical assistance, tutoring, access to
summer camps, and meetings with parents (McCord and McCord, 1959). A 30-year followup showed that participants exhibited worse drinking habits, more serious mental diseases,
more heart problems, higher blood pressure, (modestly) higher crime rates, and died younger
(McCord, 1978). Despite the negative effects, participants reported that they thought the
program helped them. McCord (1978) speculates that the program failed because it did not
create a sense of autonomy among participants. It gave intensive assistance to participants.
When the assistance was removed, they fell back into unfavorable behaviors. These were
aggravated by feelings of rejection and resentment for lack of support.

8.1.3

Project STAR

Project STAR provides evidence that higher quality kindergarten classes improve later-life
outcomes by improving character. From kindergarten through third grade, children and
teachers were randomly assigned to classrooms of differing class sizes. In an analysis that
builds on the work of Heckman et al. (2013), Chetty et al. (2011) examine the Project
STAR program and find that students placed in higher quality kindergarten classes tended
to have higher test scores at the end of kindergarten. They measure quality by peer average
performance on the Stanford Achievement Test. The effect on test scores faded over time.
By eighth grade, students in better kindergarten classes performed no differently on tests.
As with the Perry program, benefits emerge later in life. Children placed in better
kindergarten classrooms had significantly higher earnings in early adulthood. Furthermore,
kindergarten classroom quality also predicts better fourth- and eighth-grade behavior as
measured by teacher-assessed effort, initiative, interest in the class, and disruptive behavior.
56

In turn, measured behavior predicts earnings in adulthood, suggesting that improvement in
character skills is the main channel through which better kindergarten classrooms improve
earnings. Several studies suggest that smaller class sizes per se do not improve long-run
outcomes.99
The analyses of the Perry Preschool program and Project STAR highlight the importance
of long-term follow-ups and measuring outcomes that depend on character skills. If these
studies had only measured short-run improvements in cognitive ability, the programs would
appear to have had little effect.100

9

Education and Interventions Targeted Toward Adolescents and Young Adults

Compared to early-childhood programs, the evidence on adolescent programs is less abundant. There are, however, some well-documented and promising interventions. We divide
adolescent programs into four main categories: (1) mentoring programs for at-risk students;
(2) residential-based education programs for high school dropouts; (3) in-school, professional training; and (4) incentives for student performance. Several mentorship programs
and residential-based programs appear promising but have relatively short follow-ups. Somewhat similar programs with long follow-ups have had no long-term effects. These programs
appear to achieve their short-term effects by closely monitoring participants and removing
them from their usual environments.101 Programs that combine work and education are
more promising and have been shown to have lasting effects. A few programs that combine
long-term mentoring with financial support to attend college have improved educational
attainment but do not measure other outcomes.
99

Chetty et al. (2011); Hanushek (2003).
However, the estimates reported in Chetty, Friedman, Olsen, and Pistaferri (2011) appear to be implausibly large for the effect of one teacher in one class on the lifetime earnings of students.
101
These are called “incapacitation” effects in criminology.
100

57

Few programs that target adolescents have long-term follow-ups. As Table 2 shows, only
two evaluations of adolescent programs have follow-ups of at least 10 years, compared to 14
early-childhood and elementary school evaluations. Most adolescent intervention programs
tend to measure fewer outcomes and focus mainly on schooling and employment.
Our framework on the life-cycle development of skills provides an interpretation of the relative failure of adolescent programs. Early childhood is a sensitive period for the development
of both cognitive and character skills—prevention is more effective than remediation. Early
investments are productive because early skills promote the development of later skills and,
through dynamic complementarity, make later investments more productive. The finding
that short-term benefits fade away quickly in most adolescent interventions might indicate
the importance of incentives and situations in affecting behavior. As previously noted, several adolescent programs temporarily supervise and control the environments of adolescents,
thereby changing their incentives which beneficially, but temporarily, affects their behavior.

9.1
9.1.1

Adolescent Mentorship Programs
Quantum Opportunity Program

The Quantum Opportunity Program (QOP) is one of the few adolescent mentorship programs with a long-term follow-up. Rodrı́guez-Planas (2012) estimates the effect of the QOP
on labor market outcomes, educational attainment, and risky behaviors. The program was
an intensive after-school program that provided mentoring, educational services, and financial incentives during the four years of high school (plus one additional year in case students
fell behind). The program targeted low-performing high school students. QOP was evaluated
by the method of random assignment.
QOP was not successful in improving risky behaviors, and, if anything, caused harm
for males. Table 7 summarizes the effects of the program. Ten years after the start of the
program, males in the treatment group were more likely to have been recently arrested.
Males were more likely to have completed two years of college or training, but the increased
58

educational attainment did not translate into higher earnings in the follow-up period. Female
participants had better educational outcomes during the first follow-up near the end of the
program, but the control group caught up by the end of the three-year follow-up.
Because the program had many components, it is difficult to pinpoint why the program
failed. Rodrı́guez-Planas (2010) suggests four reasons. First, increasing awareness about the
consequences of risky behavior could have caused teens to become fatalistic; for example,
some might feel that drug addiction was inevitable. Second, the mentors might have served
as advocates when students were in trouble at school or with the law, lowering the cost of
engaging in problem behaviors. Third, students might have used their stipends to purchase
drugs or alcohol. Fourth, the program organized group activities among the participants,
which could have induced negative peer-effects.

59

Table 7 Summary of Treatment Effects from the Quantum Opportunity Program

Males
Outcome Since Assignment

Females

5 Y∗∗∗

7 Y∗∗∗

10 Y∗∗∗

5 Y∗∗∗

7 Y∗∗∗

10 Y∗∗∗

3.5∗∗∗
−2.2∗∗∗
0.7∗∗∗
0.7∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗

3.2∗∗∗
1.2∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
7.3∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
−6.5∗∗∗
−1.2∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗

2.9∗∗∗
1.7∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
7.4∗∗∗
7.7∗∗∗
0.3∗∗∗
−2.9∗∗∗
−1.3∗∗∗
230∗∗∗

7.4∗∗∗
1.2∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗

3.7∗∗∗
0.7∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
5.1∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗
0.8∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗

0.7∗∗∗
−0.7∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
2.0∗∗∗
6.2∗∗∗
2.4∗∗∗
5.5∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗
1,397∗∗∗

5.0∗∗∗
5.9∗∗∗
−8.3∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗

−10.1∗∗∗
−6.3∗∗∗
1.8∗∗∗
5.8∗∗∗

−2.4∗∗∗
−2.2∗∗∗
7.8∗∗∗
4.5∗∗∗

−0.9∗∗∗
6.7∗∗∗
2.7∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗

−0.5∗∗∗
−2.0∗∗∗
−2.2∗∗∗
−1.0∗∗∗

3.5∗∗∗
1.9∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗
1.5∗∗∗

Education and Employment
High School Diploma (%)
Obtained GED(%)
Math Test Score (percentile)(a)
Reading Test Score (percentile)(a)
Ever in College
Completed 2 Years of College or Training
Earned BA
Has a Job
Hourly Wage(b)
Annual Earnings(b)
Risky Behaviors and Welfare
Binge Drinking in Past 30 Days
Used Illegal Drugs in Past 30 Day
Arrested or Charged(c)
Receiving Welfare

Notes: The estimates show the difference in means between the treatment and control groups, regardless of
whether they participated in QOP. Weights were used to account for nonresponse and survey design. The
years at in the columns indicate time since the start of the program. (a) The tests were developed from
National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS) tests and scored by the Educational Testing Service (ETS).
(b) Nonworkers were assigned values of “0.” (c) For the 5-year follow-up, the value indicates percentages
of ever being arrested or charged. For the 7-year follow-up, the value indicates percentages over the past 3
months. For the 10-year follow-up, the value indicates percentages over the past 2 years.
∗
10% significance;∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.
Source: Rodrı́guez-Planas (2012).

9.1.2

Big Brothers Big Sisters

The Big Brothers Big Sisters (BBBS) mentoring program effectively improves educational
outcomes (Tierney et al., 1995). The program is aimed at children (ages 10-16) living in
unstable family environments, which generally are single-parent households. Volunteer mentors have regular and lengthy meetings with the enrollees for an average treatment length
of one year. Mentors have flexibility in their guidance, but the program emphasizes five primary goals: developing a successful relationship; providing social, cultural, and recreational
enrichment; improving peer relationships; improving self-concept; and improving motivation.

60

Tierney et al. (1995) evaluate the program by comparing treated children to a control
group that was put on a waiting list for the program. As Table 8 shows, BBBS has positive
impacts on academic outcomes but only for girls. The effects on direct measures of character
skills related to Big Five Neuroticism (Self-Worth, Social Acceptance, and Self-Confidence)
are positive but not statistically significant. The treatment group children are less likely to
hit other children or lie to their parents. The follow-up lasted only 18 months after random
assignment. Given the results from QOP, this follow-up is too short to determine whether the
effects are persistent. However, BBBS differed in important ways from QOP. BBBS features
one-on-one mentorship, which allows mentees and mentors to form stronger attachments and
might help avoid the negative peer effects of grouping at-risk youth together.
Table 8 Summary of Effects from Big Brother Big Sister Program 18 Months after Assignment
Treatment Effects
Outcome
Start Drug Use (Odds Ratio)
Start Alcohol Use (Odds Ratio)
Number of Times Hit Someone
Number of Times Stole Something
Number of Times Damaged Property
Perceived Ability to Complete Schoolwork
Grade Point Average
Number of Times Skipped Class
Number of Times Lied to Parent
Global Self-Worth(a)
Social Acceptance(a)
Self-Confidence(b)

Males
0.58∗∗∗
0.83∗∗∗
−0.67∗∗∗
−0.07∗∗∗
−0.04∗∗∗
0.39∗∗∗
0.03∗∗∗
−0.18∗∗∗
−0.83∗∗∗
0.24∗∗∗
0.54∗∗∗
0.01∗∗∗

Females
0.77∗∗∗
0.68∗∗∗
−1.17∗∗∗
−0.02∗∗∗
−0.03∗∗∗
1.25∗∗∗
0.17∗∗∗
−1.07∗∗∗
−2.24∗∗∗
0.37∗∗∗
0.09∗∗∗
0.46∗∗∗

Notes: The estimates come from models that control for baseline characteristics. The effects for
“Start Drug Use” and “Start Alcohol Use” were estimated using a logit model. All other effects
were estimated using ordinary least squares. (a) From “Self-Perception Profile for Children” (Harter, 1985). (b) From “Self-Image Questionnaire for Young Adolescents” (Petersen, Schulenberg,
Abramowitz, Offer, and Jarcho, 1984).
∗
10% significance; ∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.
Source: Tierney et al. (1995).

61

9.1.3

EPIS Program

Martins (2010) analyzes data from EPIS, a program developed to improve student achievement of 13- to 15-year-olds in Portugal. Unlike many other interventions, EPIS emphasizes
character skills, aiming to increase motivation, self-esteem, and study skills. The program
consists of one-on-one meetings with a trained staff member or meetings in small groups. The
intervention is tailored to each participant’s individual skill deficit. EPIS decreases grade
retention by 10 percentage points, in a cost-effective way. Unfortunately, other outcomes are
not reported.

9.2
9.2.1

Residential-Based Programs
Job Corps

The Job Corps is the largest residential training program in the United States for at-risk
youth. Youth spend one year in training and remedial education, and receive counseling and
training in social skills. About 90% of participants live at a residential facility throughout the
program (Schochet et al., 2001). Early evaluations found that the program improved many
outcomes including wages, welfare dependence, college attendance, health, and crime.102
However, more recent evaluations report that gains in earnings fade away rather quickly
and that the reduced crime effects came primarily during the program and only for the
residential participants (Schochet et al., 2001, 2008). Figure 13 shows that net earnings
effects are basically zero.103
This program provides useful insights into the ineffectiveness of achievement tests to
predict life outcomes. The Job Corps promoted GED certification, which is based on passing
an achievement test. Early, optimistic evaluations of the program (Schochet et al. (2001))
treated GED recipients as equivalent to high school graduates and projected substantial
102

See, for example, Mallar, Kerachsky, Thornton, and Long (1982).
For males ages 20–24 there appear to be modest Job Corps effects. However, these findings do not
survive adjustments for multiple hypothesis testing (Schochet et al. (2008)).
103

62

earnings gains. Later evaluations based on realized earnings showed the ineffectiveness of
the Job Corps and implicitly the GED.

200
−200

0

Enrollment
Period

−400

Annual Earnings (1995 Dollars)

400

Figure 13 The Treatment Effect of Job Corps on Annual Earnings

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

Year
Treament − Control
Earnings

+/−SE

Source: Estimates from Schochet et al. (2008).
Notes: The values in the graph are the difference between the annual earnings in the treatment group and
the control group. The dashed interval indicates the period when most participants were enrolled in the
program. The earnings data come from the social security earnings SER records. Earnings include zero
earnings for nonworkers.

The program’s emphasis on job search might explain the temporary increase in earnings
after participants leave it. Job Corps centers use placement outcomes in their evaluation of
vocational instructors and other staff. Staff from Job Corps centers often remain in contact
with former participants to assist in subsequent job searches.

63

9.2.2

National Guard ChalleNGe

The National Guard Youth ChalleNGe program is a 17-month intervention for youth who
have dropped out of high school. Although the program does not require that participants
enroll in the military, it stresses aspects of military discipline. Like the Job Corps, most
training occurs in a residential facility removed from the usual environments of participants.
The program features a two-week residential orientation and assessment period, a 20-week
residential program often conducted at a military base, and a one-year, nonresidential mentoring program. There have been three major evaluations of the program: one occurring
nine months after random assignment, another 21 months after random assignment, and a
third evaluation three years after random assignment (Bloom et al., 2009; Millenky et al.,
2010, 2011).
Table 9 shows the estimated treatment effects of the program. Nine months after the
program, participants are more likely to have a GED or high school diploma and be employed.
They are less likely to have been arrested or convicted. Three years after the intervention,
the effects for criminal behavior and high school graduation decline and become statistically
insignificant. The initial reduction in crime likely occurs because participants are housed
in a residential program (an incapacitation effect). However, the employment and earnings
effects persist. Given the similarities between the Job Corps and the ChalleNGe program,
the three-year follow-up might not be long enough to determine whether the labor market
effects are truly persistent.
In-depth interviews of the participants shed light on why some of the effects of the
program might fade. Most participants were glad that they had entered the program, but
explained that friends made it difficult to maintain the discipline that they had learned once
they returned to their original environments (Millenky et al. (2011)). The authors suggest
that it might be important to maintain stronger attachment with participants after they
leave the residential facility.

64

Table 9 Summary of Treatment Effects from the National Guard ChalleNGe Program
Time Since Assignment
Outcome
Has HS Diploma(%)
Has GED(%)
Earned Any College Credit
Currently Working(%)
Earnings (Annual)(a)
Working or in Training(%)
Arrested(%) (b)
Convicted(%)(b)
High Self-Efficacy
Low Self-Efficacy
Serious Psychological Distress(c)
Always Uses Birth Control
Overweight
Obese

9 Months(1)
12.0∗∗∗
23.4∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
9.1∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
−1.9∗∗∗
−5.8∗∗∗
−4.4∗∗∗
4.0∗∗∗
−9.6∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
4.2∗∗∗
−4.3∗∗∗

21 Months(2)
5.7∗∗∗
26.5∗∗∗
15.1∗∗∗
4.9∗∗∗
2,028∗∗∗
5.7∗∗∗
0.9∗∗∗
−4.2∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
0.3∗∗∗
0.3∗∗∗
1.0∗∗∗
−1.5∗∗∗

3 Years(3)
3.7∗∗∗
22.4∗∗∗
16.1∗∗∗
7.1∗∗∗
2,226∗∗∗
4.6∗∗∗
−0.8∗∗∗
2.8∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗
−1.1∗∗∗
−8.0∗∗∗
6.1∗∗∗
−0.7∗∗∗

Notes: The estimates are coefficients from regressions that control for sample member characteristics. The
headers in the columns indicate the duration since random assignment. (a) For the 21-month survey, annual
earnings are approximated by multiplying the estimates for weekly earnings by 52. Nonworkers are included
as “0’s.” (b) For the 9-month survey, the value is for differences since random assignment. For the 21-month
and 3-year follow-ups the value indicates differences for the past 12 months. (c) The psychological distress
score is based on the K6 scale, which ranges from 0 to 24. Serious psychological distress is a score of 13
points or more.
∗
10% significance; ∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.
Sources: (1) The estimates after 9 months come from Bloom et al. (2009). (2) The estimates after 21 months
come from Millenky et al. (2010). (3) The estimates after 3 years come from Millenky et al. (2011).

9.3

Workplace-Based Adolescent Intervention Programs

Workplace-based internships and apprenticeships can boost skills.104 A hundred and fifty
years ago, apprenticeships and workplace-based education were standard for most adolescents. Apprenticeships offer in-depth, work-based learning combined with related academic
course work. Few rigorous studies have examined how entering and completing apprenticeships in the United States affects the educational attainment, job skills, non-academic
104

We have benefitted from the commentary of Robert Lerman in preparing this subsection. See Lerman
(2013) for a discussion of related issues.

65

skills, and job market outcomes of young people.105 A study of high school students who
participated in a Wisconsin youth apprenticeship in printing documented participant earnings levels substantially above expected earnings for similar youth (Orr, Bloom, Bell, Lin,
Cave, and Doolittle, 1994). Anecdotal evidence suggests that youth apprenticeships motivate participants to do better in school and to pursue difficult courses broadly related to
their occupational interests.
Well-structured career-focused programs can potentially enhance character as well as occupational skills, in ways most relevant to the occupations and tasks that engage young
people. Halpern (2009) undertook in-depth, observational studies of high school youth apprenticeships over a three-year period. He analyzed 24 separate programs involving nearly
500 apprentices and conducted over 300 hours of observation and over 90 interviews with
adult mentors, staff, program directors, and students. One program, called After School
Matters, engaged inner-city Chicago high school students in one- to two-year programs for
two to three afternoons a week in fields such as video and computer technology, culinary
arts, and design. Halpern also followed students in other programs, including Wisconsin’s
youth apprenticeship program.
Halpern’s qualitative analysis of these programs is rich and difficult to summarize. Nonetheless, several perspectives are worth noting. He gives many examples of how apprentices gradually develop expertise in an occupation as well as in problem-solving skills. They acquire
self-confidence, teamwork, the ability to take direction and take initiatives, and other noncognitive skills. He notes that participating youth see themselves as judged by their ability
to meet or exceed the established standards of a discipline, including meeting deadlines and
facing genuine constraints and unexpected difficulties that arise in the profession. To quote
105

Students involved in Wisconsin’s Youth Apprenticeship Program believed their worksite learning experiences were excellent, with 84%–86% reporting that they enabled them to improve their problem-solving and
teamwork skills (Scribner and Wakelyn, 1998). Students reported gaps between their work-based and schoolbased learning. But interviews with instructors and employers indicated that apprentices improved their social and interpersonal skills, develop independent decision-making skills, and increased their self-confidence
and self-esteem. However, one should be wary of self-reports. Students in the Cambridge-Somerville program reported satisfaction with the program, even though objective evaluations of it were negative (McCord,
1978).

66

Halpern, “Young people learn through observation, imitation, trial and error, and reiteration; in other words through force of experience.” Adult mentors scaffold the discipline
protocol for the apprentice, sequencing and controlling task demands to keep them on the
constructive side of difficulty. They direct apprentices’ attention, demonstrate new points,
and sometimes collaborate with them.
Utilizing workplaces as learning locations is motivated by evidence of the importance of
occupational and character skills. Workplace-oriented training can help youth attain development goals such as personal autonomy, efficacy, motivation, realism, optimism, and
knowledge of vocations. It facilitates matching between workers and firms, and motivates
adolescents to acquire relevant academic and character skills. Evidence from other countries
shows that workplace-based learning helps students develop an occupational identity, a professional ethic, and self-esteem based on accomplishment (Rauner, 2007). We review some
of the better documented programs in this section.

9.3.1

Career Academies

Career Academies provide evidence that integrating career development into a standard high
school can have long-term labor market benefits. These academies operate within regular
high schools and prepare students for postsecondary education and employment. In addition
to regular high school courses, Career Academies offer courses that are career- or occupationfocused (Kemple and Willner, 2008). Individual academies focus on preparing students for
participation in particular industries such as finance, health science, hospitality, and tourism.
They include activities that might enhance character skills in the workplace (Kemple and
Snipes, 2000). Career Academies have many features in common with European apprenticeship programs that are discussed in Section 9.10
Compared to other high schools, Career Academies expose students to career-oriented
activities, including job shadowing, career fairs, job search workshops, resume preparation,
and interview preparation. Students work together in teams when relating their experiences.

67

A recent evaluation based on random assignment estimates the effects of Career Academies
on labor market, educational, and social outcomes (Kemple and Willner, 2008). Table
10 shows the difference in outcomes between the control and treatment groups. Career
Academies have positive and sustained impacts on earnings and employment among young
men but have no impact on high school completion rates and postsecondary educational
enrollment and attainment rates.106 Treatment group participants are more likely to live
independently with children and a spouse/partner. Young males in the treatment group
are more likely to get married and become custodial parents. For females, most effects are
positive but not statistically significant.
Career Academies likely benefit their students by improving character skills. The program
improves earnings for males in the long run, even though it does not improve educational
attainment or scores on achievement tests. The Career Academies include activities that
are designed to improve character. Internships may teach students the importance of perseverance and Conscientiousness, along with other occupation-related skills that improve their
labor market readiness. Programs that integrate school and work not only motivate students
to learn relevant academic material but also integrate adolescents into the larger society and
teach children the skills valued in the workplace and in society at large.
106
The percentage gains in earnings were highest for the students facing the highest risk of dropping out
of school. Young women did not experience any statistically significant gains in earnings. Given that only
55% of the treatment group actually finished the full curriculum of the Career Academy, the earnings gains
likely understate the actual impact of full participation.

68

Table 10 Summary of Treatment Effects from Career Academies within 96-Month FollowUp after Scheduled High School Graduation
Outcome

Males

Females

361∗∗∗
2.8∗∗∗
4.1∗∗∗
0.6∗∗∗

118∗∗∗
−0.3∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗
0.7∗∗∗

−0.4∗∗∗
3.6∗∗∗
2.0∗∗∗
−1.0∗∗∗
−2.2∗∗∗

0.2∗∗∗
1.3∗∗∗
0.1∗∗∗
1.8∗∗∗
−1.6∗∗∗

9.0∗∗∗
11.5∗∗∗
−6.4∗∗∗

1.5∗∗∗
3.7∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗

Labor Market (49–96 Months)
Monthly Earnings ($)(a)
Months Employed (#)
Average Hours Worked per Week (#)
Average Hourly Wages ($)
Educational Attainment (After 96 Months)
High School Diploma
GED
Certificate/License
AA Degree
BA Degree
Family Formation (After 96 Months)
Married and Living Together
Custodial Parent
Non-Custodial Parent

Notes: Impact estimates are regression-adjusted to control for background characteristics of the sample and
for the clustering of students within schools and random assignment years. (a) Nonworkers were assigned a
value of “0” for monthly earnings.
∗
10% significance; ∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.
Source: Kemple and Willner (2008).

9.3.2

Year-Up Program

The Year-Up program provides low-income, mostly black and Hispanic 18- to 24-year-olds
with full-time classes and six-month internships. To enter the program, applicants must
submit a written essay, letters of reference, a high school transcript, and attendance records
(Grobe, Rosenblum, and Weissman, 2010). Given the requirements, Year-Up applicants may
be more motivated than their peers.
During the first six months of the program, students take classes involving business
writing, time management, teamwork, problem solving, and conflict resolution (Grobe et al.
(2010)). To remain in the program, students must maintain high attendance rates, be on
time, and complete assignments (Roder and Elliot, 2011). Students who complete classes

69

are placed in internships with companies (Roder and Elliot, 2011). Participants continue
to attend a weekly class during their internships where they share experiences about their
internships, work on their resumes, do mock job interviews, and look into postsecondary
options. The technical skills training component of the program includes instruction in word
processing, spreadsheet, and presentation software. Some students learn about computer
installation and repair, and other students learn how to track portfolios.
Roder and Elliot (2011) study the effect of Year-Up on labor market outcomes one year
after the end of the program. Qualified applicants on the waiting list were assigned to
treatment or control groups. Table 11 summarizes the effects of the program two years after
random assignment (one year after the end of the program). The treatment group has higher
annual earnings, primarily due to their increased hourly wages. The employment rates are
similar between the treatment and control groups, although the treatment group was more
likely to have full-time jobs. The earnings and wage benefits arise from improvements in job
quality. Compared to the control group, more members in the treatment group find higher
paying jobs in information technology and investment operations. About a quarter of the
treatment group is hired by the employer sponsoring their internship.
The one-year follow-up is too short to determine whether the program has lasting effects,
but some evidence suggests that the benefits might be more permanent than other similar
programs. The Job Corps primarily improves earnings in the short run by increasing employment (Schochet et al. (2008)). In contrast, Year-Up increases hourly wages (Roder and
Elliot, 2011). If these wage increases reflect increased human capital formation, the benefits
likely last longer. Many employers of interns later hired their trainees.
The evaluation has no direct measures of character skills, but it does provide clues that
the program affected character in ways that lead to better outcomes in the job market. YearUp students were taught that appropriate behavior, dress, and communication are important
for success.

70

Table 11 Impacts of the Year-Up Program
Outcome
Hourly Wage at Current or Most Recent Job
Annual Earnings during Year after Program(a)
Employed during Year after Program
Works Full-Time
Works in Information Technology
Works in Investment Operations

Treatment

Control

Treatment
Effect

12.58
15,082
86
67
22
15

10.32
11,621
83
55
2
0

2.26∗∗∗
3,461∗∗∗
3∗∗∗
12∗∗∗
20†∗∗
15†∗∗

Notes:(a) The annual earnings calculations include nonworkers.
∗
10% significance; ∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance; † No measure of statistical significance reported.
Source: Roder and Elliot (2011).

9.3.3

Dominican Youth Employment Program

A recent study by Gertler and Martinez (2012) evaluates the Dominican Youth Employment
program. The intervention targets unemployed youth (ages 16–29) without a high school
diploma. In the evaluation, youth were assigned to one of three groups: a group that received
vocational skills training, life skill training, and an internship; a group that received life
skills training and an internship; or a control group. The vocational training is available in a
variety of fields including cosmetology, sales, tourism, and electricity. The life skills training
focuses on building self-esteem and capacities for communication, conflict resolution, time
management, and teamwork. The internship takes place at a private company and lasts 240
hours.
Table 12 summarizes treatment effects from the program 18 months after assignment for
the group that received both treatments (“Life+Vocation”) and the group that only received
life skills training (“Life Only”). Females in both treatment groups have higher employment
rates, higher earnings, and fewer pregnancies than their control group counterparts. These
differences are statistically significant when compared with the control group. The difference
in impact between the two treatment groups is only statistically significant for preventing
pregnancies. Since both treatment groups benefit equally, the program likely helps females

71

by improving character or through work experience rather than through the receipt of vocational training. For males, life skills training had no effect, while the combined training
produced negative impacts. Given that the males who received vocational training report
that they are actively looking for work and that they believe that their employment outcomes will improve, the authors of the evaluation speculate that vocational training might
have raised the labor market prospects of male participants.

Table 12 Summary of Treatment Effects from the Dominican Youth Employment Program
18 Months after Assignment
Males
Outcome
Worked during Last Week (%)
Searching for Job in Last Week (%)
Monthly Wage Income
Expect Better Employment (%)(a)
Number of Children

Life + Vocation
−8.3∗∗∗
6.8∗∗∗
676∗∗∗
3.8∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗

Females
Life Only
-3.8∗∗∗
5.3∗∗∗
−414∗∗∗
1.9∗∗∗
–∗∗∗∗

Life + Vocation
6.4∗∗∗
−4.5∗∗∗
456∗∗∗
2.9∗∗∗
−0.13∗∗∗

Life Only
7.2∗∗∗
−1.6∗∗∗
518∗∗∗
3.2∗∗∗
−0.15∗∗∗

Notes: The reported estimated effects come from a linear probability model. The tests of significance
assume that the errors are clustered at the course level. (a) The variable takes the value of 1 if the
respondent reports that they expect their employment to be improved a year from now and a value
of 0 if they expect it to be the same or worse.
∗
10% significance; ∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.
Source: Gertler and Martinez (2012).

9.3.4

Self-Sufficiency Project

The Canadian Self-Sufficiency Project (SSP) provides direct evidence that working improves
character. The program provided earnings supplements to single parents on welfare if they
found full-time jobs and agreed to leave welfare. New enrollees were told that if they remained
on welfare a year later, they would have the chance to participate in the SSP program. After
a year, they were either assigned to a treatment group that would receive an earnings subsidy
for three years if they worked full time or to a control group that would not.107
107

See Michalopoulos, Tattrie, Miller, Robins, Morris, Gyarmati, Redcross, Foley, and Ford (2002) for a
detailed description of the program.

72

Assessing the effect of employment on skills is complicated by the possibility of reverse
causality. Just as employment might affect skills, skills might affect employment. The SSP
program provides a way to study the effects of exogenous variation of employment status
on skills. Gottschalk (2005) uses assignment status in the experiment as an instrumental
variable for employment to estimate the effect of employment on Locus of Control (the
extent to which people feel they have control over their lives).108 After 36 months, those
who received the subsidy were more likely to have an improved Locus of Control, suggesting
that work can improve this character skill. This finding supports the earlier evidence that
work-based education can improve character.
Other studies evaluate the labor market benefits of the program. The findings are mixed.
Michalopoulos et al. (2002) evaluate the labor market benefits of the program. During the
three-year eligibility period, SSP had significant positive impacts on employment, earnings,
and reduced welfare use. However, the effect faded. Nevertheless, the children of participants
who were in preschool at randomization performed better in school. At the 36-month followup, the children of mothers in the treatment group scored 10 percentage points higher on a
test of math skills (p < 0.05)109 and about 1/8 of a standard deviation higher on a vocabulary
test, but this difference is not statistically significantly different from zero.110
Later studies investigate short- and long-term treatment effects for the take-up group
(the members of the treatment group who qualified for the supplements). Zabel, Schwartz,
and Donald (2010) find that the take-up group was 25% more likely to be employed after
52 months. Another study by Zabel, Schwartz, and Donald (2013) shows that, although the
overall treatment effect on the wages of the take-up group is small, there is heterogeneity in
the impact of SSP on wages between “incentivized” and “nonincentivized” take-up groups.111
108

Locus of Control is related to Big Five Neuroticism. See Almlund et al. (2011) for a discussion.
The report does not specify the nature of the math skills test.
110
The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised was used to measure vocabulary.
111
“Incentivized take-up group”—individuals who were induced by the program to find full-time jobs
during a 13-month eligibility window and who would not otherwise have worked full time. “Nonincentivized
take-up group”—members of the program group who would leave welfare and work full-time regardless of
the SSP program.
109

73

For the incentivized program group the absolute wage progression was 10.8%–11.5% compared to 1.9%–2.2% for the control group while for the nonincentivized take-up group, the
absolute wage progression was 11.2%–12.2% compared to 8.2%–11.6% for the control group.
Card and Hyslop (2009) find that SSP increased welfare participation in the first year after
initial entry and lowered it over the following five years even after SSP payments ended,
although the effect largely disappeared after seven years.

10

Apprenticeship Programs112

Apprentices are employees who have formal agreements with employers to carry out a recognized program of work-based and classroom learning. Apprenticeships typically begin in
late adolescence or early adulthood. The training is highly structured, with a well-designed
curriculum usually lasting three to four years. It is common for apprentices to spend three
to four days per week at workplaces, acquiring knowledge and undertaking productive work
involving gradually increasing levels of complexity. Classroom instruction in theoretical and
general studies takes place at vocational schools one to two days per week. Apprentices participate in the production process, work with a trainer who is often a mentor, and ultimately
gain sufficient occupational mastery to become certified by an external body (Wolter and
Ryan, 2011). The emphasis is on occupational skills, but apprentices are likely to improve
character and other generic employment skills as well, including those most relevant for
their chosen occupation. The training is employer-led and thus sensitive to market demands
and less costly to the government than full-time schooling. Career Academies and apprenticeship programs share many features in common. They train participants in the skills of
specific occupations, supplement the training with general education, and provide guidance
and mentoring for participants.
Apprenticeship training is common in many countries, reaching 55%–70% of youth in
Austria, Germany, and Switzerland. The scale of apprenticeship varies widely across coun112

The commentary and text of Robert Lerman was helpful in preparing this section. See Lerman (2013).

74

tries. Apprenticeships as a share of the total labor force are about 3.7%–3.9% in Australia
and Germany, about 2.3%–2.5% in Canada and England, and 1.7% in France but only about
0.3% in the United States.113
Given the concern that apprenticeships train workers too narrowly and make apprentices less adaptable to a changing labor market, in evaluating apprenticeship programs it is
important to follow those completing apprenticeships over long time horizons. At a minimum, an evaluation has to find an appropriate comparison group, estimate costs to firms,
workers, and the government, and take account of the heterogeneity of occupations used for
apprenticeships.
Several studies of apprenticeship training in European countries find high rates of returns
to participants, often in the range of 10%–15%.114 Bougheas and Georgellis (2004) find that
about 70% of apprentices were in full-time employment immediately after training. Cooke
(2003) shows that apprentices do not initially earn more than other workers, but experience
greater wage growth.
One recent study of apprenticeship training analyzes small Austrian firms that eventually failed. It compares the wages of apprentices who started well before the firm failed (and
thus who had a long period in apprenticeship training) with wages of apprentices who spent
less time in training because the firm failed earlier in their apprenticeship period (Fersterer,
Pischke, and Winter-Ebmer, 2008). Estimates suggest that for a three- to four-year apprenticeship, post-apprenticeship wages are 12%–16% higher than they would otherwise be.
Since the worker’s costs of participating in an apprenticeship are often minimal, the returns
are high.
What about job and occupational mobility? Buechtemann, Schupp, and Soloff (1993)
113

Apprenticeships have expanded rapidly in several countries, including Australia (rising from 157,000
in 1996 to 515,000 in 2012) and in England (rising from 53,000 in 1990 to 614,000 in 2012) (National
Apprenticeship Service, 2012; National Centre for Vocational Education Research, 2012). Along with the
increasing roles of apprenticeship in Australia and England have come initiatives to upgrade the quality of
their programs (McDowell, Oliver, Persson, Fairbrother, Wetzlar, Buchanan, and Shipstone, 2011).
114
See, for example, Adda, Dustmann, Meghir, and Robin (2013); Bougheas and Georgellis (2004); Clark
and Fahr (2002); Winkelmann (1996).

75

find that about 80% of apprentices join the firm where they apprenticed after completing
the program. In order to examine the adaptability of apprenticeship training, researchers
(Clark and Fahr, 2002; Geel and Backes-Gellner, 2009) identified groups of skills that are
required for each occupation. Changing occupations may not imply a significant change in
the types of expertise required because of the overlap of skill requirements across occupations.
While only 42% of apprentices stay in their initial occupation, nearly two-thirds remain with
the apprentice occupation or another occupation requiring a similar mix of skills (Geel and
Backes-Gellner, 2009). When apprentices move to another occupation that requires similar
skills, their wages increase. Those trained in occupations with more specific skills are most
likely to remain in their initial occupation or move to occupations within the same cluster.115
Germany has formally integrated apprenticeship programs into its educational system
with apparent success. In Germany, there are three types of secondary schools: low (Hauptschule), medium (Realschule), and high (Gymnasium). Students who graduate from any of
these secondary schools qualify to participate in the dual apprenticeship program. Those
who graduate from higher quality schools have more prestigious vocational options.116 The
apprenticeships typically last about three years during which participants spend one to two
days per week in a part-time vocational training school. They work the remaining time
(Franz and Soskice, 1995).
Harhoff and Kane (1997) argue that apprentices occupy a similar place in the German
economy as high school graduates occupy in the American economy. They find that apprentices earn about 19% more than those completing 10 or fewer years of school but 47%
less than college graduates, whereas in the United States high school graduates earn about
23% more than those who complete 10 or fewer years of school but 42% less than those who
complete college. The estimates are similar over the life cycle.
115

Clark and Fahr (2002) also find that the wage penalty of departing from the occupation for which
apprentices trained varies with the distance away from the original occupation and that there is no penalty
at all from displacement into a somewhat related occupation. Among the former apprentices changing
occupations, about two of five report using many or very many of the skills from their apprenticeship and
another 20% used some of the skills.
116
See Franz and Soskice (1995) for a detailed description of the program.

76

Adda et al. (2013) estimate that participating in the German apprenticeship program
yields a 9%–10% annual rate of return. This estimate includes the return to character skills
which the authors do not isolate from the other benefits of the program. It also includes the
return to the education and job training received, which likely produces skills valued in the
labor market.
Some American apprenticeships are also promising. Hollenbeck (2008) estimates rates
of return to various types of job training in Washington State. He compares outcomes
of apprentices to those of other workers with similar backgrounds and earnings histories.
His results show that apprenticeship training yields higher returns than other training or
postsecondary (mostly community college) occupational programs. For apprenticeships, the
social and governmental rates of return are large (over 20%) within the first 2.5 years after
apprentices exit the program.
Another, more recent study of apprenticeship in 10 American states documents large and
statistically significant earnings gains from participating in an apprenticeship (Reed, YungHsu Liu, Kleinman, Mastri, Reed, Sattar, and Ziegler (2012)). The study estimates how
the length of participation in an apprenticeship affects earnings, holding constant the preenrollment earnings of apprenticeship participants. Six years after starting a program, the
earnings of the average apprenticeship participant (average duration in an apprenticeship) are
40% higher than the earnings of nonparticipants with the same pre-apprenticeship history.
Workplace-based education is promising. It breaks down the artificial barrier between
the culture of high schools and that of the rest of society documented in Coleman (1961).
It motivates adolescents to learn relevant academic skills and gives mentoring and guidance
to participants, many of whom come from disadvantaged families where such guidance is
missing.

77

11

Other Curricula that Have Been Applied to Multiple Age Groups

11.1

Tools of the Mind

A random assignment evaluation of Tools of the Mind provides evidence that character
skills can be fostered. Tools of the Mind is a program that attempts to teach preschool and
early primary schoolchildren to regulate their social and cognitive behaviors. The curriculum
encourages children to role-play and learn in groups with other children. In short-term followups, several studies show that it improves classroom behavior as well as executive functioning,
defined as higher-level cognitive skills, including inhibitory control, working memory, and
cognitive flexibility.117 Similar findings are reported for the Montessori preschool curriculum
(Lillard and Else-Quest, 2006).
However, the evidence on the program is not all favorable.118 There are few long-term
evaluations of it. As noted by Heckman et al. (2013), the Perry curriculum and the Tools of
the Mind curriculum have common intellectual origins, so the positive long-term evidence
on Perry arguably transfers to forecasting the likely long-run effects of Tools of the Mind.

11.2

Studies that Teach the Incremental Theory of Intelligence

Several studies examine the effect of teaching students that capabilities are malleable and
that learning can change the structure of the brain (the “incremental theory of intelligence”).
Dweck (2007) presents an extensive discussion of this approach. The focus in this intervention is on promoting cognition, but the measures used to evaluate the interventions include
achievement tests and grades that are also determined by character skills. Some of this
research also measures perseverance. The theory underlying the intervention is that children
117

Barnett, Jung, Yarosz, Thomas, Hornbeck, Stechuk, and Burns (2008); Barnett, Yarosz, Thomas, and
Hornbeck (2006); Bodrova and Leong (2001, 2007); Diamond, Barnett, Thomas, and Munro (2007).
118
See the study by Farran, Lipsey, and Wilson (2011).

78

who believe that cognitive ability is a fixed trait might have little incentive to improve it.
The “mindset” interventions implement the logic of Figure 1. Effort and character skills
determine performance on tasks, including performance on grades and achievement tests.
Motivating greater effort enhances performance, and the “mindset” intervention is one such
motivational exercise. At issue is whether the enhanced effort, however motivated, has
lasting consequences. Unfortunately, all of the follow-ups are short-term in nature, so the
important question—do these motivational programs have lasting consequences?—remains
unanswered.119
Table 13 summarizes the results from three evaluations of these programs. Aronson,
Fried, and Good (2002) evaluate an intervention in which college students were taught the
incremental theory of intelligence. As a way to internalize the information, the participants
were instructed to write a letter that explains the theory to a low-performing middle school
student. At the end of the next academic quarter, the average GPA in the treatment group
was modestly higher than in the control group. There was no follow-up.
119

Motivation research (Deci, 1971; Deci and Ryan, 1985) suggests that intrinsic rewards have longer
lasting consequences than extrinsic rewards (e.g., payments or punishment).

79

Table 13 Evidence on the Treatment Effects of Teaching that Intelligence is Malleable

Intervention

Follow-up

Main Results

Source

College students were taught
the incremental theory of
intelligence and wrote letters
to a middle school student
explaining the theory on
three occasions over a one
month period.

2 quarters(a)

0.20–0.27 point increase in GPA
(p < 0.05)(b)

Aronson et al.
(2002)

Seventh graders received
explanations of the
incremental theory of
intelligence via two
90-minute, in-person
meetings with a mentor and
weekly emails during the
school year.

1 year

0.64 standard deviation increase
on math score for boys
(p < 0.10), 1.13 standard
deviation increase in TAAS
math scores for females
(p < 0.01), and 0.52 standard
deviation increase in reading
scores (p < 0.05)(c)

Good, Aronson,
and Inzlicht
(2003)

1 semester
0.53 point increase in math GPA Blackwell,
Seventh graders attended a
(p < 0.05)
Trzesniewski,
weekly, 25-minute class that
and Dweck
explained the incremental
(2007)
theory of intelligence.
Notes: (a) The intervention began at the beginning of the winter quarter, and grades were measured at
the end of the spring quarter. (b) A range is given because the effect size differs across races and between
different types of comparison groups. Not all of the effects are significant at the 5% level. (c) The authors
do not estimate separate effects for males and females on the reading score.

80

Good et al. (2003) study an intervention in which seventh-grade students were taught
the incremental theory of intelligence. At the end of the year, students who learned about
the incremental theory of intelligence performed somewhat better on the math and reading
sections of the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) achievement test. The effect
was strongest for girls.
Blackwell et al. (2007) evaluate a program in which seventh graders are taught about the
incremental theory of intelligence through a series of class sessions. The treatment group
and control group participated in eight 25-minute classroom sessions that had similar course
material about the physiology of the brain, study skills, and antistereotypic thinking. Only
the treatment group was taught the incremental theory of intelligence. After one term, the
treatment group improved its math GPAs relatively more than the control group.
While these studies are promising, their follow-ups are very short. The longest follow-up
is a year after the beginning of the program. For example, it is possible that the interventions
increased motivation in the short run, much like the studies in which children are incentivized
using M&M candies. In addition, while the effects are statistically significant, they are
relatively small. It is unknown whether the benefits outweigh the costs. None of the studies
of the “mindset” intervention report a rate of return. The mechanism by which reported
results are produced is not analyzed.120

12

The Effects of Education and Parental Investment
on Character and Cognition

Studies that analyze the consequences of parental and schooling investment demonstrate
their causal effects on promoting cognitive and character skills. Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa
(2006) estimate the effect of schooling in creating cognitive and character skills, controlling
120

Hunt (2012), a leading authority on intelligence, provides a trenchant assessment of this group of
interventions and in particular the work of Dweck.

81

for the problem of reverse causality that schooling may be caused by skills. Specifically, they
estimate the effect of schooling on Self-Esteem and Locus of Control, character skills related
to Neuroticism.121 Figures 14 and 15 show the effect of education on measures of these skills:
Schooling improves both character and cognitive skills. In results that are not displayed,
they show that these traits, in turn, boost a variety of labor market and social outcomes at
age 30.122
121

The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale assesses the degree of approval or disapproval of oneself (Rosenberg,
1965). The relationship between these measures and the Big Five traits of Neuroticism is discussed in
Almlund et al. (2011). See Table 1.
122
Both Heckman, Humphries, Urzúa, and Veramendi (2011) and Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa (2006) use
an identification strategy employing matching on proxies for unobserved skills that corrects for measurement
error and the endogeneity of schooling.

82

Hanushek_2011 978-0-444-53444-6
978-0-444-53444-6 00001
00001
Hanushek_2011

Figure 14 Causal Effect of Schooling on ASVAB Measures
of Cognition
Hanushek_2011
978-0-444-53444-6 00001
00001
Hanushek_2011
978-0-444-53444-6
Hanushek_2011 978-0-444-53444-6 00001
PersonalityPsychology
Psychologyand
andEconomics
Economics 133
133
Personality

(b) Word
Knowledge
PersonalityPsychology
Psychologyand
andEconomics
Economics 133
133
Personality

1.51.5

1.5

1.5

1

.5

0 0
Less than 12
12
13 −15
Less than 12
12
13 −15
Years of completed schooling at test date
Years of completed schooling at test date

1

Less
than
Less
than
1212

(a)
(a)

−15
1313
−15

1212

(a)

13 −15
Less than 12
12
13 −15
Less than 12
12
Years of completed schooling at test date
Years of completed schooling at test date
Less
than
Less
than
1212

11

(b)
(b)

1212

−15
1313
−15

16 or more
16 or more
more
1616
or or
more

Years
completed
schooling
test
date
Years
of of
completed
schooling
at at
test
date
1.5
13 −15
16 or more
12
1.5Less than 12
Years of completed schooling at test date

(d) Math(b)
Knowledge
(b)
(b)

1.51.5

1.5

1
1

1 1

.5
.5

1

.5
.5

.50.5

0
0

.5

00

0
0

0 0

−.5
0 −.5

−.5
0 −.5
Less than 12
12
13 −15
Less than 12
12
13 −15
Years of completed schooling at test date
Years of completed schooling at test date

(c)
(c)

16 or more
16 or more

−0.5
−.5

Less
than
−15
more −.5
Less
than
1212
1212
1313
−15
1616
or or
more
Years
completed
schooling
test
date
Years
of of
completed
schooling
at at
test
date
Less than 12
12
131.5
−15
16 or more
1.5
Mean value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected
of testcovariates
score, covariates
at mean
Expected
value ofvalue
test score,
fixed at fixed
mean
Expected
value
of test score, covariates
fixed at mean

−.5

0

more −.5
1616
or or
more

1
1

−.5
−0.5

0

−.5−.5

0.5.5

.5

0.5
.5

16 or more
16 or more

(c) Paragraph (a)
Comprehension
(a)
Years of completed schooling at test date

1.5
1.5

1

− 0.5
0 −.5

Years
completed
schooling
test
date
Years
of of
completed
schooling
at at
test
date
1.5
12
13 −15
16 or more
1.5Less than 12

1.5

1

0 0

−.5
0 −0.5

−.5

133

.5 .5

0
0

−.5−.5

Personality Psychology and Economics

1 1

.5
0.5

.5 .5

.5

1.5
1.5

1.51.5

1
1

1 1

1

Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected
of testcovariates
score, covariates
at mean
Expected
value
of covariates
test score, fixed
covariates
fixed at mean
Expected
valuevalue
ofvalue
test
fixed fixed
at fixed
mean
Mean value
of
test
score,
at
mean
Mean
of score,
test score, covariates
at mean
Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Mean value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean
Expected
of testcovariates
score, covariates
at mean
Mean
value
of test
score,
covariates
at mean
Expected
value ofvalue
test score,
fixed at fixed
mean
Expected
value
of value
test
score,
covariates
fixedfixed
at mean
Expected
value
of test score, covariates
fixed at mean
Expected
of test
score, covariates
fixed at mean

(a) Arithmetic Reasoning
1.5
1.5

(c)
(c)
(c)

1.5

16 or more
16 or more

(d)
(d)

−15
Less
than
more
1313
−15
Less
than
1212
1212
1616
or or
more
Years
completed
schooling
test
date
Years
of of
completed
schooling
at at
test
date
13 −15
Less than 12
12
16 or more

(d)
(d)
(d)

Years of completed schooling at test date

Years of completed schooling at test date
1.51.5

13 −15
Less than 12
12
13 −15
Less than 12
12
Years of completed schooling at test date
Years of completed schooling at test date

(e) Coding Speed

1
1
1 1

.5
1 .5
.5 .5

0.5

0
0
0 0

−.5
0 −.5
−.5−.5

−0.5

f0150
f0150

13 −15
Less than 12
12
13 −15
Less than 12
12
Years of completed schooling at test date
Years of completed schooling at test date

16 or more
16 or more

(e)
(e)

−15
more
Less
than
1313
−15
1616
or or
more
Less
than
1212
1212
Years
completed
schooling
test
date
Years
of of
completed
schooling
at at
test
date
13 −15
16 or more
Less than 12
12

(e) at test date
Figure 1.29
1.29 Causal
Causal Effect
Effect of
of Schooling
SchoolingYears
onofASVAB
ASVAB
Measures
of Cognition.
Cognition. (a)
(a) Arithmetic
Arithmetic Reasoning.
Reasoning.
(e)
completed Measures
schooling
Figure
on
of
(b)
Word
Knowledge.
(c)
Paragraph
Comprehension.
(d)
Math
Knowledge.
(e)
Coding
Speed.
(e)
(b) Word Knowledge. (c) Paragraph Comprehension. (d) Math Knowledge. (e) Coding Speed.
f0150
Figure1.29
1.29 Causal
CausalEffect
EffectofofSchooling
Schoolingon
onASVAB
ASVABMeasures
MeasuresofofCognition.
Cognition.(a)(a)Arithmetic
ArithmeticReasoning.
Reasoning.
f0150
Figure
Notes:
Effect
of schooling
schooling
on components
components
of the
the ASVAB.
ASVAB.
The
first four
four
components
are averaged
averaged to
to
(b)
Word
Knowledge.
Paragraph
Comprehension.
(d)Math
Math
Knowledge.
(e)Coding
CodingSpeed.
Speed.
Notes:
of
on
of
first
components
are
(b)
Word
Knowledge.
(c)(c)
Paragraph
Comprehension.
(d)
Knowledge.
f0150
Figure
1.29Effect
Causal
Effect
of
Schooling
on ASVAB
Measures
of The
Cognition.
(a)(e)
Arithmetic
Reasoning.
create
males
with
average
ability.
We
standardize
the
test
scores
to
have
within-sample
mean
zero
create
males
with
average
ability.
We
standardize
the
test
scores
to
have
within-sample
mean
zero
(b) WordetKnowledge.
(c) Paragraph
Comprehension. (d) Math Knowledge. (e) Coding Speed.
Source: Heckman
al. (2006,
Figure
4).
Notes:
Effect
schooling
oncomponents
components
theASVAB.
ASVAB.
Thefirst
first
fourcomponents
components
areaveraged
averaged
to
Notes:
Effect
ofofone.
schooling
on
ofofusing
the
The
four
are
to
and
variance
Thecomponents
model
estimated
the NLSY79
NLSY79
sample.
Solid
lines
depict
average
test
variance
one. The
model
isis estimated
using The
the
Solid
lines
depict
average
test
Notes: Meanand
effect
of schooling
on
of the ASVAB.
first
foursample.
components
are
averaged
to
create males
create
males
withaverage
average
ability.
We
standardize
thetest
test
scores
havewithin-sample
within-sample
mean
zero with
create
males
with
ability.
We
standardize
the
scores
totohave
mean
zero
Notes:
Effect
of
schooling
on
components
of
the
ASVAB.
The
first
four
components
are
averaged
to
scores,
and
dashed
lines,
2.5
–
97.5%
confidence
intervals.
average ability.
We and
standardize
the test
scores to
have within-sample
scores,
dashed lines,
2.5
–97.5%
confidence
intervals. mean zero and variance one. The model is estimated
and
variance
one.
The
model
isUrzua
estimated
using
the
NLSY79
sample.
Solid
lines
depictmean
average
test
and
variance
one.
The
model
estimated
the
NLSY79
sample.
Solid
lines
depict
average
test
males
with
average
ability.
We
standardize
the
scores
to 2.5%–97.5%
have
within-sample
zero
Source:
Heckman,
Stixrud,
andisUrzua
(2006,
Figure
4).test
using the create
NLSY79
sample.
Solid
lines
depict
average
test using
scores,
and
dashed
lines,
confidence
intervals.
Regressors
Source:
Heckman,
Stixrud,
and
(2006,
Figure
4).
scores,
and
dashed
lines,
2.5
–
97.5%
confidence
intervals.
scores,
and
dashed
lines,
2.5
–
97.5%
confidence
intervals.
and
variance
one.
The
model
is
estimated
using
the
NLSY79
sample.
Solid
lines
depict
average
test
are fixed at means.
Source:
Heckman,
Stixrud,
andUrzua
Urzua
(2006,Figure
Figure4).4).
Source:
Heckman,
Stixrud,
and
(2006,
scores,
and
dashed lines,
2.5
–97.5%
confidence
intervals.
Source: Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006, Figure 4).

83

Expected value of test scor

.2

0

Figure 15 Causal Effect of Schooling on
−.2 Two Measures of Character
Less than 12
12
13 or more
Years of completed schooling at test date

(b) Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
(a)

0.8

Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

(a) Rotter Locus of Control Scale

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2
Less than 12
12
13 or more
Years of completed schooling at test date

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2
Less than 12
12
13 or more
Years of completed schooling at test date

Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

(a)
.8

Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 5).
Notes: Effect of schooling on socioemotional scales for males with average ability, with 95% confidence bands. The locus of
control scale
.6 is based on the four-item abbreviated version of the Rotter Internal-External Locus of Control Scale. This scale
is designed to measure the extent to which individuals believe they have control over their lives through self-motivation or
self-determination (internal control), as opposed to the extent to which individuals believe that the environment controls their
lives (external control). The self-esteem scale is based on the 10-item Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. This scale describes a
.4
degree of approval
or disapproval toward oneself. In both cases, we standardize the test scores to have within-sample mean zero
and variance one, after taking averages over the respective sets of scales. The model is estimated using the NLSY79 sample.
Solid lines depict average test scores, and dashed lines, 2.5%–97.5% confidence intervals. Regressors are fixed at means.

.2

0

−.2
Less than 12
12
13 or more
Years of completed schooling at test date

84

Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010) estimate a causal model of parental investment
using longitudinal data on the development of children with rich measures of parental investment and child skills. It estimates the model of Figure 9. They show that skills are
self-productive and exhibit dynamic complementarity; levels of skills at one age affect the
productivity of future investments at later ages and hence help determine the evolution of
future skills through direct and cross effects. For example, more motivated children learn
more.
The authors find that it is more difficult to compensate for the effects of adverse environments on cognitive skills in adolescence than it is to build cognitive skills at earlier
ages. Thus the early years are sensitive periods for cognitive skills. This finding is consistent
with the high-rank stability of cognitive skills after age 11 or so; it also helps to explain the
evidence on ineffective cognitive remediation strategies for disadvantaged adolescents documented in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006), Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron,
and Shonkoff (2006), and Cunha and Heckman (2007).
Character skills foster cognitive development. Greater malleability of character skills is
found over longer stretches of the life cycle than for cognitive skills. This occurs in part because new aspects of character emerge with maturity and can be influenced.123 Investment
in character skills in the early years has a higher economic return than investment in the
later years because it builds the base for subsequent investment. Nonetheless, the productivity of later-age investment in character skills is substantial. If the early years have been
compromised, it is more effective in the adolescent years to focus on developing character
skills rather than on cognitive skills.124
Heckman et al. (2011) estimate a sequential model of education to study the effects of
education on a variety of outcomes, controlling for cognitive and character skills and the
endogeneity of education. Correcting for selection into education, they find that early cogni123

Borghans et al. (2008).
Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010) report that 16% of the variation in educational attainment
is explained by adolescent cognitive skills, 12% is due to adolescent socioemotional traits (character skills),
and 15% is due to measured parental investments.
124

85

tive and character skills have substantial causal effects on schooling, labor market outcomes,
adult health, and social outcomes and that education at most levels causally produces benefits in labor market, health, and social outcomes. They also study the effects of schooling
on measures of adult character and find substantial impacts.
Jackson (2013) estimates a valued-added model of the effect of ninth-grade math and
English teachers on student cognitive and noncognitive (character) skills as measured by
absences, suspensions, grades, and grade progression.125 Similar models have been adopted
by school districts to assess the teacher’s impact on student achievement test scores and to
determine teacher bonuses. Jackson estimates a bigger effect of teachers on character skills
than on cognitive skills.126 Estimated teacher effects on cognition and character are only
weakly correlated with each other, suggesting that some teachers improve one dimension of
skill without improving the other. These findings imply that using achievement tests alone
to assess teacher effectiveness would miss important dimensions of teacher quality.
Coleman, Hoffer, and Kilgore (1982), Neal (1997), and Bryk, Lee, and Holland (1993)
document the benefits of Catholic education in terms of scores on achievement tests.127 It
has long been speculated that Catholic schools mold character through creating a more
disciplined environment and through teaching moral values. However, to our knowledge,
there are no direct estimates of the effects of religious education on character. Typical of
the entire literature on evaluation of schools, these studies focus on the effects of Catholic
schools on test scores and schooling.
Arum (2005) documents the decline of disciplinary practices in American schools arising
in part from legal and legislative developments originating in the 1960s that increased the
rights of students and circumscribed teachers from using traditional measures of enforcing
discipline. He cites evidence showing that greater discipline improves test scores and behavior
125

See, for example, the Teacher Advancement Program in Chicago Public Schools (Glazerman and Seifullah, 2012).
126
The estimates are from teacher “fixed-effect” models.
127
Neal (1997) corrects for the selection effect that Catholic schools can expel unruly and undisciplined
students. Uncontrolled comparisons could show a spurious positive effect of Catholic schools that do not
reflect their true effect on any given person.

86

and promotes greater high school graduation.128
Some modern schools have shown how it is possible to integrate character education
into schools. The Knowledge Is Power Program (KIPP) is a group of public charter middle
schools that are designed to improve educational outcomes for low-income families. Tough
(2012) discusses how the first wave of KIPP students excelled at taking achievement tests
but dropped out of college at disappointingly high rates. In response, KIPP schools started
to emphasize character skills, “grit, self-control, social intelligence (including self-advocacy),
zest, optimism, and gratitude, that enable students to stick with college even in the face of
considerable obstacles” (The KIPP Foundation, 2011). Their motto is: Work hard. Be nice.
Evidence on the efficacy of KIPP is lacking. An evaluation of KIPP schools suggests that
it has improved achievement test scores three years after students enter the program.129 A
recent report from KIPP found that 33% of the students graduate from a four-year college,
which is less than their goal of 75% but is four times higher than the rate for students
with comparable backgrounds (The KIPP Foundation, 2011). However, these evaluations
are based on comparing KIPP students to students in other schools; some have argued
that KIPP students have higher levels of starting achievement and that KIPP selects more
motivated students and parents into their schools.130 A recent randomized trial evaluation
of KIPP (Mathematica, 2013) found that KIPP boosted achievement test scores but had
mixed effects on character skills. For example, participants in KIPP were more likely to lie
to their parents or quarrel with them (Tuttle et al., 2013).
Similar to KIPP, a recent intervention in Chicago attempts to foster character skills.
The OneGoal program selects and trains high school teachers to help students apply to
colleges, improve grades and test scores, and, importantly, persist through college. It serves
low-income schools in Chicago, most of which have college enrollment rates of less than
50%. Like KIPP, it attempts to cultivate character skills (Tough, 2012). So far, OneGoal
128

DiPrete, Muller, and Shaeffer (1981).
Tuttle, Teh, Nichols-Barrer, Gill, and Gleason (2010).
130
Carnoy, Jacobsen, Mishel, and Rothstein (2005).
129

87

appears to be successful: 94% of OneGoal participants attend college, and 85% of the college
enrollees complete the first year.131 While there have been no long-term evaluations of KIPP
or OneGoal that account for selection bias, these programs show that it is possible to openly
emphasize character in schools without infringing on the rights of students or families or
violating the boundaries between church and state. These efforts can be viewed as secular
versions of moral and character education that do not introduce religion into schools.

13

Summary

This paper reviews recent literature on the economics and psychology of character skills and
how interventions can develop character. Character skills predict later-life outcomes with
the same, or greater, strength as measures of cognition.
Character is a skill—not a trait. It can be enhanced, and there are proven and effective
ways to do so. Character is shaped by families and social environments. At any age,
character skills are stable across different tasks, but performance on any task depends on
multiple skills as well as the effort expended on it. Effort, in turn, depends on the incentives
offered to perform the task. Since all measures of character and cognition are measures of
performance on some task, it is necessary to standardize for incentives, effort, and other skills
in measuring any particular character or cognitive skill. Despite these difficulties, reliable
measures of character have been developed, although there is always room for improvement.
Though stable at any age, skills are not set in stone over the life cycle. Both cognitive and
character skills can change. Parents, schools, and social environments shape them, although
there are important genetic influences. Skill development is a dynamic process. The early
years are important in laying the foundation for successful investment in the later years.
While there is hard evidence on the importance of the early years in shaping all skills, some
character skills are more malleable than cognitive skills at later ages.
131

See http://www.onegoalgraduation.org/onegoal-results/. The OneGoal students are not old
enough to estimate college graduation rates.

88

This paper reviews a variety of interventions targeted to different stages of the life cycle.
Long-term evaluations of early childhood programs are more numerous. There is substantial
evidence that high-quality early childhood programs have lasting and beneficial effects on
character skills. The evidence on interventions in elementary schools shows lasting benefits
of interventions that primarily operate through boosting character skills.
There are few long-term evaluations of adolescent interventions. The available evidence
suggests a much greater benefit from programs that target character skills compared to the
benefits of programs that mainly target cognition and academic learning. Workplace-based
programs that teach character skills appear to be the most effective remediation interventions
for adolescents. They motivate acquisition of work-relevant skills and provide discipline
and guidance for disadvantaged youth that is often missing in their homes or high schools.
Successful interventions at any age emulate the mentoring and attachment that successful
families give their children.
The available evidence suggests that the most successful remediation programs are not
as effective as the most successful early childhood programs. Building an early base of skills
that promote later-life learning and engagement in school and society is a better strategy.
Prevention is more effective than remediation.

89

References
Abbott, R. D., J. O’Donnell, J. D. Hawkins, K. G. Hill, R. Kosterman, and R. F. Catalano (1998). Changing teaching practices to promote achievement and bonding to school.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 68 (4), 542–552.
Achenbach, T. M. and L. A. Rescorla (2001). Manual for ASEBA School-Age Forms and
Profiles. Burlington, VT: Research Center for Children, Youth and Families.
Ackerman, P. L. and E. D. Heggestad (1997). Intelligence, personality, and interests: Evidence for overlapping traits. Psychological Bulletin 121, 219–245.
Adda, J., C. Dustmann, C. Meghir, and J.-M. Robin (2013). Career progression, economic
downturns, and skills. Unpublished manuscript, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London, UK.
Almlund, M., A. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2011). Personality psychology
and economics. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Wößmann (Eds.), Handbook of the
Economics of Education, Volume 4, pp. 1–181. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV (4 ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Aronson, J., C. B. Fried, and C. Good (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 38 (2), 113–125.
Arum, R. (2005). Judging School Discipline: The Crisis of Moral Authority. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ayllon, T. and K. Kelly (1972). Effects of reinforcement on standardized test performance.
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 5 (4), 477–484.

90

Barnett, W. S., K. Jung, D. J. Yarosz, J. Thomas, A. Hornbeck, R. Stechuk, and S. Burns
(2008). Educational effects of the Tools of the Mind curriculum: A randomized trial. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly 23 (3), 299–313.
Barnett, W. S., D. J. Yarosz, J. Thomas, and A. Hornbeck (2006). Educational effectiveness
of a Vygotskian approach to preschool education: A randomized trial. Technical report,
National Institute for Early Education Research, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey.
Barrick, M. R. and M. K. Mount (1991). The Big Five personality dimensions and job
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology 44 (1), 1–26.
Barton, P. (2006). High School Reform and Work: Facing Labor Market Realities. Princeton,
NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Becker, A., T. Deckers, T. Dohmen, A. Falk, and F. Kosse (2012, July). The relationship
between economic preferences and psychological personality measures. Annual Review of
Economics 4, 453–478.
Benda, B. B. (2005). The robustness of self-control in relation to form of delinquency. Youth
& Society 36 (4), 418–444.
Besharov, D. J., P. Germanis, C. A. Higney, and D. M. Call (2011). Houston Parent-Child
Development Center. Working Paper 17, University of Maryland, School of Public Policy,
Welfare Reform Academy.
Binet, A. and T. Simon (1916). The Development of Intelligence in Children (The BinetSimon Scale). Psychological Science. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins Co.
Blackwell, L. S., K. H. Trzesniewski, and C. S. Dweck (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development 78 (1), 246–263.
91

Bloom, D., A. Gardenhire-Crooks, and C. L. Mandsager (2009). Reengaging high school
dropouts: Early results of the National Guard Youth ChalleNGe program evaluation.
Report, MDRC. Last accessed online February 11, 2013. http://www.mdrc.org/sites/
default/files/full_491.pdf.
Bodrova, E. and D. J. Leong (2001). Tools of the Mind: A Case Study of Implementing
the Vygotskian Approach in American Early Childhood and Primary Classrooms. Geneva:
International Bureau of Education, UNESCO.
Bodrova, E. and D. J. Leong (2007). Tools of the Mind: The Vygotskian Approach to Early
Childhood Education. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc.
Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel (2008, Fall). The economics
and psychology of personality traits. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), 972–1059.
Borghans, L., B. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and H. Meijers (2009, April). Gender differences in risk aversion and ambiguity aversion. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2–3), 649–658.
Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011a). Identification
problems in personality psychology. Personality and Individual Differences 51 (3: Special
Issue on Personality and Economics), 315–320.
Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011b). Reinterpreting
estimated effects of cognition on social outcomes. Unpublished manuscript, Department
of Economics, University of Chicago.
Borghans, L., H. Meijers, and B. ter Weel (2008, January). The role of noncognitive skills
in explaining cognitive test scores. Economic Inquiry 46 (1), 2–12.
Bouchard, T. J. and J. C. Loehlin (2001, May). Genes, evolution and personality. Behavior
Genetics 31 (3), 243–273.
92

Bougheas, S. and Y. Georgellis (2004). Early career mobility and earnings profiles of German
apprentices: Theory and empirical evidence. Labour 18 (2), 233–263.
Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Mathiowetz (2001). Measurement error in survey data. In J. J.
Heckman and E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5 of Handbooks in
Economics, Chapter 59, pp. 3705–3843. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Bowen, W. G., M. M. Chingos, and M. S. McPherson (2009). Test scores and high school
grades as predictors. In Crossing the Finish Line: Completing College at America’s Public
Universities, pp. 112–133. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bowlby, J. (1951). Maternal Care and Mental Health. Bulletin, World Health Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland.
Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational Reform and
the Contradictions of Economic Life. New York: Basic Books.
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne (2001, December). The determinants of earnings: A
behavioral approach. Journal of Economic Literature 39 (4), 1137–1176.
Boyle, S. H., R. B. Williams, D. B. Mark, B. H. Brummett, I. C. Siegler, and J. C. Barefoot
(2005). Hostility, age, and mortality in a sample of cardiac patients. American Journal of
Cardiology 96 (1), 64–66.
Breitmayer, B. J. and C. T. Ramey (1986, October). Biological nonoptimality and quality
of postnatal environment as codeterminants of intellectual development. Child Development 57 (5), 1151–1165.
Breuning, S. E. and W. F. Zella (1978). Effects of individualized incentives on normreferenced IQ test performance of high school students in special education classes. Journal
of School Psychology 16 (3), 220–226.

93

Bridgeman, B., J. B. Blumenthal, and S. R. Andres (1981). Parent Child Development
Center: Final evaluation report. Report, ETS Research.
Bryk, A. S., V. E. Lee, and P. B. Holland (1993). Catholic Schools and the Common Good.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Buechtemann, C. F., J. Schupp, and D. J. Soloff (1993). Roads to work: school-to-work
transition patterns in Germany and the United States. Industrial Relations Journal 24 (2),
97–111.
Campbell, F., G. Conti, J. Heckman, S. Moon, and R. Pinto (2013). The long-term health
effects of early childhood interventions. Under review, Economic Journal.
Campbell, F. A., E. P. Pungello, S. Miller-Johnson, M. Burchinal, and C. T. Ramey (2001,
March). The development of cognitive and academic abilities: Growth curves from an
early childhood educational experiment. Developmental Psychology 37 (2), 231–242.
Campbell, F. A., C. T. Ramey, E. Pungello, J. Sparling, and S. Miller-Johnson (2002).
Early childhood education: Young adult outcomes from the Abecedarian Project. Applied
Developmental Science 6 (1), 42–57.
Canli, T. (2006). Biology of Personality and Individual Differences. New York: Guilford
Press.
Card, D. and D. R. Hyslop (2009). The dynamic effects of an earnings subsidy for longterm welfare recipients: Evidence from the Self-Sufficiency Project applicant experiment.
Journal of Econometrics 153 (1), 1–20.
Carneiro, P. and R. Ginja (2011, January). Preventing behavior problems in childhood
and adolescence: Evidence from Head Start. Unpublished manuscript, University College
London.

94

Carneiro, P. and R. Ginja (2012, January). Long-term impacts of compensatory preschool
on health and behavior: Evidence from Head Start. IZA Discussion Paper 6315, Institute
for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2003). Human capital policy. In J. J. Heckman, A. B.
Krueger, and B. M. Friedman (Eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital
Policies?, pp. 77–239. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carnoy, M., R. Jacobsen, L. Mishel, and R. Rothstein (2005). The Charter School Dust-up.
Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic Studies. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, S. W. Diane, and D. Yagan (2011). How
does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4), 1593–1660.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, T. Olsen, and L. Pistaferri (2011, May). Adjustment costs,
firm responses, and micro vs. macro labor supply elasticities: Evidence from Danish tax
records. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2), 749–804.
Clark, D. and R. Fahr (2002, February). The promise of workplace training for non-college
bound youth: Theory and evidence from German apprenticeship. CEP Discussion Paper
518, Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics and Political Science,
London, UK.
Clingman, J. and R. L. Fowler (1976). The effects of primary reward on the I.Q. performance
of grade-school children as a function of initial I.Q. level. Journal of Applied Behavior
Analysis 9 (1), 19–23.

95

Cloninger, C. R., D. M. Svrakic, C. Bayon, and T. R. Przybeck (1999). Measurement of
psychopathology as variants of personality. In C. R. Cloninger (Ed.), Personality and
Psychopathology, pp. 33–66. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Coleman, J. S. (1961). The Adolescent Society: The Social Life of the Teenager and Its
Impact on Education. New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
Coleman, J. S., T. Hoffer, and S. Kilgore (1982). High School Achievement: Public, Catholic,
and Private Schools Compared. New York: Basic Books.
Cooke, L. (2003). A comparison of initial and early life course earnings of the German
secondary education and training system. Economics of Education Review 22 (1), 79–88.
Costa, P. T. and R. R. McCrae (1992a). Four ways five factors are basic. Personality and
Individual Difference 13 (6), 653–665.
Costa, P. T. and R. R. McCrae (1992b). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PIR) and the NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) Professional Manual. Odessa, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007, May). The technology of skill formation. American
Economic Review 97 (2), 31–47.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008, Fall). Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4),
738–782.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2009, April). The economics and psychology of inequality
and human development. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2–3), 320–364.
Presented as the Marshall Lecture, European Economics Association, Milan, Italy, August
29, 2008.

96

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the
evidence on life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook
of the Economics of Education, Chapter 12, pp. 697–812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010, May). Estimating the technology of
cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883–931.
Currie, J. and D. Thomas (1995, June). Does Head Start make a difference? American
Economic Review 85 (3), 341–364.
Deci, E. L. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 18, 105–115.
Deci, E. L. and R. M. Ryan (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human
Behavior. New York: Plenum Press.
DeLong, J. and K. Magin (2009, Winter). The U.S. equity return premium: Past, present
and future. Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (1), 193–208.
Deming, D. (2009, July). Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill development:
Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3), 111–
134.
Devlin, B., M. Daniels, and K. Roeder (1997). The heritability of IQ. Nature 388 (6641),
468–471.
DeYoung, C. G., J. B. Hirsh, M. S. Shane, X. Papademetris, N. Rajeevan, and J. R. Gray
(2010). Testing predictions from personality neuroscience: Brain structure and the Big
Five. Psychological Science 21 (6), 820–828.
Diamond, A., S. Barnett, J. Thomas, and S. Munro (2007). Preschool program improves
cognitive control. Science 318 (5855), 1387–1388.

97

DiPrete, T. A., C. Muller, and N. Shaeffer (1981). Discipline and order in American high
schools. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics. Contractor Report
from NORC.
Duckworth, A. (2012, November). Reference bias. Presented at the University of Chicago.
Duckworth, A. L., C. Peterson, M. D. Matthews, and D. R. Kelly (2007, June). Grit:
Perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92 (6), 1087–1101.
Duckworth, A. L., P. D. Quinn, D. R. Lynam, R. Loeber, and M. Stouthamer-Loeber (2011).
Role of test motivation in intelligence testing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108 (19), 7716–7720.
Durlak, J. A., R. P. Weissberg, A. B. Dymnicki, R. D. Taylor, and K. B. Schellinger (2011).
The impact of enhancing students’ social and emotional learning: A meta-analysis of
school-based universal interventions. Child Development 82 (1), 405–432.
Dweck, C. S. (2007). Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York, NY: Ballantine
Books.
Eckenrode, J., M. Campa, D. W. Luckey, C. R. Henderson, R. Cole, H. Kitzman, E. Anson,
K. Sidora-Arcoleo, and D. L. Olds (2010, January). Long-term effects of prenatal and infancy nurse home visitation on the life course of youths: 19-year follow-up of a randomized
trial. Journal of the American Medical Association 164 (1), 9–15.
Edlund, C. V. (1972). The effect on the behavior of children, as reflected in the IQ scores,
when reinforced after each correct response. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 5 (3),
317–319.
Engle, P. L., M. M. Black, J. R. Behrman, M. Cabral de Mello, P. J. Gertler, L. Kapiriri,
R. Martorell, M. Eming Young, and The International Child Development Steering Group
98

(2007, January). Strategies to avoid the loss of developmental potential in more than 200
million children in the developing world. The Lancet 369 (9557), 229–242.
Engle, P. L., L. C. H. Fernald, H. Alderman, J. Behrman, C. O’Gara, A. Yousafzai,
M. Cabral de Mello, M. Hidrobo, N. Ulkuer, I. Ertem, and S. Iltus (2011, October).
Strategies for reducing inequalities and improving developmental outcomes for young children in low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet 378 (9799), 1339–1353.
Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: I. On predicting most of the people much of
the time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37 (7), 1097–1126.
Farran, D. C., M. W. Lipsey, and S. Wilson (2011, August). Experimental evaluation of the
Tools of the Mind pre-k curriculum. Technical report, Peabody Research Institute Report.
Fersterer, J., J.-S. Pischke, and R. Winter-Ebmer (2008). Returns to apprenticeship training
in Austria: Evidence from failed firms. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 110 (4), 733–
753.
Flynn, J. R. (2007). What is Intelligence?: Beyond the Flynn Effect. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Franz, W. and D. W. Soskice (1995). The German apprenticeship system. In Institutional
Frameworks and Labor Market Performance, Chapter 8, pp. 208–234. New York, NY:
Routle.
Friedman, D. and A. H. Streicher (1985). Reliability of scores for Fiscal Year 1981 Army
applicants: Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery forms 8, 9, and 10. Technical
report, Defense Technical Information Center.
Friedman, H. S. and L. R. Martin (2011). The Longevity Project: Surprising Discoveries for
Health and Long Life from the Landmark Eight-Decade Study. New York, NY: Hudson
Street Press.
99

Garces, E., D. Thomas, and J. Currie (2002, September). Longer-term effects of Head Start.
American Economic Review 92 (4), 999–1012.
Geel, R. and U. Backes-Gellner (2009). Occupational mobility within and between skill
clusters: An empirical analysis based on the skill-weights approach. Economics of Education Working Paper Series 0047, University of Zurich, Institute for Strategy and Business
Economics (ISU).
Gensowski, M. (2012). Personality, IQ, and lifetime earnings. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Gertler, P., J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A. Zanolini, C. Vermeersch, S. Walker, S. Chang, and
S. Grantham-McGregor (2013). Labor market returns to early childhood stimulation:
A 20-year followup to an experimental intervention in Jamaica. Working Paper 19185,
NBER.
Gertler, P. and S. Martinez (2012). Vocational and life skills in youth training: A randomized
experiment in the Dominican Republic. Presented at the IZA/World Bank/OECD Conference on Activation and Employment Support Policies, Bahcesehir University, Istanbul,
Turkey, May 01, 2012.
Glazerman, S. and A. Seifullah (2012). An evaluation of the Chicago Teacher Advancement
Program (Chicago TAP) after four years. Final Report 06736-520, Mathematica Policy
Research.
Goldammer, C. (2010). Skills, investment, and race: Evidence from the ECLS-K. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2008). The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

100

Goldschmidt, P. and D. Huang (2007). The long-term effects of after-school programming
on educational adjustment and juvenile crime: A study of the LA’s BEST after-school
program. Technical report, National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and
Student Testing (CRESST), Los Angeles, CA.
Good, C., J. Aronson, and M. Inzlicht (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Applied Developmental Psychology 24 (6), 645–662.
Gottfredson, M. R. and T. Hirschi (1990). A General Theory of Crime. Palo Alto, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Gottschalk, P. (2005). Can work alter welfare recipients’ beliefs? Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management 24 (3), 485–498.
Gough, H. G. and A. B. Heilbrun (1983). The Adjective Check List Manual. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Grantham-McGregor, S., Y. B. Cheung, S. Cueto, P. Glewwe, L. Richter, and B. Strupp
(2007). Developmental potential in the first 5 years for children in developing countries.
The Lancet 369 (9555), 60–70.
Grantham-McGregor, S. M., C. A. Powell, S. P. Walker, and J. H. Himes (1991). Nutritional
supplementation, psychosocial stimulation, and mental development of stunted children:
The Jamaican study. The Lancet 338 (8758), 1–5.
Grek, S. (2009). Governing by numbers: The PISA ‘effect’ in Europe. Journal of Education
Policy 24 (1), 23–37.
Griffin, M., J. J. Heckman, and S. H. Moon (2013). Preschool curricula. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.
Griffiths, R. (1954). The Abilities of Babies. London, UK: University of London Press.
101

Grobe, T., E. Rosenblum, and T. Weissman (2010). Dollars and Sense: How “Career First”
Programs Like Year Up Benefit Youth and Employers. Boston, MA: Jobs for the Future.
Groot, W. (2000). Adaptation and scale of reference bias in self-assessments of quality of
life. Journal of Health Economics 19 (3), 403–420.
Haggerty, K., R. Kosterman, R. F. Catalano, and J. D. Hawkins (1999). Preparing for the
drug free years. Juvenile justice bulletin, US Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, Washington, DC.
Halpern, R. (2009). The Means to Grow Up: Reinventing Apprenticeship as a Developmental
Support in Adolescence (1 ed.). Critical youth studies. New York, NY: Routledge.
Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004, July–August). The effect of schooling
and ability on achievement test scores. Journal of Econometrics 121 (1–2), 39–98.
Hanushek, E. (2003, February). The failure of input-based schooling policies. Economic
Journal 113 (485), F64–F98.
Harhoff, D. and T. J. Kane (1997). Is the German apprenticeship system a panacea for the
US labor market? Journal of population economics 10 (2), 171–196.
Harter, S. (1985). Manual for the Self-Perception Profile for Children. Denver, CO: University of Denver.
Hawkins, J., E. Von Cleve, and R. Catalano Jr (1991). Reducing early childhood aggression:
Results of a primary prevention program. Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry 30 (2), 208–217.
Hawkins, J. D., R. F. Catalano, R. Kosterman, R. D. Abbott, and K. G. Hill (1999). Preventing adolescent health-risk behaviors by strengthening protection during childhood.
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 153 (3), 226–234.

102

Hawkins, J. D., R. Kosterman, R. F. Catalano, K. G. Hill, and R. D. Abbott (2005). Promoting positive adult functioning through social development intervention in childhood.
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 159 (1), 25–31.
Hawkins, J. D., R. Kosterman, R. F. Catalano, K. G. Hill, and R. D. Abbott (2008). Effect
of social development intervention in childhood 15 years later. Archives of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine 162 (12), 1133–1141.
Heckman, J. and R. Pinto (2013). Econometric mediation analyses: Identifying the sources of
treatment effects from experimentally estimated production technologies with unmeasured
and mismeasured inputs. Forthcoming, Econometric Reviews.
Heckman, J. J. (2008, July). Schools, skills and synapses. Economic Inquiry 46 (3), 289–324.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (2014a). The economic and social benefits
of GED certification. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth
of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.) (2014b). The Myth of Achievement
Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, S. Urzúa, and G. Veramendi (2011). The effects of educational choices on labor market, health, and social outcomes. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2012, August). Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour Economics 19 (4), 451–464. Adam Smith Lecture.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014a). Achievement tests and the role of character in
American life. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth of
103

Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014b). Fostering and measuring skills: Interventions that improve character and cognition. In The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role
of Character in American Life. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Forthcoming.
Heckman, J. J. and D. V. Masterov (2007). The productivity argument for investing in
young children. Review of Agricultural Economics 29 (3), 446–493.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, and R. Pinto (2012). The effects of early intervention on abilities and social outcomes: Evidences from the Carolina Abecedarian study. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010a, August).
Analyzing social experiments as implemented: A reexamination of the evidence from the
HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Quantitative Economics 1 (1), 1–46.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010b, February). The rate of return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public
Economics 94 (1–2), 114–128.
Heckman, J. J. and S. Mosso (2013). The economics of human development and social mobility. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics. Under
review, Annual Review of Economics.
Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2013). Understanding the mechanisms through
which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. American Economic
Review 103 (6), 1–35.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzúa (2006, July). The effects of cognitive and noncog-

104

nitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3), 411–482.
Heine, S. J., E. E. Buchtel, and A. Norenzayan (2008). What do cross-national comparisons
of personality traits tell us? The case of Conscientiousness. Psychological Science 19 (4),
309–313.
Heine, S. J., S. Kitayama, D. R. Lehman, T. Takata, E. Ide, C. Leung, and H. Matsumoto
(2001). Divergent consequences of success and failure in Japan and North America: An
investigation of self-improving motivations and malleable selves. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 81 (4), 599–615.
Heine, S. J., D. R. Lehman, K. Peng, and J. Greenholtz (2002, June). What’s wrong with
cross-cultural comparisons of subjective Likert scales? The reference-group effect. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 82 (6), 903–918.
Herrnstein, R. J. and C. A. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure
in American Life. New York: Free Press.
Hieronymus, A. N., E. F. Lindquist, and H. D. Hoover (1980). Iowa Tests of Basic Skills:
Primary Battery. Iowa City, IA: Houghton.
Hillage, J., J. Regan, J. Dickson, and K. McLoughlin (2002). Employers skill survey: 2002.
Research Report RR372, Department for Education and Skills.
Hirschi, T. and M. Gottfredson (1993). Commentary: Testing the general theory of crime.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 30 (1), 47–54.
Hogan, J. and B. Holland (2003). Using theory to evaluate personality and job-performance
relations: A socioanalytic perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology 88 (1), 100–112.
Hollenbeck, K. (2008). State use of workforce system net impact estimates and rates of

105

return. Technical report, Upjohn Institute. Presented at the Association for Public Policy
Analysis and Management (APPAM) Conference, Los Angeles, CA.
Holmlund, H. and O. Silva (2009). Targeting non-cognitive skills to improve cognitive outcomes: Evidence from a remedial education intervention. Discussion Paper 4476, IZA.
Holt, M. M. and T. R. Hobbs (1979). The effects of token reinforcement, feedback and
response cost on standardized test performance. Behaviour Research and Therapy 17 (1),
81–83.
Holzer, H. (1997). Is there a gap between employer skill needs and the skills of the work
force? In A. Lesgold, M. Feuer, and A. Black (Eds.), Transitions in Work and Learning:
Implications for Assessment, Chapter 2, pp. 6–33. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Howard, K. S. and J. Brooks-Gunn (2009). The role of home-visiting programs in preventing
child abuse and neglect. The Future of Children 19 (2), 119–146.
Huang, D., B. Gribbons, K. S. Kim, C. Lee, and E. L. Baker (2000). A decade of results:
The impact of the LA’s BEST after school enrichment program on subsequent student
achievement and performance. Technical report, UCLA Center for the Study of Evaluation,
Graduate School of Education and Information Studies, Los Angeles, CA.
Huang, D., K. S. Kim, A. Marshall, and P. Pérez (2005). Keeping kids in school: An LA’s
BEST example—a study examining the long-term impact of LA’s BEST on students’
dropout rates. Technical report, National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards,
and Student Testing (CRESST), Los Angeles, CA.
Hunt, E. (2012). Improving intelligence. Presented at the American Psychological Association Annual Meeting, Sunday, May 27, 2012, Chicago, IL.

106

Jablonka, E. and G. Raz (2009). Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: Prevalence, mechanisms, and implications for the study of heredity and evolution. The Quarterly Review
of Biology 84 (2), pp. 131–176.
Jackson, C. K. (2013). Non-cognitive ability, test scores, and teacher quality: Evidence from
9th grade teachers in North Carolina. Working Paper 18624, NBER.
Jencks, C. (1979). Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of Economic Success in America.
New York: Basic Books.
John, O. P., A. Caspi, R. W. Robins, and T. E. Moffitt (1994). The “little five”: Exploring
the nomological network of the five-factor model of personality in adolescent boys. Child
Development 65 (1), 160–178.
John, O. P. and S. Srivastava (1999). The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement
and theoretical perspectives. In L. A. Pervin and O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, Chapter 4, pp. 102–138. New York: The Guilford Press.
Johnson, A. W. (1999). Assessing the impact of the Sponsor-A-Scholar youth mentoring
program on student performance. Technical Report 355, Mathematica Policy Research.
Johnson, D. and T. Walker (1991). A follow-up evaluation of the Houston Parent-Child
Development Center: School performance. Journal of Early Intervention 15 (3), 226–236.
Jolly, R. (2007). Early childhood development: The global challenge. The Lancet 369 (9555),
8–9.
Kaestle, C. F. (1984, May). Moral education and common schools in America: A historian’s
view. Journal of Moral Education 13 (2), 101–111.
Kagitcibasi, C., D. Sunar, and S. Bekman (2001). Long-term effects of early intervention:
Turkish low-income mothers and children. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 22 (4), 333–361.
107

Kagitcibasi, C., D. Sunar, S. Bekman, N. Baydar, and Z. Cemalcilar (2009). Continuing
effects of early enrichment in adult life: The Turkish Early Enrichment Project 22 years
later. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 30 (6), 764–779.
Kahne, J. and K. Bailey (1999). The role of social capital in youth development: The case of
“I Have a Dream” programs. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 21 (3), 321–343.
Kemple, J. and J. C. Snipes (2000). Career Academies: Impacts on student engagement and
performance in high school. Report 03/2000, MDRC.
Kemple, J. and C. Willner (2008). Career Academies: long-term impacts on labor market
outcomes, educational attainment, and transitions to adulthood. Report 06/2008, MDRC.
Kern, M. L. and H. S. Friedman (2008). Do conscientious individuals live longer? Health
Psychology 27 (5), 505–512.
Kettner, N. (1976). Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB form 5): Comparison with GATB and DAT tests: Final report for period May 1975–October 1976.
Technical report, DTIC Document: Department of Defense, Department of the Air Force,
Air Force Systems Command, Air Force Human Resources Laboratory.
Kitzman, H., D. L. Olds, R. Cole, C. Hanks, E. Anson, K. Arcoleo, D. W. Luckey, M. Knudtson, C. R. Henderson, and J. Holmberg (2010, May). Enduring effects of prenatal and
infancy home visiting by nurses on children: Follow-up of a randomized trial among children at age 12 years. Journal of the American Medical Association 164 (5), 412–418.
Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff (2006, July). Economic,
neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (27), 10155–10162.
Krueger, A. B. (2003, February). Economic considerations and class size. Economic Journal 113 (485), F34–F63.
108

Kubzansky, L. D., D. Sparrow, P. Vokonas, and I. Kawachi (2001). Is the glass half empty
or half full? A prospective study of optimism and coronary heart disease in the normative
aging study. Psychosomatic Medicine 63 (6), 910–916.
Lake, A. (2011).

Early childhood development—global action is overdue.

The

Lancet 378 (9799), 1277–1278.
Lally, J. R., P. L. Mangione, and A. S. Honig (1987). The Syracuse University Family
Development Research Program: Long-Range Impact of an Early Intervention with LowIncome Children & their Families. San Francisco, CA: Center for Child and Family Studies,
Far West Laboratory for Educational Research and Development.
Lang, F. R., D. John, O. Lüdtke, J. Schupp, and G. G. Wagner (2011). Short assessment
of the Big Five: Robust across survey methods except telephone interviewing. Behavior
research methods 43 (2), 548–567.
Lapsley, D. and D. Yeager (2012). Moral-character education. In I. Weiner, W. Reynolds, and
G. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of Psychology, Volume 7 of Educational Psychology, Chapter 7,
pp. 117–146. New York, NY: Wiley.
Larson, G. E., D. P. Saccuzzo, and J. Brown (1994). Motivation: Cause or confound in
information processing/intelligence correlations? Acta Psychologica 85 (1), 25–37.
Lemann, N. (1999). The Big Test: The Secret History of the American Meritocracy. New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Lerman, R. I. (2013). Are employability skills learned in U.S. youth education and training
programs? Under review, IZA Journal of Labor Policy.
Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology 22 (140), 55.

109

Lillard, A. and N. Else-Quest (2006).

The early years: Evaluating Montessori.

Sci-

ence 313 (5795), 1893–1894.
Lleras, C. (2008). Do skills and behaviors in high school matter? The contribution of
noncognitive factors in explaining differences in educational attainment and earnings. Social Science Research 37 (3), 888–902.
Ludwig, J. and D. L. Miller (2007). Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evidence from a regression discontinuity approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1),
159–208.
Lutz, M. N., J. Fantuzzo, and P. McDermott (2000). Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennysylvania.
Mallar, C., S. Kerachsky, C. Thornton, and D. Long (1982). Evaluation of the impact of
the Job Corps program: Third follow-up report. Technical Report PR82-05, Mathematica
Policy Research, Inc., Princeton, NJ.
Martin, L. R., H. S. Friedman, and J. E. Schwartz (2007). Personality and mortality risk
across the life span: The importance of conscientiousness as a biopsychosocial attribute.
Health Psychology 26 (4), 428–436.
Martins, P. S. (2010). Can targeted, non-cognitive skills programs improve achievement?
Discussion Paper 5266, IZA.
McAdams, D. P. (2006). The Person: A New Introduction to Personality Psychology (4 ed.).
Hoboken, N.J.: J. Wiley and Sons.
McCord, J. (1978).

A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects.

American Psycholo-

gist 33 (3), 284–289.
McCord, J. and W. McCord (1959). A follow-up report on the Cambridge-Somerville Youth
Study. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 322 (1), 89–96.
110

McCormick, M. C., J. Brooks-Gunn, S. L. Buka, J. Goldman, J. Yu, M. Salganik, D. T.
Scott, F. C. Bennett, L. L. Kay, J. C. Bernbaum, C. R. Bauer, C. Martin, E. R. Woods,
A. Martin, and P. H. Casey (2006, March). Early intervention in low birth weight premature infants: Results at 18 years of age for the Infant Health and Development Program.
Pediatrics 117 (3), 771–780.
McDowell, J., D. Oliver, M. Persson, R. Fairbrother, S. Wetzlar, J. Buchanan,
and T. Shipstone (2011).
21st century.

A shared responsibility:

Apprenticeships for the

http://www.australianapprenticeships.gov.au/faq/documents/

apprenticeshipsforthe21stcenturyexpertpanel.pdf, last accessed February 11, 2013.
McLanahan, S. (2004, November). Diverging destinies: How children are faring under the
second demographic transition. Demography 41 (4), 607–627.
Michalopoulos, C., D. Tattrie, C. Miller, P. K. Robins, P. Morris, D. Gyarmati, C. Redcross,
K. Foley, and R. Ford (2002). Final report on the Self-Sufficiency Project for long-term
welfare recipients. Report, Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.
Millenky, M., D. Bloom, and C. Dillon (2010). Making the transition: Interim results of the
National Guard Youth ChalleNGe evaluation. Report 05/2010, MDRC.
Millenky, M., D. Bloom, S. Muller-Ravett, and J. Broadus (2011). Staying on course: Threeyear results of the National Guard Youth ChalleNGe evaluation. Report 06/2011, MDRC.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and Assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mischel, W., O. Ayduk, M. G. Berman, B. J. Casey, I. H. Gotlib, J. Jonides, E. Kross,
T. Teslovich, N. L. Wilson, V. Zayas, and Y. Shoda (2011). ‘Willpower’ over the life span:
decomposing self-regulation. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 6 (2), 252–256.
Moon, S. H. (2012, July). Time to invest in disadvanted young children. Samsung Economic
Research Institute Quarterly 5 (3), 50–59.
111

Mroczek, D. K. and A. Spiro (2007). Personality change influences mortality in older men.
Psychological Science 18 (5), 371–376.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in Personality: A Clinical and Experimental Study of
Fifty Men of College Age. New York: Oxford University Press.
Myers, R. (1992). The Twelve Who Survive: Strengthening Programmes of Early Childhood
Development in the Third World. New York, NY: Routledge/UNESCO.
National Apprenticeship Service (2012).

History of apprenticeships.

http://

www.apprenticeships.org.uk/About-Us/History-of-Apprenticeships.aspx, last accessed February 11, 2013.
National
time

Centre
series

of

for

Vocational

apprenticeships

Education
and

Research

traineeships

in

(2012).
Australia

Historical
from

1963.

http://www.ncver.edu.au/publications/2329.html.
Naumann, L. P. and O. P. John (2011). Toward a domain-specific approach to cultural differences: The influence of cultural values and reference-group standards on self-reported
personality. Unpublished manuscript, Sonoma State University, Department of Psychology.
Neal, D. A. (1997, January). The effects of Catholic secondary schooling on educational
achievement. Journal of Labor Economics 15 (1, Part 1), 98–123.
Nelsen, B. (1997). Should social skills be in the vocational curriculum? Evidence from the
automotive career field. In A. M. Lesgold, M. J. Feuer, and A. M. Black (Eds.), Transitions
in Work and Learning: Implications for Assessment, Papers and Proceedings. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
Niles, M. D., A. J. Reynolds, and M. Nagasawa (2006). Does early childhood intervention

112

affect the social and emotional development of participants? Early Childhood Research
and Practice 8 (1).
Nisbett, R. E. (2009, February). Intelligence and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures
Count. New York, NY: W. W. Norton and Company.
Nisbett, R. E., J. Aronson, C. Blair, W. Dickens, J. Flynn, D. F. Halpern, and E. Turkheimer
(2012). Intelligence: New findings and theoretical developments. American Psychologist 67 (2), 130–159.
Nyhus, E. K. and E. Pons (2005). The effects of personality on earnings. Journal of Economic
Psychology 26 (3), 363–384.
Olds, D. L. (2006). The Nurse-Family Partnership: An evidence-based preventive intervention. Infant Mental Health Journal 27 (1), 5–25.
Olds, D. L., H. Kitzman, R. Cole, C. Hanks, K. Arcoleo, E. Anson, D. W. Luckey, M. Knudtson, C. R. Henderson, J. Bondy, and A. J. Stevenson (2010, May). Enduring effects of
prenatal and infancy home visiting by nurses on maternal life course and government
spending: Follow-up of a randomized trial among children at age 12 years. Journal of the
American Medical Association 164 (5), 419–424.
Olds, D. L., H. Kitzman, R. Cole, J. Robinson, K. Sidora, D. W. Luckey, C. R. Henderson,
C. Hanks, J. Bondy, and J. Holmberg (2004, December). Effects of nurse home-visiting
on maternal life course and child development: Age 6 follow-up results of a randomized
trial. Pediatrics 114 (6), 1550–1559.
Olds, D. L., H. Kitzman, C. Hanks, R. Cole, E. Anson, K. Sidora-Arcoleo, D. W. Luckey,
C. R. Henderson, J. Holmberg, R. A. Tutt, A. J. Stevenson, and J. Bondy (2007, December). Effects of nurse home-visiting on maternal and child functioning: Age 9 follow-up of
a randomized trial. Pediatrics 120 (4), 832–845.

113

Olds, D. L., J. Robinson, L. Pettitt, D. W. Luckey, J. Holmberg, R. K. Ng, K. Isacks, K. Sheff,
and C. R. Henderson (2004, December). Effects of home visits by paraprofessionals and
by nurses: Age 4 follow-up results of a randomized trial. Pediatrics 114 (6), 1560–1568.
Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (2001).

OECD employment

and labour market statistics. Data available from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/
employment/data/oecd-employment-and-labour-market-statistics_lfs-data-en.
Orr, L., H. Bloom, S. Bell, W. Lin, G. Cave, and F. Doolittle (1994). The National JTPA
Study. Impacts, Benefits, and Costs of Title II-A. Bethesda, MD: Abt Associates.
Peng, K., R. E. Nisbett, and N. Y. Wong (1997). Validity problems comparing values across
cultures and possible solutions. Psychological Methods 2 (4), 329–344.
Petersen, A. C., J. E. Schulenberg, R. H. Abramowitz, D. Offer, and H. D. Jarcho (1984). A
Self-Image Questionnaire for Young Adolescents (SIQYA): Reliability and validity studies.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence 13 (2), 93–111.
Pratt, T. C. and F. T. Cullen (2000). The empirical status of Gottfredson and Hirschi’s
general theory of crime: A meta-analysis. Criminology 38 (3), 931–964.
Quinn, L. M. (2014). An institutional history of the GED. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries,
and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character
in American Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rauner, F. (2007).

Vocational education and training—A European perspective.

In

A. Brown, S. Kirpal, and F. Rauner (Eds.), Identities at Work, Volume 5 of Technical
and Vocational Education and Training: Issues, Concerns and Prospects, pp. 115–144.
Springer.
Raven, J., J. C. Raven, and J. Court (1988). Manual for Raven’s Progressive Matrices and
Vocabulary Scales. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assessment.
114

Raven, J. C. (1962). Advanced Progressive Matrices: Sets I and II (Revised ed.). London:
H.K. Lewis.
Reed, D., A. Yung-Hsu Liu, R. Kleinman, A. Mastri, D. Reed, S. Sattar, and J. Ziegler
(2012). An effectiveness assessment and cost-benefit analysis of registered apprenticeship in
10 states. Mathematica Final Report 06689.090 and 40096, Mathematica Policy Research.
Reynolds, A. J. (1994). Effects of a preschool plus follow-on intervention for children at risk.
Developmental Psychology 30 (6), 787–804.
Reynolds, A. J. (1995). One year of preschool intervention or two: Does it matter? Early
Childhood Research Quarterly 10 (1), 1–31.
Reynolds, A. J. (2000). Success in Early Intervention: The Chicago Child-Parent Centers.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Reynolds, A. J. and J. A. Temple (1998, February). Extended early childhood intervention
and school achievement: Age 13 findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study. Child
Development 69 (1), 231–246.
Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, S.-R. Ou, I. A. Arteaga, and B. A. B. White (2011, July).
School-based early childhood education and age-28 well-being: Effects by timing, dosage,
and subgroups. Science 333 (6040), 360–364.
Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, D. L. Robertson, and E. A. Mann (2001, May). Long-term
effects of an early childhood intervention on educational achievement and juvenile arrest—
A 15-year follow-up of low-income children in public schools. Journal of American Medical
Association 285 (18), 2339–2346.
Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, D. L. Robertson, and E. A. Mann (2002). Age 21 cost-benefit
analysis of the Title I Chicago Child-Parent Centers. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis 24 (4), 267–303.
115

Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, B. A. White, S.-R. Ou, and D. L. Robertson (2011, January–
February). Age 26 cost-benefit analysis of the Child-Parent Center early education program. Child Development 82 (1), 379–404.
Roberts, B. W. (2009). Back to the future: Personality and assessment and personality
development. Journal of Research in Personality 43 (2), 137–145.
Roberts, B. W., N. R. Kuncel, R. L. Shiner, A. Caspi, and L. R. Goldberg (2007, December).
The power of personality: The comparative validity of personality traits, socioeconomic
status, and cognitive ability for predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives in Psychological Science 2 (4), 313–345.
Roberts, R. D., G. N. Goff, F. Anjoul, P. C. Kyllonen, G. Pallier, and L. Stankov (2000).
The Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB): Little more than acculturated
learning (Gc)!? Learning and Individual Differences 12 (1), 81–103.
Roder, A. and M. Elliot (2011). A promising start: Year-Up’s initial impacts on young
adults’ careers. Technical report, Economic Mobility Corporation.
Rodrı́guez-Planas, N. (2010). Mentoring, educational services, and economic incentives:
Longer-term evidence on risky behaviors from a randomized trial. Discussion Paper 4968,
IZA.
Rodrı́guez-Planas, N. (2012, October). Longer-term impacts of mentoring, educational services, and learning incentives: Evidence from a randomized trial in the United States.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4), 121–139.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the Adolescent Self-Image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Rothstein, R., R. Jacobsen, and T. Wilder (2008). Grading Education: Getting Accountability
Right. New York: Economic Policy Institute and Teachers College Press.
116

Rutter, M. (2006). Implications of resilience concepts for scientific understanding. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences 1094 (1), 1–12.
Ryan, R. M. and E. L. Deci (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions
and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology 25 (1), 54–67.
Salgado, J. F. (1997). The five factor model of personality and job performance in the
European Community. Journal of Applied Psychology 82 (1), 30–43.
Schmidt, F. L. and J. Hunter (2004). General mental ability in the world of work: Occupational attainment and job performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 86 (1), 162–173.
Schmitt, D. P. (2002). Are sexual promiscuity and relationship infidelity linked to different
personality traits across cultures? Findings from the International Sexuality Description
Project. Online Readings in Psychology and Culture 4 (Unit 4), 1–22. Retrieved from
http://scholarworks.gvsu.edu/orpc/vol4/iss4/4.
Schmitt, D. P., J. Allik, R. R. McCrae, and V. Benet-Martı́nez (2007). The geographic
distribution of Big Five personality traits: Patterns and profiles of human self-description
across 56 nations. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 38 (2), 173–212.
Schochet, P. Z., J. Burghardt, and S. Glazerman (2001). National Job Corps Study: The
Impacts of Job Corps on Participants’ Employment and Related Outcomes. Princeton, NJ:
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Schochet, P. Z., J. Burghardt, and S. McConnell (2008, December). Does Job Corps work?
Impact findings from the National Job Corps Study. American Economic Review 98 (5),
1864–1886.
Schulz, R., J. Bookwala, J. E. Knapp, M. Scheier, and G. M. Williamson (1996). Pessimism,
age, and cancer mortality. Psychology and Aging 11 (2), 304–309.
117

Schumacher, R. (2003). Family support and parent involvement in Head Start: What do
Head Start program performance standards require? Technical report, Center for Law
and Social Policy.
Scribner, J. P. and D. Wakelyn (1998). Youth apprenticeship experiences in Wisconsin: A
stakeholder-based evaluation. The High School Journal 82 (1), 24–34.
Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (1992).

Learning a Living: A

Blueprint for High Performance: A SCANS Report for America 2000. Washington, DC:
United States Government Printing Office.
Segal, C. (2008, October). Working when no one is watching: Motivation, test scores, and
economic success. Economics working papers, Department of Economics and Business,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
Shure, M. B. and G. Spivack (1988). Interpersonal cognitive problem solving. In R. H.
Price, E. L. Cowen, R. P. Lorion, and J. Ramos-McKay (Eds.), 14 Ounces of Prevention: A Casebook for Practitioners, Chapter 6, pp. 69–82. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Social and Character Development Research Consortium (2010, October). Efficacy of schoolwide programs to promote social and character development and reduce problem behavior
in elementary school children. Research Report NCER 20112001, National Center for
Education Research, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Sroufe, L. A. (1997, Spring). Psychopathology as an outcome of development. Development
and Psychopathology 9 (2), 251–268.
Sroufe, L. A., B. Egeland, E. Carlson, and W. A. Collins (2005). The Development of the
Person: The Minnesota Study of Risk and Adaptation from Birth to Adulthood. New York,
NY: Guilford Press.

118

Stasz, C. (2001). Assessing skills for work: Two perspectives. Oxford Economic Papers 53 (3),
385–405.
Sylva, K. (1997). The quest for quality in curriculum. In L. J. Schweinhart and D. P.
Weikart (Eds.), Lasting Differences: The High/Scope Preschool Curriculum Comparison
Study through Age 23, pp. 89–93. Ypsilanti: High/Scope Press.
Temple, J. A. and A. J. Reynolds (2007). Benefits and costs of investments in preschool
education: Evidence from the Child-Parent Centers and related programs. Economics of
Education Review 26 (1), 126–144.
Terman, L. M., B. T. Baldwin, E. Bronson, J. C. DeVoss, F. Fuller, T. Lee Kelley, M. Lima,
H. Marshall, A. H. Moore, A. S. Raubenheimer, G. M. Ruch, R. L. Willoughby, J. Benson Wyman, and D. Hazeltine Yates (1925). Genetic Studies of Genius: Mental and
Physical Traits of a Thousand Gifted Children, Volume 1. Stanford University, CA: Stanford University Press.
Terman, L. M. and M. A. Merrill (1960). Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale: Manual for the
Third Revision Form L-M. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Terman, L. M., M. H. Oden, N. Bayley, H. Marshall, Q. McNemar, and E. B. Sullivan (1947).
Genetic Studies of Genius: The Gifted Child Grows Up: Twenty-Five Years’ Follow-Up
of a Superior Group, Volume 4. Stanford University, CA: Stanford University Press.
Thaler, R. H. (2008, July). A short course in behavioral economics. Edge Master Class,
Sonoma, CA, July 25–27, 2008.
The KIPP Foundation (2011). The promise of college completion: KIPP’s early successes
and challenges. Report, The KIPP Foundation, San Francisco, CA.
Tierney, J. P., J. Baldwin-Grossman, and N. L. Resch (1995). Making a difference: An
impact study of Big Brothers Big Sisters. Report, Public/Private Ventures.
119

Tough, P. (2012). How Children Succeed: Grit, Curiosity, and the Hidden Power of Character. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Tuttle, C. C., B.-r. Teh, I. Nichols-Barrer, B. P. Gill, and P. Gleason (2010). Student characteristics and achievement in 22 KIPP middle schools. Report 06441.900, Mathematica.
Tyler, R. W. (1973). Assessing educational achievement in the affective domain. Measurement in Education 4 (3), 1–8.
Walker, G. C. and F. Vilella-Velez (1992). Anatomy of a Demonstration: The Summer
Training and Education Program (STEP) from Pilot through Replication and Postprogram
Impacts. Philadelphia, PA: Public/Private Ventures.
Walker, S., T. Wachs, S. Grantham-McGregor, M. Black, C. Nelson, S. Huffman, H. BakerHenningham, S. Chang, J. Hamadani, B. Lozoff, J. Meeks Gardner, C. Powell, A. Rahman,
and L. Richter (2011). Inequality in early childhood: risk and protective factors for early
child development. The Lancet 378 (9799), 1325–1338.
Walker, S. P., S. M. Chang, C. A. Powell, and S. M. Grantham-McGregor (2005). Effects
of early childhood psychosocial stimulation and nutritional supplementation on cognition and education in growth-stunted Jamaican children: Prospective cohort study. The
Lancet 366 (9499), 1804–1807.
Walker, S. P., S. M. Chang, C. A. Powell, E. Simonoff, and S. M. Grantham-McGregor
(2007). Early childhood stunting is associated with poor psychological functioning in
late adolescence and effects are reduced by psychosocial stimulation. The Journal of
Nutrition 137 (11), 2464–2469.
Walker, S. P., S. M. Chang, M. Vera-Hernández, and S. Grantham-McGregor (2011). Early
childhood stimulation benefits adult competence and reduces violent behavior. Pediatrics 127 (5), 849–857.

120

Walker, S. P., T. D. Wachs, J. M. Gardner, B. Lozoff, G. A. Wasserman, E. Pollitt,
J. A. Carter, and The International Child Development Steering Group (2007, January). Child development: Risk factors for adverse outcomes in developing countries.
The Lancet 369 (9556), 145–157.
Walsh, D. A. (2005). Why Do They Act That Way? A Survival Guide to the Adolescent
Brain for You and Your Teen (1 ed.). New York: Free Press.
Washington Workforce Training Board (2008). Washington state employers workforce needs
and practices survey. Statewide report.
Webb, E. (1915). Character and intelligence. British Journal of Psychology Supplement
1 (3), 1–99.
Westat (2010). Head Start Impact Study: Final report. Contract 282-00-0022, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Westwood, A. (2004).

Skills that matter and shortages that don’t.

In C. Warchust,

I. Grugulis, and E. Keep (Eds.), The Skills that Matter. New York, NY: PalgraveMacmillan.
Winkelmann, R. (1996, July). Employment prospects and skill acquisition of apprenticeshiptrained workers in Germany. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 49 (4), 658–672.
Wolter, S. C. and P. Ryan (2011). Apprenticeship. In S. M. Eric A. Hanushek and L. Woessmann (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 3 of Handbooks in Economics, Chapter 11, pp. 521–576. Elsevier.
Young, M. E. (1996). Early Childhood Development: Investing in the Future. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Zabel, J., S. Schwartz, and S. Donald (2010). The impact of the Self-Sufficiency Project

121

on the employment behaviour of former welfare recipients. Canadian Journal of Economics 43 (3), 882–918.
Zabel, J., S. Schwartz, and S. Donald (2013, February). An analysis of the impact of the
Self-Sufficiency Project on wages. Empirical Economics 44 (1), 231–259.
Zemsky, R. (1997). Skills and the economy: An employer context for understanding the
school-to-work transition. In A. Lesgold, M. Feuer, and A. Black (Eds.), Transitions in
Work and Learning: Implications for Assessment. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

122

