NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEOUS TECHNOLOGY DIFFUSION AND RICARDIAN TRADE PATTERNS
William R. Kerr
Working Paper 19657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19657

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu. I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Pol
Antras, David Autor, Nick Bloom, Ricardo Caballero, Arnaud Costinot, Julian Di Giovanni, Fritz
Foley, Richard Freeman, Ashley Lester, Matt Mitchell, Peter Morrow, Ramana Nanda, Tim Simcoe,
Antonio Spilimbergo, Scott Stern, and John Van Reneen for advice on this project and to seminar
participants at the American Economic Association meetings, Clemson University, European Regional
Science Association meetings, Georgetown University, Harvard University, International Monetary
Fund, London School of Economics, MIT Economics, MIT Sloan, NBER High Skilled Immigration
Conference, NBER Productivity, Queens University, University of California Davis, University of
Helsinki, and University of Toronto Rotman for helpful comments. This paper is a substantial revision
of Chapter 2 of my Ph.D. dissertation (Kerr 2005). This research is supported by the National Science
Foundation, MIT George Schultz Fund, HBS Research, and the Innovation Policy and Economy Group.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Heterogeneous Technology Diffusion and Ricardian Trade Patterns
William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 19657
November 2013
JEL No. F11,F14,F15,F22,J44,J61,L14,O31,O33,O57
ABSTRACT
This study tests the importance of Ricardian technology differences for international trade. The empirical
analysis has three comparative advantages: including emerging and advanced economies, isolating
panel variation regarding the link between productivity and exports, and exploiting heterogeneous
technology diffusion from immigrant communities in the United States for identification. The latter
instruments are developed by combining panel variation on the development of new technologies across
U.S. cities with historical settlement patterns for migrants from countries. The instrumented elasticity
of export growth on the intensive margin with respect to the exporter's productivity growth is between
1.6 and 2.4 depending upon weighting.

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu

1

Introduction

Trade among countries due to technology di¤erences is a core principle in international economics. Countries with heterogeneous technologies focus on producing goods in which they
have comparative advantages; subsequent exchanges a¤ord higher standards of living than are
possible in isolation. This Ricardian …nding is the …rst lesson in most undergraduate courses
on trade, and it undergirds many modelling frameworks on which recent theoretical advances
build (e.g., Dornbusch et al. 1977, Eaton and Kortum 2002, Costinot et al. 2012). In response
to Stanislaw Ulam’s challenge to name a true and nontrivial theory in social sciences, Paul
Samuelson chose this principle of comparative advantage due to technology di¤erences.
While empirical tests date back to David Ricardo (1817), quantifying technology di¤erences across countries and industries is extremely di¢ cult. Even when observable proxies for
latent technology di¤erences are developed (e.g., labor productivity, industrial specialization),
cross-sectional analyses risk confounding heterogeneous technologies with other country-industry
determinants of trade. Panel data models can further remove time-invariant characteristics
(e.g., distances, colonial histories) and a¤ord explicit controls of time-varying determinants (e.g.,
factor accumulation, economic development, trading blocs). Quantifying the dynamics of uneven technology advancement across countries is an even more challenging task, however, and
whether identi…ed relationships represent causal linkages remains a concern. These limitations
are particularly acute for developing and emerging economies. This is unfortunate as non-OECD
economies have experienced some of the more dramatic changes in technology sets and manufacturing trade over the last thirty years, providing a useful laboratory for quantifying Ricardian
e¤ects.
This study contributes to the empirical trade literature on Ricardian advantages in three
ways. First, it utilizes a panel dataset that includes many countries at various development
stages (e.g., Bolivia, France, South Africa), a large group of focused manufacturing industries,
and an extended time frame. The 1975-2000 World Trade Flows (WTF) database provides
export data for each bilateral route (exporter-importer-industry-year), and data from the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) provide labor productivity estimates.
The developed data platform includes substantially more variation in trade and productivity
di¤erences across countries than previously feasible.
The second contribution is to provide panel estimates of the elasticity of export growth with
respect to productivity development. Following the theoretical work of Costinot et al. (2012)
that is discussed below, estimations include …xed e¤ects for importer-industry-year and exporterimporter-year. The importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects control, for example, for trade barriers
in each importing country by industry segment, while the exporter-importer-year …xed e¤ects
1

control for the overall levels of trade between countries (e.g., the gravity model), labor cost structures in the exporter, and similar. While these controls account for overall trade and technology
levels by country, permanent di¤erences in the levels of these variables across industries within a
country are used for identi…cation. This paper is the …rst to quantify Ricardian elasticities when
further modelling cross-sectional …xed e¤ects for exporter-importer-industry observations. This
panel approach only exploits variation within industry-level bilateral trading routes, providing
a substantially stronger empirical test of the theory.
The third and most important contribution is to provide instruments for the labor productivity development in exporting countries. Instruments are essential in this setting due to
typical concerns: omitted variable biases for the labor productivity measure, reverse causality,
and the potential for signi…cant measurement error regarding the productivity di¤erences across
countries. The instruments exploit heterogeneous technology di¤usion from past migrant communities in the United States for identi…cation. These instruments are developed by combining
panel variation on the development of new technologies across US cities during the 1975-2000
period with historical settlement patterns for migrants and their ancestors from countries that
are recorded in the 1980 Census of Populations.
The foundation for these instruments is the modelling of Ricardian advantages through di¤erences across countries in their access to the US technology frontier. Recent research emphasizes
the importance of immigrants in frontier economies for the di¤usion of technologies to their home
countries (e.g., Saxenian 2002, 2006, Kerr 2008, Papageorgiou and Spilimbergo 2008). These
global connections and networks facilitate the transfer of both codi…ed and tacit details of new
innovations, and Kerr (2008) …nds foreign countries realize manufacturing gains from stronger
scienti…c integration, especially with respect to computer-oriented technologies. Multiple studies
document speci…c channels sitting behind this heterogeneous di¤usion.1
As invention is disproportionately concentrated in the United States, these ethnic networks
signi…cantly in‡uence technology opportunity sets in the short-run for following economies. This
study uses heterogeneous technology di¤usion from the United States to better quantify the importance of technology di¤erences across countries in explaining trade patterns. Trade between
the United States and foreign countries is excluded throughout this study due to network effects operating alongside technology transfers. Attention is instead placed on how di¤erential
1

Channels for this technology transfer include communications among scientists and engineers (e.g., Saxenian
2002, Kerr 2008, Agrawal et al. 2011), trade ‡ows (e.g., Rauch 2001, Rauch and Trindade 2002), and foreign
direct investment (e.g., Kugler and Rapoport 2007, 2012, Foley and Kerr 2013). Recent research further quanti…es
the role of international labor mobility in these exchanges (e.g., Saxenian 2006, Kapur and McHale 2005, Nanda
and Khanna 2010, and Obukhova 2008, 2009).
Other sources of heterogeneous technology frontiers are geographic distances to major R&D nations (e.g.,
Keller 2002b), the innovative e¤orts of trading partners (e.g., Grossman and Helpman 1991, Coe and Helpman
1995, Coe et al. 1997), or international patenting decisions (e.g., Eaton and Kortum 1999). Keller (2004) reviews
the technology transfer literature.

2

technology transfer from the United States— especially its industry-level variation by country—
in‡uences exports from the foreign country to other nations. Said di¤erently, the study quanti…es the extent to which India’s exports, for example, grow faster in industries where technology
transfer from the United States to India is particularly strong.
The instrumented elasticity of export growth on the intensive margin with respect to the
exporter’s productivity growth is 2.4 in unweighted estimations. The elasticity is 1.6 when
using sample weights that interact worldwide trade volumes for exporters and importers in
the focal industry. Thus, the study estimates that a 10% increase in the labor productivity
of an exporter for an industry leads to about a 20% expansion in export volumes within that
industry compared to other industries for the exporter. This instrumented elasticity is weaker
than Costinot et al.’s (2012) preferred estimate of 6.5 derived through producer price data for
OECD countries in 1997, but it is quite similar to their 2.7 elasticity with labor productivity
data that are most comparable to this study. The two analyses are also qualitatively similar in
terms of their relationships to uninstrumented elasticities. This study does not …nd evidence of
substantial adjustments in the extensive margin of the group of countries to which the exporter
trades. These results are robust to sample composition adjustments and variations on estimation
techniques. Extensions quantify the extent to which heterogeneous technology transfer can be
distinguished from a Rybczynski e¤ect operating within manufacturing, evaluate di¤erences in
education levels or time in the United States for past migrants in instrument design, and test
the robustness to controlling for direct ethnic patenting growth by industry in the United States.
This study concludes that comparative advantages are an important determinant of trade;
moreover, Ricardian di¤erences are relevant for explaining changes in trade patterns over time.
These panel exercises are closest in spirit to the industrial specialization work of Harrigan (1997b)
and the structural Ricardian model of Costinot et al. (2012). Other tests of the Ricardian
model are MacDougall (1951, 1952), Stern (1962), Golub and Hsieh (2000), Morrow (2010), Chor
(2010), Shikher (2010), Fieler (2011), Costinot and Donaldson (2012), Caliendo and Parro (2012),
Bombardini et al. (2012), and Levchenko and Zhang (2012). The comparative advantages of
this work are in its substantial attention to non-OECD economies, the stricter panel assessment
using heterogeneous technology di¤usion, and the instruments built o¤ of di¤erential access
to the US frontier. Work on migration-trade linkages dates back to Gould (1994), Head and
Reis (1998), and Rauch and Trindade (2002), with Bo and Jacks (2012), Bahar and Rapoport
(2013), and Cohen et al. (2013) being recent contributions that provide references to the lengthy
subsequent literature. This paper di¤ers from these studies in its focus on technology transfer’s
role for export promotion as an independent mechanism from migrant networks. In addition to
contributing to the trade literature, the study documents for emerging economies an economic
consequence of emigration to frontier economies like the United States.2
2

Davis and Weinstein (2002) consider immigration to the United States, technology, and Ricardian-based

3

2

Theory and Estimating Framework

This section develops the basic estimating equation from the multi-country and multi-industry
model of Costinot et al. (2012). This framework builds o¤ the model of Eaton and Kortum
(2002) to articulate appropriate estimation of Ricardian advantages. A simple application builds
ethnic networks and heterogeneous technology di¤usion into this theory. The boundaries of the
framework and the statistical properties of the estimating equation are discussed.3

2.1

Costinot et al. (2012) Theoretical Framework

A world economy is comprised of I countries and K industries or goods. Labor is the sole factor
of production and there are constant returns to scale in the production of each good. Labor is
perfectly mobile across industries and immobile across countries. Li and wi are the number of
workers and the wage rate in country i, respectively. Consumers consume their full wages in each
period. Accordingly, time subscripts are omitted until the estimating equation is introduced.
Countries are free to produce or trade all goods. Each good k 2 K has an in…nite number of
varieties indexed by ! 2
[1; : : : ; +1]. zik (!) represents the number of units of the !th
variety of good k that can be produced with one unit of labor in country i.
Following Eaton and Kortum (2002), zik (!) is a random variable drawn independently for
each triplet (i; k; !) from a Fréchet distribution,
Fik (z) = exp[ (z=zik ) ], for all z

0,

(1)

where zik > 0 and > 1. Thus, technological di¤erences across countries and industries depend
on two parameters, zik and . The …rst parameter zik captures the fundamental productivity
of country i in industry k, which a¤ects the productivity of all producers (e.g., institutions,
climate). For each industry, the cross-country variation of this zik parameter governs the crosscountry variation in relative labor productivity that sits at the core of the standard Ricardian
model. A larger zik raises the absolute advantage for trade for exporter i in industry k. The second
parameter models the intra-industry heterogeneity that exists due to the scope for idiosyncratic
di¤erences in technological know-how across varieties. This variation is the same in all countries
and industries, and parameterizes the impact of changes in fundamental productivity levels
zik on aggregate trade ‡ows. A larger implies a tighter distribution that limits the scope for
comparative advantage across nations.
trade. Their concern, however, is with the calculation of welfare consequences for US natives as a consequence
of immigration due to shifts in trade patterns.
3
Dornbusch et al. (1977), Wilson (1980), Baxter (1992), Alvarez and Lucas (2007), and Costinot (2009)
provide further theoretical underpinnings for comparative advantage.

4

Trade frictions have iceberg costs such that for each unit of good k shipped from exporter i
to importer j, only 1=dkij 1 units arrive, with dkii = 1 and dkil dkij dkjl for any third country l
to rule out cross-country arbitrage opportunities. Perfect competition in markets and constant
returns to scale in production imply that the price pkj (!) paid by buyers of variety ! of good k
in any country j is
pkj (!) = min[ckij (!)],
(2)
i2I

ckij (!)

wi )=zik (!)

(dkij

is the cost of producing and delivering one unit of this variety
=
where
from country i to country j. For each variety ! of good k, buyers in country j select the best
price available from around the world. An increase in country i’s e¢ ciency for good j lowers the
price it must charge.
Representative consumers in each country have a two-tier utility function. The upper tier is
Cobb-Doublas, and the preference parameter kj measures the share of expenditure on varieties
from industry k in country j. The lower tier is constant elasticity of substitution (CES), and
k
j is the elasticity of substitution between varieties. Accordingly, expenditures are such that in
any importer j, total expenditure on variety ! of good k is
k

where 0

k
j

1,

k
j

xkj (!) = [pkj (!)=pkj ]1 j
hP
k
0 1
< 1 + , and pkj
! 0 2 pj (! )

k
j wj Lj ,
k
j

i1=(1

(3)
k)
j

. The restriction

k
j

< 1 + is

a technical assumption that guarantees the existence of a well-de…ned CES price index pkj . The
QK
k kj
consumer price index in country j is pj
k=1 (pj ) :
P
0
k
The value of total exports from exporter i to importer j in industry k is xkij
! 0 2 k xj (! ),
ij

where kij denotes the set of varieties exported. The share of exports in importer j and industry
P
k from country i is kij xkij = Ii0 =1 xki0 j . With this model structure, the bilateral exports from
exporter i to importer j in industry k is
xkij = PI

(wi dkij =zik )

k
k
i0 =1 (wi0 di0 j =zi0 )

k
j wj Lj ;

(4)

which has an intuitive interpretation that closely connects to a similar expression in Eaton and
Kortum (2002). The righthand terms express the overall economic size of the importer j and its
preferences over goods. The lefthand fraction describes the extent to which the exporter is the
lowest cost producer of the good, taking into account geographic distances, production costs,
technology levels, and the underlying heterogeneity in varieties for countries. Under assumptions
of balanced trade, the relatives wages around the world can further be determined.
Costinot et al. (2012) show that equation (4) provides the foundation for estimating an
econometric equation of the form
ln x~kij =

ij

+

k
j

5

+ ln(~
zik ) + "kij ;

(5)

where x~kij represents "corrected" trade ‡ows that adjust for country openness. Similarly, z~ik
represents observed productivity, given that not every country produces every good as it can
import goods from other countries. ij and kj are vectors of exporter-importer and importerindustry …xed e¤ects. Comparing equations (5) and (4) shows the basic function of these …xed
e¤ects. The importer-industry …xed e¤ects control for the righthand terms about the importer
and its preferences over goods. Importer-industry …xed e¤ects also account for the denominator
of the lefthand fraction, given that it is a worldwide aggregate for an industry. The exporterimporter …xed e¤ects capture the numerator’s terms, which emphasize cost levels in the exporter
and distances between the two countries. Under the assumption that the delivery cost term dkij
in the numerator can be expressed in proportionate terms over these two vectors of …xed e¤ects
(e.g., dkij = dij dkj ), speci…cation (5) provides an unbiased estimate of the parameter. An
alternative assumption is that the residual di¤erences in delivery costs after controlling for these
vectors of …xed e¤ects are uncorrelated with the focal productivity level z~ik .

2.2

Estimating Equation

This study quanti…es this Ricardian theory through worldwide trade in manufacturing goods.
Rather than attempting to jointly model Ricardian advantages with other determinants of trade
(e.g., Davis and Weinstein 2001, Morrow 2010), estimations isolate the role of technology di¤erences through the structure outlined by Costinot et al. (2012) along with …rst di¤erencing and
instrumental variables. The …rst step is to extend equation (5) to include time t,
ln x~kijt =

ijt

+

k
jt

+ ln(~
zitk ) + "kijt :

(6)

It is important to note that this extension is being applied to the …xed e¤ect terms. Thus, the
exporter-importer …xed e¤ects in the cross-sectional format become exporter-importer-year …xed
e¤ects in a panel format. The empirical work below estimates equation (6) for reference, but
most of the speci…cations instead examine a …rst-di¤erenced form,
ln x~kijt =

ijt

+

k
jt

+

ln(~
zitk ) + "kijt ;

(7)

where the …xed e¤ects and error term are appropriately adjusted.
The motivation for …rst di¤erencing is stronger empirical isolation of the parameter. By
themselves, exporter-importer-year and importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects in equation (6) allow
identi…cation of the parameter in two ways: 1) longitudinal changes in z~itk over time and 2)
long-term di¤erences in z~itk across industries for the exporter. In a cross-sectional estimation of
equation (5), it is not feasible to distinguish between these forms. This second e¤ect persists
when extending the equation (6) to a panel setting because the exporter-importer-year …xed
e¤ects ijt only account for the aggregate technology changes for exporters.
6

Whether estimating the parameter through both forms of variation is appropriate depends
upon model assumptions, beliefs about unmeasured factors, and measurement error. It is helpful
to illustrate by considering the exports of Germany in automobiles. The study examines trade
over the 1980-1999 period. Throughout this period, Germany held strong technological advantages and labor productivity for manufacturing automobiles relative to the rest of the world.
Over the course of the period, this productivity also changed in relative terms. If one can feasibly isolate these productivity variables, then having both forms of variation is an advantage.
A second and related issue is that …rst di¤erencing the data exacerbates the downward bias
that measurement error causes for estimates of the parameter. There are plenty of reasons to
suspect non-trivial measurement error in industry-level labor productivity estimates developed
from the UNIDO database.
On the other hand, the earlier discussion about the delivery cost term dkij highlights why
removing long-term di¤erences might be an advantage. The basic identi…cation constraint for
the econometric analysis is that technology levels of exporters cannot be distinguished from
other unobservable factors that also vary by exporter-industry or exporter-industry-year for the
long-term technology levels and their longitudinal changes, respectively. The …rst is particularly
worrisome given its general nature. First di¤erencing is not foolproof against omitted factors,
but it does require that the changes in these factors correlate with the changes in the focal
productivity level in the exporters of z~itk . For the delivery cost example that was outlined above,
…rst di¤erencing permits the allowable proportionate structure dkij = dij dkj to be extended to
dkijt = dijt dkjt dkij , where the third term represents the long-term delivery costs for the exporter
to the importer by industry. This latter approach of panel estimation, while very common in
micro-economic analyses, has yet to be extended to the Ricardian literature.
Beyond this discussion, a few other notes about the estimation of (7) are warranted. The
dependent variable is bilateral manufacturing exports by exporter-importer-industry-year. The
lack of trade for a large number of bilateral routes at the industry level creates econometric
challenges with a log speci…cation. These zero-valued exports are predicted by the model as
an exporter is rarely the lowest cost producer for all countries in an industry. This study
approaches this problem by separately testing the intensive and extensive margins of trade.
Most of the focus is on the intensive margin of trade expansion, where the dependent variable
is the log growth in the value of bilateral exports ln x~kijt . The intensive margin of exports
captures both quantities e¤ects and price e¤ects (e.g., Acemoglu and Ventura 2002, Hummels
and Klenow 2005). In tests of extensive margin of trade expansion— that is, commencing exports
to new import destinations— the dependent variable becomes a dichotomous indicator variable
for whether measurable exports exist. Di¤erences in the sample construction for these two tests
are discussed when describing the trade dataset.
Beyond the model’s background, the exporter-importer-year …xed e¤ects perform several
7

functions. They intuitively require that Germany’s technology expansion for auto manufacturing
exceed its technology expansion for chemicals manufacturing if export growth is stronger in autos
than chemicals. Thus, these …xed e¤ects remove aggregate trade growth by exporter-importer
pairs common across industries. These uniform expansions could descend from factors speci…c to
one country of the pair (e.g., economic growth and business cycles, factor accumulations, terms
of trade and price levels) or be speci…c to the bilateral trading pair (e.g., trade agreements,
preferences4 ). This framework is thus a powerful check against omitted variables biases, helping
to isolate the Ricardian impetus for trade from relative factor scarcities and other determinants of
trade. The …xed e¤ects also control for the gravity covariates commonly used in empirical trade
studies. National changes in factor endowments may still in‡uence industries di¤erentially due
to the Rybczynski e¤ect, which is explicitly tested for below. The importer-industry-year …xed
e¤ects control for tari¤s imposed upon an industry in the importing country. More broadly, they
also control for the aggregate growth in worldwide trade in each industry, relative price changes,
and the potential for trade due to increasing returns to scale (e.g., Helpman and Krugman 1985,
Antweiler and Tre‡er 2002).
More subtly, a key di¤erence between multi-country Ricardian frameworks and the classic
two-country model of Dornbusch et al. (1977) is worth emphasizing. This di¤erence in‡uences
how the comparative static of increasing a single country-industry technology parameter z~itk ,
ceteris paribus, is viewed. The multi-country theoretical framework allows for increases in z~itk
to reduce exports on some bilateral routes for the exporter-industry. This e¤ect is due to
general equilibrium pressures on input costs and extreme value distributions. The treatment
e¤ect is measured across all export destinations and thus captures the general Ricardian pattern
embedded in the model. This e¤ect, however, is a net e¤ect that may include reduction of
exports on some routes.5

2.3

Heterogeneous Technology Di¤usion and Ricardian Trade

While the Ricardian framework assigns a causal relationship of export growth to technology development, in practice the empirical estimation of speci…cation (7) can be confounded by reverse
causality or omitted variables operating by exporter-industry-year even after …rst di¤erencing.
Reverse causality may arise if engagement in exporting leads to greater technology adoption,
perhaps through learning-by-doing or for compliance with an importer’s standards and regulations. An example of an exporter-industry-year omitted factor is a change in government policies
to promote a speci…c industry, perhaps leading to large technology investments and the adoption
4

Hunter and Markusen (1988) and Hunter (1991) …nd these stimulants account for up to 20% of world trade.
Costinot et al. (2012) provides a more detailed discussion, including the extent to which the industry ordering
of the two-country model is found in the relative ordering of exports for countries.
5

8

of policies that favor the chosen industry’s exports relative to other manufacturing industries.
This would lead to an upward bias in the estimated parameter.6
Heterogeneous technology transfer from the United States provides an empirical foothold
against these complications. Consider a leader-follower model where the technology state in
exporter i and industry k is
k
k
(8)
z~itk = z~tk;U S
it Mit :
i
z~tk;U S is the exogenously determined US technology frontier for each industry and year. Two
general shifters govern the extent to which foreign nations access this frontier. First, ki models
time-invariant di¤erences in the access to or importance of US technologies to exporter i and
industry k; potentially arising due to geographic separation (e.g., Keller 2002b), heterogeneous
production techniques (e.g., Davis and Weinstein 2001, Acemoglu and Zilibotti 2001), or similar
factors. The shifter it models longitudinal changes in the utilization of US technologies common
to all industries within exporter i, for example, changes due to declines in communication and
transportation costs, greater general scienti…c or business integration, and so on. In what follows,
both of these shifters could further be made speci…c to an exporter-importer pair.
By themselves, these …rst three terms of model (8) describe the realities of technology diffusion but are not useful for identi…cation when estimating speci…cation (7). The technology
frontier z~tk;U S is captured by the importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects, the bilateral ki shifter is
removed in the …rst di¤erencing, and the longitudinal it shifter is captured in the exporterindustry-year …xed e¤ects. The …nal term Mitk , however, describes di¤erential access that the
migrants to the United States from exporter i provide to the technologies used in industry k.
This term models the recent empirical literature that …nds that overseas diaspora and ethnic
communities aid technology transfer from frontier countries to their home countries. If there is
su¢ cient industry variation in this technology transfer, once removing the many …xed e¤ects
embedded into speci…cation (7), then this transfer may provide an exogenous instrument to the
exporter productivity parameter z~itk in a way that allows very powerful identi…cation for the role
of Ricardian advantages in trade.
The design of this instrument combines spatial variation in historical settlement patterns
in the United States of migrant groups from countries with spatial variation in where new
technologies emerged over the period of the study. The instrument takes the form
"
#
k;A S
X
T
ech
c;t
Mitk =
M %i;c;1980
;
(9)
k;A S
T
ech
c;1980
c2C
6

More speci…cally, the innovation in industrial policy support must be non-proportional across manufacturing
industries. Long-term policies to support certain industries more than others are accounted for by the …rst
di¤erencing. Uniform changes in support across industries are also jointly accounted for by panel …xed e¤ects.

9

where c indexes US cities. M %i;c;1980 is the share of individuals tracing their ancestry to country
i— de…ned in more detail below and including …rst-generation immigrants— that are located in
city c in 1980. These shares sum to 100% across US cities. The bracketed fraction is a technology
ratio de…ned for an industry k. The ratio measures for each city how much patenting grew in
industry k relative to its initial level in 1980. The fraction exceeds one when when a city’s
level of invention for industry k grows from the base period, and it falls below one if the city’s
invention for an industry weakens.
The instrument thus interacts the spatial distribution across US cities of migrants from
exporter i with the city-by-city degree to which technological development for industry k grew
in locations. By summing across cities, equation (9) develops a total metric for exporter i and
industry k that can be …rst di¤erenced to instrument for ln(~
zitk ) in equation (7). A subtle but
important point is that the instrument can only work in a …rst-di¤erenced format (or equivalent
panel data model with bilateral route …xed e¤ects). This restriction is because the expression
(9) does not have a meaningful cross-sectional level to it— for all countries and industries, the
value of Mitk is equal to one in 1980 by de…nition. As such, Mitk cannot predict the cross-section of
trade in 1980. However, Mitk does provide insight about changes in technology opportunity sets
over time that can be used for identi…cation in estimations that consider changes in technology
and trade over time.
Two other points about the instrument’s design are important to bring out as they specifically relate to potential concerns about the instrument. One concern would be that migrants
from exporter i select cities speci…cally to acquire technologies useful for their home country’s
exports. This seems less worrisome perhaps for individual migrants, but it is quite plausible
when contemplating a German automobile manufacturer opening a new facility in the United
States (e.g., Alcacer and Chung 2007). The instrument seeks to rule out this concern by …xing
the city distribution of migrants from exporter i at their city locations in 1980. This approach
eliminates endogenous resorting, and the results below are also shown to be robust to focusing
on second-generation and earlier migrants.
A second concern is one of reverse causality. The United States relies extensively on immigrants for its science and engineering labor force, with …rst-generation immigrations accounting
for about a quarter of the bachelor’s educated workforce and half of those with PhDs. Moreover,
immigrants account for the majority of the recent growth in the US science and engineering
workforce. The spatial patterns of new high-skilled immigrants frequently build upon ethnic
enclaves and impact the innovation levels in those locations (e.g., Kerr and Lincoln 2010, Hunt
and Gauthier-Loiselle 2010, Peri et al. 2013). Thus, a worry could be that the technology
growth for cities in model (9) is endogenous. The concern would be that Germany is rapidly
developing innovations and new technologies for the automobile industry, and this expansion is
10

simultaneously leading to greater exports from Germany and the migration of German scientists
that are patenting automobile technologies to the United States.
This concern is addressed in several ways throughout this study, including sample decomposition exercises, lag structure tests, and similar exercises. The most straightforward safeguard,
however, is already built into model (9). The patenting data, as described below, allow us to
separate the probable ethnicities of inventors in the United States. By focusing on inventors
of Anglo-Saxon ethnic heritage, one can remove much of this reverse causality concern. The
Anglo-Saxon group accounts for about 70% of US inventors during the time period studied, and
so this group re‡ects the bulk and direction of US technological development.7
Addressing these concerns also provides the approach (9) with a conceptual advantage with
respect to the …xed e¤ect estimation strategy. The …rst di¤erencing in speci…cation (7) controls
for the initial distributions M %i;c;1980 , and the importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects kjt control for
the technology growth ratio for industry k. This separation is not perfect due to the summation
over cities, but it is closely mimicked. Thus, the identi…cation in these estimations comes o¤
these particular interactions. This provides a strong lever against concerns of omitted factors
or reverse causality, and the well-measured US data can provide instruments that overcome the
downward bias in coe¢ cients due to measurement error.

3

Data Preparation

This section describes the key data employed in this study and their preparation.

3.1

Labor Productivity Data

Productivity measures z~itk are taken from the Industrial Statistics Database of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). The UNIDO collects industry-level manufacturing statistics for The International Yearbook of Industrial Statistics and specialized publications
on topics like development and competition. Researchers at the UNIDO supplement the data
resources of the OECD with national records for non-OECD members, creating a unique global
resource. The UNIDO’s stated objective is the compilation of internationally comparable and
internally consistent series (e.g., variable de…nitions, accounting units, collection procedures).
7
Very strong crowding-in or crowding-out of natives by immigrant scientists and engineers would create a bias
in the Anglo-Saxon trend itself. Kerr and Lincoln (2010) …nd very limited evidence of either e¤ect at the city
level for the United States during this time period and for the time horizons considered here (i.e., …rst di¤erencing
over …ve-year periods).

11

The UNIDO data provide an unbalanced panel over countries, industries, and time periods,
and the availability of these data are the key determinant of this study’s sample design. Estimations consider manufacturing industries at the three-digit level of the International Standard
Industrial Classi…cation system (ISIC3). Data construction starts by calculating the annual
labor productivity in available industries and countries during the 1980-1999 period. These
annual measures are then collapsed into the mean labor productivity level for each …ve-year
period from 1980-1984 to 1995-1999. This aggregation into …ve-year time periods a¤ords a
more balanced panel by abstracting away from the occasional years when an otherwise reported
country-industry is not observed. The higher aggregation is also computationally necessary
below due to the tremendous number of …xed e¤ects considered.
These labor productivity measures are …rst di¤erenced in log format for inclusion in equation
(7). Thus, an exporter i and industry k is included if it is observed in the UNIDO database in
two adjacent periods. Sample inclusion also requires that the country-industry be reported in
two observations at least …ve years apart (e.g., to prevent an included observation only being
present in 1989 and 1991). The main estimations consider the three change periods of 19801984!1985-1989, 1985-1989!1990-1994, and 1990-1994!1995-1999.
Table 1a describes the 88 exporting countries included. Column 2 provides a count of the
number of periods the country is included in after the …rst di¤erence is taken, with a maximum
of three changes. Column 3 documents the count of bilateral route observations included at
the exporter-importer-industry level for the intensive-margin estimations. The total observation
count is 103,839 intensive-margin changes for an exporter-importer-industry. Countries di¤er
in their observation counts, even if observed for the same number of periods, due to variations
in their industry-level reporting in the UNIDO database and minimum requirements for export
volumes discussed below.
Column 4 documents the average manufacturing productivity levels for countries, expressed
in US dollars. While direct comparisons across countries are limited with an unbalanced panel,
productivity di¤erences between industrialized countries and developing nations are clearly evident. Oil-producing countries (e.g., Kuwait, Norway) have the highest average labor productivity levels, with Ireland, Japan and Singapore among the highest when excluding oil producers.
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar are among the lowest levels recorded. A small number of country-industry observations with under ten employees or very problematic data are
excluded. Column 5 documents the mean growth rate in labor productivity for each country
over its observations. These growth rates are …ve-year di¤erences, with outliers winsorized at
their 2% and 98% levels for reporting. Hong Kong, Myanmar, Peru, and Syria have the highest
growth rates, while the Dominican Republic, Tanzania, and Romania show the sharpest declines.
Table 1b provides similar statistics for the 26 industries, aggregating over countries. Industry
12

353 (Petroleum re…neries) has the highest average labor productivity, while industry 322 (Wearing apparel, except footwear) has the lowest. Productivity growth is strongest in industries 382
and 383 (Machinery, except electrical, and Machinery, electric). Productivity growth rates are
lowest in industry 323 (Leather products) and industry 361 (Pottery, china, earthenware).8

3.2

Export Volumes

Bilateral exports x~kijt are taken from the 1975-2000 World Trade Flows Database (WTF) developed by Feenstra et al. (2005). This rich data source documents product-level values of bilateral
trade for most countries from 1980-1999. Similar to the development of the labor productivity
variables, these product ‡ows are aggregated into …ve-year periods from 1980-1984 to 1995-1999
and then …rst di¤erenced in log format. Each productivity growth observation available with
the UNIDO dataset is paired with industry-level bilateral export observations from that country.
All exporting countries other than the United States are included.
The majority of export volumes for bilateral routes are zero-valued, which creates challenges
for the estimation of equation (7). It is also the case that the minimum threshold of trade
that can be consistently measured across countries and industries is US $100k in the WTF
database. While Feenstra et al. (2005) are able to incorporate smaller trading levels for some
countries, these values are ignored to maintain a consistent threshold across observations. To
accommodate these conditions, the empirical approach separately studies the extensive and
intensive margins of export expansion. Mean export volumes are taken across exporter-importerindustry observations for …ve-year time periods. For the extensive margin, entry into exports
along an exporter-importer-industry route is de…ned as exports greater than US $100k.9
Columns 6-8 of Tables 1a and 1b describe the WTF data. These descriptives focus on the
intensive-margin estimations that require exporter-importer-industry observations maintain the
minimum threshold of trade volume. Columns 6 and 7 provide comparable statistics about the
mean export levels and growth rates for included routes. Germany and Japan have the highest
average volumes, and Nicaragua and El Salvador have the lowest average volumes. Export growth
rates are strongest in Nicaragua, Congo, and Costa Rica, and they are lowest in Guatemala and
Zimbabwe. From an industry perspective, trade volumes have the highest average values in
industries 382-384 (Machinery and Transportation equipment), and the lowest average volumes
8
Most Ricardian models suggest using labor productivity to measure comparative advantage. This is fortunate
in that manufacturing output and employment data are among the most available metrics for the broad grouping
of countries under study. Labor is typically the only factor of production in Ricardian models, so a natural
extension might be total factor productivity that also allows for capital accumulation as well. Unfortunately,
capital data at the country-industry level for this sample is too sparse to be of bene…t in a panel study. An
earlier version of this paper presents results using output to measure industrial specialization.
9
A break exists in data collection procedures at 1984. This break does not have a signi…cant impact on
ISIC3-level export volumes, and the results are robust to dropping the initial period.

13

are observed in industry 361 (Pottery, china, earthenware). Industry 383 (Machinery, electric)
has the highest growth rate, while industries 353 (Petroleum re…neries) and 371 (Iron and steel)
have the lowest.
Column 8 of Table 1a documents the share of total WTF exports for countries that are
included in this sample. The main reasons why exports are not included are lack of corresponding
UNIDO labor productivity estimates or that the exports are going to the United States. This
sample accounts for 78% of exports to destinations other than United States from these countries
(about 63% if exports to the United States are included in the denominator). Column 8 of Table
1b provides comparable data for industries. The sample accounts for 69% of exports in these
industries to destinations other than United States. This share is lower than 78% due to the
inclusion of exporters not captured in Table 1a. Much of the decline on the industry side comes
through limited representation of major petroleum producers.10

3.3

US Historical Settlement Patterns

The …rst building block for the instrument is the historical settlement patterns of migrants from
each country M %i;c;1980 . These data are taken from the 1980 Census of Populations, which is
the earliest US census to collect the detailed ancestry of respondents (as distinguished from
immigration status or place of birth). The detailed ancestry codes include 392 categories with
positive responses, and this study maps these categories to the UNIDO records. Respondents
are asked primary and secondary ancestries, but the classi…cations only focus on the primary
…eld given the many missing values in the secondary …eld. There are multiple ancestry groups
that map to the same country, but the mapping procedure limits each ancestry group to map
to just one UNIDO country. Categories not linked to a speci…c UNIDO country are dropped
(e.g., Western Europe not elsewhere classi…ed, Cosswack, Ossetian). In total, 89% of the US
population in 1980 is mapped.
Metropolitan statistical areas, which will be referred to as cities for expositional ease, are
identi…ed using the 1% Metro Sample. This dataset is a 1-in-100 random sample of the US
population in 1980 and is designed to provide accurate portraits of cities. The set C over which
M %i;c;1980 is calculated includes 210 cities from the 1980 census …les are linked to the US patent
data described next. The primary measures of M %i;c;1980 include all individuals regardless of
age or education level to form M %i;c;1980 , only dropping those in group quarters (e.g., military
barracks) or not living in an urban area. Extensions test variations on these themes.
10
Price de‡ators are not available for this sample (exports or labor productivity data). To the extent that
exporter-industry-year de‡ators are comprised of exporter-year, industry-year, and exporter-industry components, the …xed e¤ects and …rst di¤erencing strategy will control for them automatically. Residual exporterindustry-year trends could bias OLS estimations. The IV estimations will overcome any such OLS biases due to
de‡ators.

14

Columns 9 and 10 of Table 1a provide the largest cities for each country’s ancestry population.
Due to their large overall size and high immigration shares, cities like New York, Los Angeles,
and Miami appear frequently. Nonetheless, there is substantial heterogeneity. East and West
Coast cities are more likely to link respectively to European and Asian ancestries, for example,
while southern parts of the United States link more to Latin American ancestries. The migration
from Nordic countries to the mid-west is evident (e.g., Finland’s presence in Minnesota).

3.4

US Patenting Data

S
The second building block for the instrument is the trend in patenting for each city T echk;A
.
c;t
These series are quanti…ed through individual records of all patents granted by the United States
Patent and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) from January 1975 to May 2009. Each patent record
provides information about the invention (e.g., technology classi…cation, citations of patents on
which the current invention builds) and inventors submitting the application (e.g., name, city).
Hall et al. (2001) provide extensive details on this dataset. USPTO patents must list at least one
inventor, and multiple inventors are allowed. Approximately 7.8 million inventors are associated
with 4.5 million granted patents during this period.

The base patent data are augmented in three ways. First, the addresses listed on inventor
records are used to group patents to the cities identi…ed in the 1980 census. This procedure uses
city lists collected from the O¢ ce of Social and Economic Data Analysis at the University of
Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%. Manual recoding further ensures that all patents with
more than 100 citations and all city names with more than 100 patents are identi…ed. Some
smaller metropolitan areas identi…ed in the patent data are excluded since they do not link to
places identi…ed in the 1980 census. Only patents with all inventors living in the United States
at the time of their patent application are included, and multiple inventors are discounted so
that each patent receives the same weight when measuring inventor populations.
Second, the USPTO issues patents by technology categories rather than by industries. The
work of Johnson (1999), Silverman (1999), and Kerr (2008) develops concordances that link the
USPTO classi…cations to ISIC3 industries in which new inventions are manufactured or used.
The main estimations focus on industry-of-use, a¤ording a composite view of the technological
opportunity developed for an industry. Studies of advanced economies …nd accounting for these
inter-industry R&D ‡ows important (e.g., Scherer 1984, Keller 2002a). Estimations using the
alternative categorization of technologies to industry of manufacturer are also presented below.
Cohen (2011) discusses the larger literature on industry-level mappings and evidence regarding
patents, R&D, and productivity.
Finally, the probable ethnicities of inventors are estimated through the names listed on
patents. This procedure exploits the fact the individuals with surnames Gupta or Desai are
15

likely to be Indian, Wang or Ming are likely to be Chinese, and Martinez or Rodriguez are
likely to be Hispanic. The name matching work exploits two commercial databases of ethnic
…rst names and surnames, and the procedures have been extensively customized for the USPTO
data. The match rate is 98% for US domestic inventors, and the process a¤ords the distinction of
nine ethnicities: Anglo-Saxon, Chinese, European, Hispanic, Indian, Japanese, Korean, Russian,
and Vietnamese.11
Most of the estimations in this paper only use whether inventors are of Anglo-Saxon origin,
as a means for reducing the potential of reverse causality as discussed above. The Anglo-Saxon
share of US domestic patenting declines from 73% in 1980-1984 to 66% in 1995-1999. This group
accounts for a majority of patents in each of the six major technology categories developed
by Hall et al. (2001). Appendix Table 1 provides descriptive statistics. This approach, in
combination with the interactions embedded in model (9), has the subtler advantage of allowing
the construction of instruments for many more countries and their ancestry groups than what
one can directly identify through inventor names, either due to lack of names for some countries
(e.g., Ethiopia, Oman) or due to extensive name overlap among countries within an ethnic group
(e.g., most of Latin America sharing Hispanic names). Extensions to this main approach are
considered after the core instrumental variable results are presented.
As with the productivity and trade data, the patenting series are aggregated into …ve-year
blocks by city and industry. These intervals start in 1975-1979 and extend through 1995-1999,
and the series are normalized by the patenting level of each city-industry in 1980-1984. These
series are then united with the spatial distribution of each country’s ancestry group using model
(9) to form an aggregate for each country-industry, and the log growth rate is then calculated
across these …ve-year intervals. The lag of this growth rate is used as the instrument for the productivity growth rate in an exporter-industry. That is, the estimated growth in technology ‡ows
from Brazil’s chemical industry during 1975-1979!1980-1984 is used as the instrument for the
growth in Brazil’s labor productivity in chemicals for the 1980-1984!1985-1989 period. This lag
structure follows the emphasis in Kerr (2008) on the strength of ethnic networks for technology
di¤usion during the …rst 3-6 years after a US invention is developed, and the comparison to
contemporaneous ‡ows is shown in robustness checks.
The Costinot et al. (2012) model dictates the inclusion of importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects
in speci…cation (7) for structural reasons such as country preferences. Two other rationales
exist for having at least industry-year …xed e¤ects due to the data development depicted. First,
the US technology frontier is taken as exogenous in model (8), and the identi…cation of the
k
jt

11
Kerr (2007) documents speci…c algorithms, lists frequent ethnic names, and provides extensive descriptive
statistics. This paper also discusses quality assurance exercises performed. For example, the ethnic-name database
can be applied to foreign patents registered with the USPTO. The ethnic-name database assigns ethnicities to 98%
of foreign records. Moreover, estimated inventor compositions are quite reasonable— for example, approximately
90% of inventors …ling from Chinese countries and regions are classi…ed as ethnically Chinese.

16

parameter should thus be independent of the pace of US technology expansion in di¤erent industries. A second methodological rationale stems from the US patent process. US patent grants
have increased dramatically since the early 1980s. While several factors lie behind this increase,
it is clear that USPTO grant rates grew faster than the underlying growth of US scienti…c personnel and innovation can explain. Moreover, di¤erences in grant rates exist across industries.
The …xed e¤ects account for these secular changes in the underlying patenting productivity.12

4

Empirical Results

This combined dataset is a unique laboratory for evaluating Ricardian technology di¤erences
in international trade. This section commences with ordinary least squares (OLS) estimations
using the UNIDO and WTF data. The instrumental variable (IV) results are then presented.

4.1

Base OLS Speci…cations

Table 2 provides the basic OLS estimations. Column 1 presents the "between" estimates from
speci…cation (6) before …rst di¤erencing the data; the dependent variable is the log mean nominal
value of bilateral exports for the …ve-year period. These estimates identify the parameter
through variation within bilateral trading routes and variation across industries of an exporter.
This framework parallels most Ricardian empirical studies. Column 2 presents the "within"
estimate from speci…cation (7) that utilizes …rst di¤erencing to isolate productivity and trade
growth within exporter-importer-industry cells.
Estimations in Panel A weight bilateral routes by an interaction of total exporter and importer trade in the industry. For example, the weight given to Germany’s exports of automobiles
to Nepal is the total export volume of Germany in the auto industry interacted with the total
imports of Nepal in the auto industry, using averages for each component across the sample
period. These weights focus attention on routes that are likely to be more important and give a
sense of the overall treatment e¤ect from Ricardian advantages. The weights, however, explicitly
do not build upon the actual trade volume for a route to avoid an endogenous emphasis on where
trade is occurring. Estimates in Panel B are unweighted. This study reports results with both
strategies to provide a range of estimates.
Estimations cluster standard errors by exporter-industry. This re‡ects the repeated application of exporter-industry technology levels to each route and the serial correlations concerns of
12

For example, Griliches (1990), Kortum and Lerner (2000), Kim and Marschke (2004), Hall (2005), Branstetter
and Ogura (2005), Ja¤e and Lerner (2005), and Lemley and Sampat (2007).

17

panel models. Other variants are reported below, too. Finally, the combination of 88 countries,
26 industries, and 3 time intervals creates an enormous number of exporter-importer-year and
importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects. The number of import destinations is in fact larger than the
88 exporters, as a UNIDO data match is not required for import destinations. With such a large
dataset, it is computationally di¢ cult to include exporter-importer-year and importer-industryyear …xed e¤ects, especially when considering IV estimations. By necessity, manual demeaning is
employed to remove the exporter-importer-year …xed e¤ects, and this procedure is applied over
the importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects. The baseline estimates also use an aggregated version
of the importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects where the industry level used for the groups is at the
two-digit level of the ISIC system rather than the three-digit level (reducing this dimension from
26 industries to 8 higher-level industry groups). Robustness checks on these simpli…cations are
reported below.
Interestingly, the "between" and "within" elasticities estimated in Panel A are both around
0.6 on the intensive margin. These coe¢ cients suggest that a 10% growth in labor productivity
for an exporter-industry is associated with a 6% growth in exports. The estimates in Panel B
are lower at 0.2-0.4, but they remain economically and statistically important. These elasticities
are somewhat lower than the unit elasticity often found in this literature with OLS estimation
techniques and cross-sectional data. There are many empirical reasons why this might be true,
with greater measurement error for productivity estimates outside of OECD sources certainly
being among them. An elasticity greater than or equal to one is also the baseline for the
Ricardian theory in Section 2. The IV estimates reported below are greater than one and have
a comparable level on some dimensions to those estimated with OECD countries. The next
subsection continues with extensions for these OLS estimates to provide a foundation for the IV
results.

4.2

Extended OLS Results

Table 3 provides robustness checks on the …rst-di¤erenced estimates, which are the focus of the
remainder of this study. The …rst column repeats the core results from Column 2 of Table 2.
The next two columns show robustness to dropping Brazil and China. Brazil, of all included
countries, displays the most outlier behavior with respect to its productivity growth rates, likely
due to de…nitional changes, but Brazil’s exclusion does not a¤ect the results. The results are
also similar when excluding China, which experienced substantial growth during the sample
period. It is generally worth noting that the 1980-1999 period pre-dates the very rapid take-o¤
of Chinese manufacturing exports after 2000. Unreported tests considered other candidates like
Mexico, Germany, and Japan, and these tests, too, found the results very stable to the sample
composition, re‡ective in large part of the underlying exporter-importer-year …xed e¤ects.
18

Column 4 shows the results when excluding industry 383 (Machinery, electrical). The coe¢ cient estimates are reduced in size by about 30% from Column 1, but they remain quite strong
and well-measured overall. The exclusion of industry 383 has the largest impact on the results
of the 26 industries in the sample, which is why it is reported. This importance is not very
surprising given the very rapid development of technology in this sector, its substantial di¤usion
around the world, and its associated trade. On this dimension, the industry-year portion of the
importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects play a very stabilizing role. Column 5 shows that winsorizing the sample at the 2%/98% delivers similar results, indicative that outliers are not overly
in‡uencing the measured elasticities.
It was earlier noted that computational demands require that the main estimations employ
the ISIC2-level industry groups when preparing importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects. Columns
6-8 test this choice in several ways. First, Column 6 shows that the results hold when estimating
the full model with ISIC2-based cells, so that the importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects exactly
match the cell construction. The weaker variation reduces the coe¢ cient estimates by half,
but the results remain statistically and economically important. Columns 7 and 8 alternatively
estimate the model using the sample from Kerr (2008) that focuses on a subset of the UNIDO
data in the 1985-1997 period. The Kerr (2008) sample is substantially smaller in size than
the present one, and so there is greater ‡exibility with respect to these …xed e¤ect choices.
The choice of industry aggregation for the importer-industry-year …xed e¤ects does not make a
material di¤erence in this sample.13
Finally, Column 9 shows the results with exporter-level clustering. The labor productivity
and export development of industries within countries may be correlated with each other due to
the presence of general-purpose technologies, learning-by-doing (e.g., Irwin and Klenow 1994),
and similar factors, and Feenstra and Rose (2000) show how the export ranges of countries
can change over time in systematic ways across industries. Clustering at the exporter level
allows for greater covariance across industries in this regard, and returns lower standard errors.
Most papers in this literature use robust standard errors on cross-sectional data, which would
translate most closely to bilateral-route clustering in a panel model. Unreported estimates
consider bilateral-route clustering and alternatively bootstrapped standard errors, and these
standard errors are smaller than those reported in Column 9.
Table 4 considers several extensions of this work to characterize heterogeneity in the sample.
Column 2 interacts the regressor with the GDP/capita level of the exporter, broken down into
quintiles. Interestingly, the link between base productivity and exports that is being captured
in this study is mainly coming o¤ of the lower-income countries, suggestive of higher trade
13

This extra check also has the advantage of linking the two studies closer together since the Kerr (2008) paper
focuses extensively on productivity growth due to technology transfer. Stability to the somewhat di¤erent data
preparation steps in Kerr (2008) is comforting.

19

due to varieties among developed economies. This may be due to the greater potential for
within-country productivity dispersion in the sample of developing and emerging economies,
their more rapid productivity development over the 1980-1999 period, and similar factors. It
is similar to the conclusion of Fieler (2011) that trade among advanced economies links to
product di¤erentiation and variety (low ), while trade among emerging economies links more
closely to fundamental productivity levels (higher ).14 By contrast, Column 3 …nds very little
di¤erence across countries of di¤erent sizes. Columns 4 and 5 also show very little connection
of export growth to geographic distances, excepting the fact that the growth in exports is not
simply happening to bordering countries. These extensions suggest that spatial distance is a
second-order factor in shaping where export growth occurs following technology expansion.
In contrast to the Ricardian framework, Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek (HOV) models describe trade
as resulting from factor di¤erences across countries (e.g., labor, capital, natural resources). In
the above model, technology is the only channel promoting export growth due to identical
factor endowments and no intertemporal factor accumulation. During the period studied, some
countries experienced signi…cant growth in their skilled labor forces and physical capital stocks,
as well as their technology sets, and the former could lead to growth in manufacturing exports
due to the Rybczynski e¤ect. Capital accumulation is particularly noted in rapid advances
made by several East Asian economies (e.g., Young 1992, 1995; Ventura 1997). The inclusion
of exporter-importer-year …xed e¤ects suggests that a Rybczynski e¤ect for the manufacturing
sector as a whole is not responsible for the observed trade patterns. Columns 6-8 provide
additional evidence that the observed role for technology within manufacturing is not due to
specialized factor accumulations.15
The intuition behind the proposed test is straightforward. Under the Rybczynski e¤ect, the
accumulation of skilled workers in country i shifts country i’s specialization towards manufacturing industries that employ skilled labor more intensively than other factors. By grouping
manufacturing industries by their skilled-labor intensities, tests examine if technology’s importance is preserved after time trends are removed for these industry groups within each country.
These time trends are included in addition to the …xed e¤ects listed at the bottom of the table.
To illustrate, the computer and pharmaceutical industries are both highly skill intensive. A
general Rybczynski e¤ect due to skilled worker accumulation in China would favor specialization and export growth in these industries equally. Additional con…dence for technology’s role is
warranted if China’s exports grow faster in the skill-intensive industry that receives the strongest
technology transfer from the United States relative to its peer industries.
14
These interactions are an empirical extension that are beyond the closed-form model depicted in Section 2.
Fieler (2011) provides a theoretical foundation for this work.
15
See Heckscher (1919), Ohlin (1933), and Vanek (1968). Dornbusch et al. (1980) provide a classic HOV
model, while Schott (2003) and Romalis (2004) o¤er powerful extensions and empirical tests. Tre‡er (1994,
1996), Harrigan (1997b), Davis and Weinstein (2001), Chor (2010), Morrow (2010), and Burstein and Vogel
(2012) jointly explore technology and factor di¤erences as determinants of trade.

20

To implement this matching exercise, industries are grouped into quintiles based upon their
factor intensities in the United States. Three intensities are studied— the industry’s capital-labor
ratio, the industry’s mean wage rate, and the share of non-production workers in the industry’s
labor force. Table 1b documents for each industry the quintile groupings assigned. Textiles
and apparel consistently rank in the lowest quintile in all three classi…cations schemes, while
chemicals and industrial machinery consistently fall into top quintiles. Some di¤erences do exist
though. The correlations among quintile groupings are 0.77 for capital-labor and mean wage,
0.60 for mean wage and non-production share, and 0.44 for capital-labor and non-production
share. The role for technology holds up well in all three variants. These …ndings suggest an
omitted factor accumulation is not confounding the identi…ed role for technology.16

4.3

Base IV Results

Table 5 presents the core IV results. The …rst column reports the …rst-stage estimates of how
ln(Mitk ) predicts ln(~
zitk ). The …rst-stage elasticity in Panel A is 0.6, suggesting a 10% increase
in the technology ‡ow metric from the United States predicts a 6% increase in labor productivity
abroad at the exporter-industry level. The unweighted estimates in Panel B suggest a smaller
3% increase. While the second elasticity is lower, the instrument generally performs better in the
unweighted speci…cations due to its more precise measurement. The F statistics in Panels A and
B are 4.7 and 11.6, respectively. The sample weights in Panel A place greater emphasis on larger
and more advanced countries that have large export volumes (e.g., Germany, Japan). While this
framework …nds a substantial response, the weighted dependency of this group on heterogeneous
technology transfer from the United States is noisier than in the unweighted estimations that
emphasize more developing and emerging countries.
The second column presents the reduced-form estimates where ln(Mitk ) predicts ln(~
xkijt )
using a format similar to equation (7). In both panels, there is substantial reduced-form link of
technology ‡ows to export volumes.
The third column provides the second-stage estimates from equation (7) having used ln(Mitk )
to predict ln(~
zitk ). In Panel A’s estimation, the weighted elasticity is 1.6, suggesting a 16%
16

The ideal test would simply remove factor-based trade from export volumes studied. This is test is unattainable for several theoretical and practical reasons. First, while 2x2x2 HOV models (two countries, factors, and
goods) cleanly predict a country exports goods that intensely use the factors in which the country is well endowed, this prediction does not hold universally in settings with multiple goods and factors (e.g., the critique of
Leamer (1980) on Leontief’s (1953) paradox). Likewise, bilateral trade patterns due to factor-based di¤erences
are only determined for special cases in a multi-country world (e.g., Romalis 2004). Thus, strong assumptions
would be required for distinguishing factor-based trade in this empirical setting. Practically speaking, the data
constraint is also prohibitive as factor data and industry input-output matrices are very poorly measured for
most of the countries and years covered by this study. Davis and Weinstein (2001) study this issue using OECD
data. Morrow (2010) comparatively assesses the Ricardian and HOV models in a uni…ed framework. Morrow
…nds that the two models each o¤er valid partial descriptions and ignoring one force for comparative advantage
does not bias empirical tests of the other.

21

increase in export volumes for every 10% increase in labor productivity. In Panel B’s unweighted
estimation, the 10% increase in labor productivity is linked to a 24% increase in export volumes.
The second-stage elasticity in Panel B is larger than in Panel A, as the IV estimates provide the
reduced-form scaled up by the …rst-stage e¤ects. Thus, even though the unweighted reducedform estimate in Column 2 is smaller than the weighted reduced-form estimate, this ordering
reverses once scaled-up by the …rst stages.
This study does not overly favor one set of estimates. The unweighted and unweighted approaches both have merits and liabilities. Instead, the conclusion from this work is that the
instrumented elasticity is in the neighborhood of 2. This instrumented elasticity is weaker than
the preferred instrumented elasticity of 6.5 that Costinot et al. (2012) estimate for OECD countries cross-sectionally in 1997 using producer price data, but it is quite similar to the 2.7 elasticity
that they estimate with labor productivity metrics. While it is impossible to di¤erentiate among
the various reasons as to why the IV estimates are larger than the OLS estimates, a very likely
candidate is that OLS su¤ers from a substantial downward bias due to measurement error in the
labor productivity estimates, especially with the substantial di¤erencing embedded in equation
(7). While it is likely that omitted factors or reverse causality in‡uenced the OLS estimations
as well, these appear to have been second-order to the measurement issues.17
It is important to identify the dual meaning of the higher IV results compared to OLS with
respect to the parameter. In Section 2’s model, a higher parameter corresponds to a reduced
scope for intra-industry trade due to comparative advantages across varieties. IV estimations
thus suggest that OLS speci…cations overestimate the scope for intra-industry trade because
they understate the link between country-industry productivity improvements and their associated export volumes. Both impetuses can be connected to Ricardian theories of comparative
advantage for trade, but role of the structural parameter needs to be carefully delineated.
These estimates are signi…cant in terms of their potential economic importance and explanatory power. Using an elasticity of 2, the interquartile range of country-level labor productivities
in Table 1a can explain 75% of the interquartile range in export levels. Similarly, the interquartile range of country-level labor productivity growth can explain 142% of the interquartile range
in export growth levels.
To this point, the reported estimations have only focused on the intensive margin of export
growth. Appendix Table 2 reports OLS and reduced-form results related to the extensive margin
of trade commencement. These estimations follow Tables 2 and 5 in their approach, with linear
17
Costinot et al. (2012) adjust export volumes for trade openness using the import penetration ratio for a
country-industry. The estimates are very similar when undertaking this approach, being 1.163 (0.457) and 2.513
(1.138) for weighted and unweighted speci…cations, respectively. This approach is not adopted for the main
estimations due to worries about mismeasurement in the import penetration ratio when combining UNIDO and
WTF data.

22

probability models considering an indicator variable for exports above US $100k on a bilateral
route as the outcome variable. The OLS and reduced-form results do not display signi…cant
elasticities. Computational limits prevent the full estimation of IV elasticities, but the zerovalued reduced-form elasticities are su¢ cient to conclude that the IV results would also be
weak. On the whole, this study concludes that the exporting growth due to enhanced labor
productivity and technology transfer comes through export growth on existing routes rather
than through entry into new bilateral routes.18

4.4

Extended IV Results

Table 6 provides robustness checks in the same format as Table 3. The instrumented elasticity is
again very stable to the exclusion of high-pro…le countries. The weighted elasticity is very stable
in Column 4 to excluding industry 383 (Machinery, electrical), while the unweighted elasticity
strengthens. This choice of reporting is again due to electrical machinery having the largest
impact on the results, with, for example, very similar elasticities to Column 1 being observed if
excluding industry 382 (Machinery, except electrical). Results are also again very similar with a
winsorized sample. The instrumented elasticities are reasonably stable to variations on industry
dimensions and samples in Columns 6-8 in terms of economic magnitudes, but the standard
errors on the unweighted sample in Panel B become too large for de…nitive conclusions. The
last column again shows the results are robust to exporter-level clustering. Employing bilateralroute clustering or bootstrapped standard errors would substantially increase the precision of
the results.
Table 7 reports additional robustness checks related to the instrument design. Results in
Column 2 are similar when using the total technology trends for cities in model (9) rather
than just the Anglo-Saxon ethnic trend. More deviation, however, is observed when using the
technology-to-industry concordances that emphasize where manufacturing occurs, rather than
where technologies are used. The main estimations focus on industry-of-use, a¤ording a composite view of the technological opportunity developed for an industry. Keller (2002b) reports
inter-industry R&D ‡ows aid productivity growth signi…cantly within OECD countries, equal to
half or more of the own-industry development. Estimations with manufacturing industries support the using-industry speci…cations in a weighted format, albeit with larger standard errors.
Unweighted estimates have a zero-valued …rst stage that prevents further analysis. This di¤erence emphasizes the importance of technology adoption behind the labor productivity results.
Columns 3-7 test variations on the construction of M %i;c;1980 . Columns 4 and 5 show that
very similar results are obtained when using …rst- or later-generation migrants for de…ning the
18

This test links exporting in a speci…c industry with technology for that industry. This approach di¤ers from
examinations of the extensive margins of trade that count the number of independent varieties exported (e.g.,
Feenstra 1994, Feenstra and Rose 2000, Hummels and Klenow 2005).

23

spatial patterns of migrants. This comparability is not surprising given the persistence of ethnic
enclaves in the United States and their attraction of new immigrants from the home country. This
stability suggests that the results are not being in‡uenced by endogenous migrant decisions about
which cities will show particular strength in patenting growth for certain industries. Columns
6 and 7 show similar results when using bachelor’s educated workers from a country’s ancestry
versus those without bachelor’s degrees, with the weighted estimations somewhat favoring the
distribution of bachelor’s educated workers. Overall, these variations suggest a strong stability
to this part of the IV’s construction.
Column 8 of Table 7 tests a more stringent speci…cation that augments equation (7) to
include additional …xed e¤ects for distance-industry-year, where distance is an indicator variable
for being more than the median distance from the United States. This augmented speci…cation
controls even more tightly for geographical distance as a determinant of technology di¤usion,
…nding continued and strong evidence that di¤erential technology transfer from the United States
matters. Similar results are also found when including an equivalent set of …xed e¤ects that
partition on GDP/capita of countries. Column 9 demonstrates robustness to dropping countries
with a limited migrant connection to the United States, speci…cally those nations with fewer
than 100k people in the United States in 1980 reporting ancestral connections to the country.
Unreported estimations also test including the three Rybczynski e¤ect controls discussed
with Table 4. In the unweighted estimations, the inclusion of these controls does not materially
in‡uence the instrumented elasticities. All three elasticities are in the range of 1.5-2.1 and are
statistically signi…cant at a 5% level or higher. In the weighted estimations, these controls
have a larger impact. For the non-production share control, the weighted elasticity is 2.5 (1.7),
while estimations with the other two controls have invalid …rst stages. Thus, the conclusions
regarding heterogeneous technology transfer, productivity growth, and exports for the weighted
estimations need to be cautious to acknowledge that these e¤ects are not well-distinguished from
a generalized Rybczynski e¤ect operating inside of the manufacturing sector itself. In unweighted
estimations, these e¤ects are better distinguished.
The primary IV estimations build a …ve-year lag structure into when the technology growth
occurs in the United States to when the productivity growth happens abroad. Thus, growth
in technology ‡ows over the 1975-1979!1980-1984 period towards an exporter-industry are
used to predict labor productivity growth and export growth during the 1980-1984!1985-1989
period. This …ve-year lag matches discussions of rates of di¤erential technology ‡ows across
countries. Appendix Table 3 compares this lag structure with contemporaneous technology ‡ows
in estimations similar to the …rst-stage and reduced-form speci…cations. The lagged estimator is
stronger than the contemporaneous estimator when both are modelled independently or when
modelled jointly. This pattern provides comfort in the estimation design and the proposed causal
direction of the results.
24

Another test utilizes the ethnic patenting growth in the United States to formulate an additional control against reverse causality. This control is calculated as the patenting growth within
each industry in the United States by members of the focal ethnic community. Thus, estimations consider the technology transfer instrument (9) and its impact for productivity growth
and trade after controlling for the direct growth of patenting by industry of ethnic communities.
The control is calculated across the ethnic groups discussed in Section 3, with the same control
applied to countries within an ethnicity (e.g., the growth in US patenting by ethnic Hispanic
inventors for computers is used as a control with both Mexico’s and Chile’s computer productivity and exports). As some countries do not map to an identi…able ethnic group with the name
matching approach, the sample is reduced to 73,545 observations. For this sample, the weighted
and unweighted instrumented elasticities before the ethnic patenting control is introduced are
1.32 (0.54) and 2.21 (0.92), respectively. With the control, these instrumented elasticities are
very similar at 1.40 (0.64) and 2.32 (1.37), respectively.19

5

Conclusions

While the principle of Ricardian technology di¤erences as a source of trade is well established
in the theory of international economics, empirical evaluations of its importance are relatively
rare due to the di¢ culty of quantifying and isolating technology di¤erences. This study exploits
heterogeneous technology di¤usion from the United States through ethnic migrant networks to
make additional headway. Estimations …nd bilateral manufacturing exports respond positively
to growth in observable measures of comparative advantages. Ricardian technology di¤erences
are an important determinant of trade in longitudinal changes, in addition to their cross-sectional
role discussed earlier.
Leamer and Levinsohn (1994) argue that trade models should be taken with a grain of salt
and applied in contexts for which they are appropriate. This is certainly true when interpreting these results. The estimating frameworks have speci…cally sought to remove trade resulting
from factor endowments, increasing returns, consumer preferences, etc. rather than test against
them. Moreover, manufacturing exports are likely more sensitive to patentable technology improvements than the average sector, and the empirical reach of the constructed dataset to include
emerging economies like China and India heightens this sensitivity. Further research is needed
to generalize technology’s role to a broader set of industrial sectors and environments.
Beyond quantifying the link between technology and trade for manufacturing, this paper also
serves as input into research regarding the bene…ts and costs of emigration to the United States
19
Earlier versions of this paper consider direct ethnic patenting and exports more extensively. The early work
also evaluates the role of sector reallocation from agriculture, the empirical contrast of the technology states in
the exporter and the importer, and the potential for vertical integration through parts trade (e.g., Ng and Yeats
1999, Schott 2004). These results are available upon request.

25

for the migrants’home countries (i.e., the "brain drain" or "brain gain" debate). While focusing
on the Ricardian model and its parameters, the paper establishes that the technology transfer
from overseas migrants are strong enough to meaningfully promote exports. Care should be
taken to not overly interpret these …ndings as strong evidence of a big gain from migration.
The paper does not seek to establish a clear counterfactual in the context of immigration from
the source countries’ point of view (e.g., Agrawal et al. 2011). As such, the positive export
elasticities due to US heterogeneous technology di¤usion do not constitute welfare statements
relative to other scenarios. Future research needs to examine these welfare implications further.

26

References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Jaume Ventura, "The World Income Distribution", Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117:2 (2002), 659-694.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Productivity Di¤erences", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116:2 (2001), 563-606.
Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, John McHale, and Alexander Oettl, "Brain Drain or Brain Bank?
The Impact of Skilled Emigration on Poor-Country Innovation", Journal of Urban Economics,
69:1 (2011), 43-55.
Alcacer, Juan, and Wilbur Chung, "Location Strategies and Knowledge Spillovers", Management
Science, 53:5 (2007), 760-776.
Alvarez, Fernando, and Robert Lucas, "General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
Model of International Trade", Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (2007), 1726-1768.
Antweiler, Werner, and Daniel Tre‡er, "Increasing Returns to Scale and All That: A View From
Trade", American Economic Review, 92 (2002), 93-119.
Bahar, Dany, and Hillel Rapoport, "Migration, Knowledge Di¤usion, and the Comparative
Advantages of Nations", Working Paper (2013).
Baxter, Marianne, "Fiscal Policy, Specialization, and Trade in the Two-Sector Model: The
Return of Ricardo?", Journal of Political Economy, 100:4 (1992), 713-744.
Bo, Chen, and David Jacks, "Trade, Variety and Immigration", NBER Working Paper 17963
(2012).
Bombardini, Matilde, Chris Kurz, and Peter Morrow, "Ricardian Trade and the Impact of
Domestic Competition on Export Performance", Canadian Journal of Economics, 45:2 (2012),
585-612.
Branstetter, Lee, and Yoshiaki Ogura, "Is Academic Science Driving a Surge in Industrial Innovation? Evidence from Patent Citations", NBER Working Paper 11561 (2005).
Burstein, Ariel, and Jonathan Vogel, "Factor Prices and International Trade: A Unifying Perspective", Working Paper (2012).
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro, "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare E¤ects of NAFTA",
Working Paper (2012).
Chor, Davin, "Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative Approach", Journal of International Economics, 82 (2010), 152-167.
Coe, David, and Elhanan Helpman, "International R&D Spillovers", European Economic Review,
39 (1995), 859-887.
Coe, David, Elhanan Helpman, and Alexander Ho¤maister, "North-South R & D Spillovers",
Economic Journal, 107:440 (1997), 134-149.
Cohen, Lauren, Umit Gurun, and Christopher Malloy, "Resident Networks and Firm Trade",
Working Paper (2013).
Cohen, Wesley, "Fifty Years of Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity and Performance",
in Hall, Bronwyn, and Nathan Rosenberg (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation
(Elsevier, 2011), 129-213.
Costinot, Arnaud, "An Elementary Theory of Comparative Advantage", Econometrica, 77:4
(2009), 1165-1192.
Costinot, Arnaud, and David Donaldson, "Ricardo’s Theory of Comparative Advantage: Old
Idea, New Evidence", American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 102:3 (2012), 453458.
27

Costinot, Arnaud, David Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, "What Goods Do Countries Trade?
New Ricardian Predictions", Review of Economic Studies, 79:2 (2012), 581-608.
Davis, Donald, and David Weinstein, "An Account of Global Factor Trade", American Economic
Review, 91:5 (2001), 1423-1453.
Davis, Donald, and David Weinstein, "Technological Superiority and the Losses from Migration",
NBER Working Paper 8971 (2002).
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul Samuelson, "Comparative Advantage, Trade and
Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods", American Economic Review, 67:5
(1977), 823-839.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul Samuelson, "Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theory with
a Continuum of Goods", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95:2 (1980), 203-224.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum, "International Technology Di¤usion: Theory and Measurement", International Economic Review, 40:3 (1999), 537-570.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum, "Technology, Geography, and Trade", Econometrica,
70:5 (2002), 1741-1779.
Feenstra, Robert, "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices", American Economic Review, 84:1 (1994), 157-177.
Feenstra, Robert, Robert Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson Ma, and Hengyong Mo, "World Trade
Flows: 1962-2000", NBER Working Paper 11040 (2005).
Feenstra, Robert, and Andrew Rose, "Putting Things in Order: Trade Dynamics and Product
Cycles", Review of Economics and Statistics, 82:3 (2000), 369-382.
Fieler, Ana Cecilia, "Nonhomotheticity and Bilateral Export Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative
Explanation", Econometrica, 7 9:4 (2011), 1069-1101.
Foley, C. Fritz and William Kerr, "Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activity",
Management Science, 59:7 (2013), 1529-1544.
Frankel, Je¤rey, Regional Trading Blocs in the World Economic System (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1997).
Golub, Stephen, and Chang-Tai Hsieh, "Classical Ricardian Theory of Comparative Advantage
Revisited", Review of International Economics, 8:2 (2000), 221-234.
Gould, David, "Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for US Bilateral
Trade Flows", Review of Economics and Statistics, 76:3 (1994), 500-518.
Griliches, Zvi, "Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint", American Economic Review, 84:1
(1994), 1-23.
Griliches, Zvi, "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey", Journal of Economic
Literature, 28:4 (1990), 1661-1707.
Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
Hall, Bronwyn, "Exploring the Patent Explosion", Journal of Technology Transfer, 30 (2005),
35-48.
Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg, "The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools", NBER Working Paper 8498 (2001).
Harrigan, James, "Cross-Country Comparisons of Industry Total Factor Productivity: Theory
and Evidence", Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research Paper 9734 (1997a).
28

Harrigan, James, "Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization: Estimating
the Neoclassical Model", American Economic Review, 87:4 (1997b), 475-494.
Head, Keith, and John Reis, "Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence from
Canada",Canadian Journal of Economics, 31:1 (1998), 47-62.
Heckscher, Eli, "The E¤ect of Foreign Trade on the Distribution of Income", Ekonomisk Tidskrift, 21:2 (1919), 1-32.
Helpman, Elhanan, "R&D and Productivity: The International Connection", in Razin, Assaf,
and Efraim Sadka, ed., The Economics of Globalization (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1999).
Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1985).
Hummels, David, and Peter Klenow, "The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports", American
Economic Review, 95:3 (2005), 704-723.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?", American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2 (2010), 31-56.
Hunter, Linda, "The Contribution of Non-Homothetic Preferences to Trade", Journal of International Economics, 30:3 (1991), 345-358.
Hunter, Linda, and James Markusen, "Per Capita Income as a Determinant of Trade", in Robert
Feenstra, ed., Empirical Methods for International Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988).
Irwin, Douglas, and Peter Klenow, "Learning by Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor Industry", Journal of Political Economy, 102 (1994), 1200-1227.
Ja¤e, Adam, and Joshua Lerner, Innovation and Its Discontents (Boston, MA: Harvard Business
School Press, 2005).
Ja¤e, Adam, and Manuel Trajtenberg, "International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from Patent
Citations", Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 8 (1999), 105-136.
Johnson, Daniel, "150 Years of American Invention: Methodology and a First Geographic Application", Wellesley College Economics Working Paper 99-01 (1999).
Kapur, Devesh, "Diasporas and Technology Transfer", Journal of Human Development, 2:2
(2001), 265-286.
Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale, "Sojourns and Software: Internationally Mobile Human
Capital and High-Tech Industry Development in India, Ireland, and Israel", in Arora, Ashish,
and Alfonso Gambardella, From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software
Industry in Some Emerging Economies (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2005).
Keller, Wolfgang, "Trade and the Transmission of Technology", Journal of Economic Growth, 7
(2002a), 5-24.
Keller, Wolfgang, "Geographic Localization of International Technology Di¤usion", American
Economic Review, 92:1 (2002b), 120-142.
Keller, Wolfgang, "International Technology Di¤usion", Journal of Economic Literature, 42:3
(2004), 752-782.
Kerr, William, "Ethnic Scienti…c Communities and International Technology Di¤usion", Review
of Economics and Statistics, 90:3 (2008), 518-537.
Kerr, William, "The Ethnic Composition of US Inventors", HBS Working Paper 08-006 (2007).
Kerr, William, "The Role of Immigrant Scientists and Entrepreneurs in International Technology
Transfer", MIT Ph.D. Dissertation (2005).
29

Kerr, William, and William Lincoln, "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and
US Ethnic Invention", Journal of Labor Economics, 28:3 (2010), 473-508.
Kim, Jinyoung, and Gerald Marschke, "Accounting for the Recent Surge in U.S. Patenting:
Changes in R&D Expenditures, Patent Yields, and the High Tech Sector", Economics of Innovation and New Technologies, 13:6 (2004), 543-558.
Kortum, Samuel, and Joshua Lerner, "Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to Innovation", RAND Journal of Economics, 31:4 (2000), 674-692.
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, "International Labor and Capital Flows: Complements
or Substitutes?", Economics Letters, 92.2 (2007), 155-162.
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, "Migration, FDI and the Margins of Trade", Harvard
Kennedy School Working Paper (2012).
Leamer, Edward, "The Leontief Paradox, Reconsidered", Journal of Political Economy, 88:3
(1980), 495-503.
Leamer, Edward, and James Levinsohn, "International Trade Theory: The Evidence", NBER
Working Paper 4940 (1994).
Lemley, Mark, and Bhaven Sampat, "Is the Patent O¢ ce a Rubber Stamp?", Stanford Public
Law Working Paper No. 999098 (2007).
Leontief, Wassily, "Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American Capital Position
Re-examined", Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 97 (1953), 332-349.
Levchenko, Andrei, and Jing Zhang, "Ricardian Productivity Di¤erences and the Gains from
Trade", Working Paper (2012).
MacDougall, G.D.A., "British and American Exports: A Study Suggested by the Theory of
Comparative Costs. Part I", Economic Journal, 61:244 (1951), 697-724.
MacDougall, G.D.A., "British and American Exports: A Study Suggested by the Theory of
Comparative Costs. Part II", Economic Journal, 62:247 (1952), 487-521.
Morrow, Peter, "Ricardian-Heckscher-Ohlin Comparative Advantage: Theory and Evidence",
Journal of International Economics, 82:2 (2010), 137-151.
Nanda, Ramana, and Tarun Khanna, "Diasporas and Domestic Entrepreneurs: Evidence from
the Indian Software Industry", Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 19:4 (2010),
991-1012.
Ng, Francis, and Alexander Yeats, "Production Sharing in East Asia: Who Does What for
Whom and Why?", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series (1999).
Obukhova, Elena, "Global-Pull, State-Push, or Brain Circulation? Firm-Level Technological
Upgrading in Shanghai’s Semiconductor Design Industry", Working Paper (2008).
Obukhova, Elena, "Does Brain Circulation Promote International Development? High-Skilled
Migration and Organizational Performance", Working Paper (2009).
Ohlin, Bertil, Interregional and International Trade (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1933).
Papageorgiou, Chris, and Antonio Spilimbergo, "Learning Abroad and Technology Adoption",
Working Paper (2008).
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber, "STEM Workers, H1B Visas and Productivity
in US Cities", Working Paper (2013).
Rauch, James, "Business and Social Networks in International Trade", Journal of Economic
Literature, 39 (2001), 1177-1203.
30

Rauch, James, and Vitor Trindade, "Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade", Review
of Economics and Statistics, 84:1 (2002), 116-130.
Ricardo, David, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (London, UK: John Murray, 1817).
Romalis, John, "Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade", American Economic Review, 94:1 (2004), 67-97.
Saxenian, AnnaLee, with Yasuyuki Motoyama and Xiaohong Quan, Local and Global Networks
of Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of
California, 2002).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, The New Argonauts (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
Scherer, Frederic, "Using Linked Patent Data and R&D Data to Measure Technology Flows," in
Griliches, Zvi (ed.) R & D, Patents and Productivity (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
1984).
Schott, Peter, "Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119:2 (2004), 647-678.
Schott, Peter, "One Size Fits All? Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization in Global Production", American Economic Review, 93:2 (2003), 686-708.
Shikher, Serge, "Determinants of Specialization and the Role of Trade Costs", Working Paper
(2010).
Silverman, Brian, "Technological Resources and the Direction of Corporate Diversi…cation: Toward an Integration of the Resource-Based View and Transaction Cost Economics", Management
Science, 45:8 (1999), 1109-1124.
Stern, Robert, "British and American Productivity and Comparative Costs in International
Trade", Oxford Economic Papers, 14:3 (1962), 275-296.
Tre‡er, Daniel, "International Factor Price Di¤erences: Leontief was Right!", Journal of Political
Economy, 101:6 (1993), 961-987.
Tre‡er, Daniel, "The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries", American Economic
Review, 85:5 (1995), 1029-1046.
Vanek, Jaroslav, "The Factor Proportions Theory: The N-Factor Case", Kyklos, 21:4 (1968),
749-756.
Ventura, Jaume, "Growth and Interdependence", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112:1 (1997),
57-84.
Waugh, Michael, "International Trade and Income Di¤erences", American Economic Review,
100 (2010), 2093-2124.
Wilson, Charles, "On the General Structure of Ricardian Models with a Continuum of Goods:
Applications to Growth, Tari¤ Theory, and Technical Change", Econometrica, 48:7 (1980), 16751702.
Young, Alwyn, "A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in Hong Kong
and Singapore", National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual, 7 (1992), 1363.
Young, Alwyn, "The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East
Asian Growth Experience", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110:3 (1995), 641-680.

31

Table 1a: Descriptive statistics for exporting countries

Country
(1)
Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cameroon
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo
Costa Rica
Cote d'Ivoire
Cuba
Cyprus
Denmark
Dom. Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia

WTF manufacturing exports
Count of UNIDO productivity
Count of intensiveMean Mean log 5Mean
Share of
periods in
margin labor prod.
year
exports per Mean log 5- total WTF
sample as
obs. as
over
growth for
5-year
year
exports Largest 1980 city
exporter
exporter
for ancestry
included included
period growth rate included in
after FD
after FD industries industries
population
included for routes
sample
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
1
3
2
1
3
3
2
1
2
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

15
40
819
1819
3702
194
18
1445
102
829
640
102
3876
723
2618
876
2
63
41
47
319
1954
14
252
396
5
22
31
2319
6100
1379
51
1860
32
51
2453
1446
177
2544
735

3.7E+03
3.3E+04
9.0E+04
1.4E+05
1.4E+05
3.7E+03
5.1E+04
1.4E+05
6.8E+04
7.8E+04
2.8E+04
2.0E+04
1.9E+05
2.2E+05
1.3E+04
5.5E+04
4.3E+04
4.6E+04
5.2E+04
2.0E+04
3.9E+04
1.2E+05
3.8E+04
4.6E+04
3.1E+04
4.3E+04
1.0E+04
4.3E+04
1.6E+05
1.6E+05
2.1E+05
1.8E+04
9.9E+04
2.1E+04
2.9E+04
1.0E+05
2.7E+04
1.2E+05
1.8E+04
2.0E+04

0.01
-0.13
0.28
0.19
0.35
0.07
0.05
0.16
-0.05
0.47
0.10
-0.06
0.17
0.15
0.18
0.10
0.47
0.11
-0.08
-0.04
0.15
0.18
-0.37
0.02
0.21
0.02
-0.10
-0.01
0.39
0.36
0.28
0.02
0.14
-0.18
-0.11
0.53
0.17
0.23
0.14
0.12

2.2E+08
2.6E+08
3.3E+10
6.4E+10
1.6E+11
3.6E+09
9.9E+07
9.4E+10
1.3E+09
7.8E+10
5.2E+09
1.7E+09
1.2E+11
2.8E+10
4.0E+11
6.9E+09
1.1E+07
3.2E+08
8.8E+09
2.4E+09
1.6E+09
9.9E+10
5.1E+08
2.9E+09
5.0E+09
1.7E+06
2.6E+08
9.3E+08
9.7E+10
7.3E+11
1.1E+12
1.4E+09
3.0E+10
1.1E+08
2.8E+08
1.4E+11
3.8E+10
6.2E+09
6.0E+10
5.4E+10

-0.15
-0.09
0.36
0.42
0.53
0.54
0.18
0.45
0.11
0.25
0.43
-0.12
0.45
0.45
1.25
0.52
1.56
1.31
0.35
-0.36
0.30
0.49
0.74
0.60
0.13
-0.02
-0.19
0.07
0.74
0.48
0.33
0.63
0.36
-0.55
0.75
0.56
0.79
0.43
0.72
1.10

0.79
0.01
0.64
0.68
0.97
0.44
0.33
0.20
0.69
0.60
0.48
0.51
0.98
0.86
0.82
0.42
0.03
0.12
0.85
0.61
0.61
0.72
0.35
0.70
0.55
0.00
0.18
0.60
0.79
0.83
0.68
0.36
0.91
0.04
0.16
0.96
0.85
0.92
0.81
0.45

(9)

Second largest
1980 city for
ancestry
population
(10)

San Francisco, CA Dallas-Ft. Wth, TX
Boston, MA
Tampa-St. Pete, FL
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Boston, MA
New York, NY
Green Bay, WI
Detroit, MI
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
Chicago, IL
None
Washington, DC
Los Angeles, LA
Boston, MA
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
New York, NY
San Francisco, CA
Miami, FL
New York, NY
None
Los Angeles, LA
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
New York, NY
Baltimore, MD
New York, NY
Miami, FL
San Francisco, CA
New York, NY
Salt Lake City, UT
Los Angeles, LA
Miami, FL
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
San Francisco, CA
Los Angeles, LA
Atlanta, GA
Chicago, IL
Honolulu, HI
San Francisco, CA
Duluth-Super., MN Minn.-St. Paul, MN
Boston, MA
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Chicago, IL
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Chicago, IL
New York, NY
Chicago, IL
Los Angeles, LA
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Sacramento, CA
New York, NY
Cleveland, OH
New York, NY
Seattle, WA
Los Angeles, LA
Chicago, IL
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY

Notes: Table provides descriptive statistics on intensive-margin sample. An included observation is the first-difference of values for an exporter-importerindustry-period from the prior period. For the differencing, the exporter's labor productivity at the industry level must be reported in the UNIDO database in
both periods and the export volumes in the World Trade Flows database must exceed $100k for both periods. All trade with the United States is excluded.
Column 2 reports the number of periods after first differencing that a country is included, and the third column provides route-level observation counts after
first differencing. Columns 4 and 5 provide labor productivity estimates from the UNIDO database. Columns 6-8 report statistics from the World Trade
Flows database, with volumes expressed in US dollars. The last two columns document the two largest ethnic heritage cities used in the instrument design.
Cities are defined at the consolidated metropolitan area level, with abbreviated names provided.

Table 1a, continued

Country

WTF manufacturing exports
Count of UNIDO productivity
Count of intensiveMean Mean log 5Mean
Share of
periods in
margin labor prod.
year
exports per Mean log 5- total WTF
sample as
obs. as
over
growth for
5-year
year
exports Largest 1980 city
exporter
exporter
for ancestry
included included
period growth rate included in
after FD
after FD industries industries
population
included for routes
sample

Second largest
1980 city for
ancestry
population

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Iran
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Kuwait
Macau
Malaysia
Malta
Mexico
Morocco
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Senegal
Singapore
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Tanzania
Thailand
Trinidad-Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe

2
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
1
3
3
1
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
2
3
1
3
3
3
3
3

157
2061
1123
6102
3
5799
113
231
391
166
1317
223
1474
551
40
2
5429
735
1
28
2295
14
784
288
354
930
1213
2160
191
64
2790
1017
3204
5130
348
4032
908
87
2022
54
499
41
46
1233
7143
431
490
14

2.1E+04
2.9E+05
1.0E+05
1.5E+05
1.1E+05
2.7E+05
5.3E+04
4.8E+04
7.8E+05
2.7E+04
6.6E+04
2.0E+05
7.3E+04
4.2E+04
2.4E+03
7.0E+03
2.7E+05
1.0E+05
4.1E+04
1.1E+05
3.4E+05
3.1E+05
2.1E+04
3.7E+04
6.6E+04
2.8E+04
2.6E+04
6.1E+04
6.7E+03
3.5E+04
2.6E+05
5.1E+04
1.2E+05
1.4E+05
8.0E+03
1.5E+05
1.9E+05
9.9E+04
7.7E+04
6.6E+03
5.7E+04
1.7E+05
8.8E+04
6.8E+04
1.6E+05
4.4E+04
3.1E+05
3.7E+04

-0.09
0.41
0.22
0.35
0.07
0.37
0.20
0.13
0.12
0.33
0.33
0.50
0.21
0.00
0.64
0.21
0.29
0.31
0.40
-0.06
0.26
-0.19
0.19
-0.06
0.54
0.35
0.25
0.39
-0.31
0.10
0.51
-0.02
0.52
0.36
0.20
0.30
0.29
0.54
0.46
-0.35
0.37
0.11
0.25
0.25
0.37
0.20
-0.03
0.12

4.4E+09
1.2E+11
1.3E+10
6.2E+11
7.6E+06
1.2E+12
5.5E+08
1.1E+09
1.5E+10
3.6E+09
1.1E+11
3.5E+09
3.8E+10
1.8E+10
3.2E+08
1.7E+06
5.1E+11
1.7E+10
7.4E+05
7.9E+07
8.5E+10
1.4E+09
2.1E+10
3.0E+09
3.0E+09
3.5E+10
4.1E+10
7.2E+10
8.0E+09
1.6E+09
2.0E+11
3.1E+10
2.5E+11
2.6E+11
3.5E+09
2.5E+11
1.1E+11
9.1E+08
2.1E+11
1.6E+08
4.2E+10
4.9E+08
2.6E+09
4.8E+10
6.1E+11
6.5E+09
8.4E+09
5.7E+07

0.43
0.79
0.69
0.50
0.92
0.43
0.25
0.32
-0.35
0.34
1.28
0.83
0.84
0.54
0.38
0.42
0.46
0.40
1.90
0.04
0.36
0.60
0.46
0.07
0.26
0.97
0.69
0.72
-0.08
0.19
0.83
0.36
0.95
0.69
0.63
0.45
0.35
0.47
0.87
0.55
1.33
-0.36
-0.39
0.81
0.48
0.21
-0.01
-0.58

0.55
0.96
0.50
0.89
0.01
0.99
0.26
0.28
0.74
0.72
0.61
0.68
0.82
0.86
0.24
0.00
0.91
0.49
0.00
0.03
0.90
0.33
0.87
0.47
0.27
0.80
0.71
0.96
0.29
0.81
0.94
0.67
0.84
0.97
0.59
0.98
0.42
0.36
0.74
0.09
0.37
0.22
0.15
0.80
0.90
0.88
0.51
0.01

Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
New York, NY
New York, NY
New York, NY
Honolulu, HI
New York, NY
Washington, DC
Orlando, FL
Los Angeles, LA
San Francisco, CA
Detroit, MI
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Washington, DC
Boston, MA
Los Angeles, LA
Washington, DC
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Minn.-St. Paul, MN
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
New York, NY
New York, NY
San Francisco, CA
New York, NY
Providence, RI
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
Minn.-St. Paul, MN
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
New York, NY
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA

San Francisco, CA
Philadelphia, PA
Los Angeles, LA
Philadelphia, PA
Miami, FL
Los Angeles, LA
Detroit, MI
San Francisco, CA
Providence, RI
Seattle, WA
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
San Antonio, TX
Chicago, IL
Los Angeles, LA
St. Louis, MO
Grand Rapids, MI
San Francisco, CA
San Francisco, CA
Washington, DC
Seattle, WA
Salinas, CA
Los Angeles, LA
Los Angeles, LA
Los Angeles, LA
Los Angeles, LA
Chicago, IL
San Francisco, CA
Los Angeles, LA
Washington, DC
San Francisco, CA
Dallas-Ft. Wth, TX
New York, NY
Los Angeles, LA
Boston, MA
Chicago, IL
New York, NY
Chicago, IL
San Francisco, CA
Chicago, IL
New York, NY
Washington, DC
Los Angeles, LA
Los Angeles, LA
New York, NY
Washington, DC
Miami, FL
None

Table 1b: Descriptive statistics for ISIC Revision 2 industries
UNIDO productivity
Count of
Mean log
intensive5-year
margin Mean level growth
obs. after per 5-year rate for
FD
period
industries

ISIC Industry title
(1)
311
313
314
321
322
323
324
331
332
341
342
351
352
353
354
355
361
362
369
371
372
381
382
383
384
385

WTF manufacturing exports
Mean
exports per
5-year
period

US patenting

Mean log Share of
5-year
total WTF
Share of Mean log
growth
exports
patenting
5-year
rate for included in included in growth
routes
sample
sample
rate

US quintiles (5 = Highest)

Capital/
labor
ratio

Mean
wages

Nonprod.
worker
share

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

Food products
Beverages
Tobacco
Textiles
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Leather products
Footwear, except rubber or plastic
Wood products, except furniture
Furniture, except metal
Paper and products
Printing and publishing
Industrial chemicals
Other chemicals
Petroleum refineries
Misc. petroleum and coal products
Rubber products
Pottery, china, earthenware
Glass and products
Other non-metallic mineral
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals
Fabricated metal products
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, electric
Transport equipment
Professional & scientific equipment

8183
2294
1498
7067
3738
2605
1848
3217
2551
4382
2736
6309
5379
2257
722
3819
1648
2750
3157
4301
3355
5612
6989
6513
5714
5195

1.5E+05
2.2E+05
3.3E+05
6.8E+04
4.5E+04
7.8E+04
5.8E+04
7.5E+04
7.9E+04
1.7E+05
9.6E+04
2.5E+05
1.7E+05
1.6E+06
2.7E+05
1.0E+05
5.4E+04
1.1E+05
1.2E+05
2.0E+05
2.1E+05
9.0E+04
1.5E+05
1.5E+05
2.0E+05
1.1E+05

0.16
0.31
0.22
0.22
0.18
0.14
0.30
0.15
0.21
0.19
0.20
0.23
0.21
0.24
0.15
0.29
0.12
0.24
0.22
0.29
0.21
0.20
0.43
0.46
0.33
0.28

5.9E+11
6.5E+10
2.6E+10
4.9E+11
2.8E+11
7.8E+10
4.8E+10
1.1E+11
7.9E+10
2.0E+11
4.4E+10
5.3E+11
2.8E+11
2.2E+11
1.8E+10
7.8E+10
1.4E+10
3.7E+10
6.6E+10
2.6E+11
1.7E+11
2.2E+11
1.1E+12
1.1E+12
1.0E+12
2.8E+11

0.33
0.49
0.49
0.48
0.48
0.64
0.42
0.47
0.56
0.35
0.43
0.46
0.60
0.03
0.62
0.45
0.44
0.47
0.38
0.27
0.35
0.42
0.67
0.74
0.49
0.45

0.74
0.75
0.56
0.79
0.83
0.73
0.44
0.73
0.68
0.76
0.68
0.59
0.53
0.50
0.29
0.75
0.58
0.58
0.70
0.59
0.60
0.69
0.67
0.81
0.76
0.81

0.02
0.01
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.05
0.08
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.25
0.22
0.09
0.08

0.15
0.17
0.15
0.16
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.15
0.16
0.15
0.16
0.10
0.18
0.09
0.10
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.12
0.13
0.16
0.15
0.25
0.26
0.16
0.24

3
5
5
2
1
1
1
2
1
4
2
5
4
5
4
3
1
4
4
5
4
2
3
3
2
3

2
3
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
2
5
4
5
4
3
2
3
3
5
3
3
4
4
5
4

3
5
3
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
5
4
5
4
4
2
2
1
3
2
3
3
4
5
4
5

Notes: See Table 1a. Column 3 provides route-level observation counts by industry after first differencing. Columns 4 and 5 provide labor productivity estimates from the UNIDO
database. Columns 6-8 report statistics from the World Trade Flows database, with volumes expressed in US dollars. Industries 356 and 390 are excluded. Columns 9-10 report the share
and growth rate of patenting in United States that is used for the technology transfer measures. The last columns report the quintile to which the industry is assigned for the Rybczynski
effect controls of country time trends x industry quintiles.

Table 2: OLS estimations of labor productivity and exports
Between estimation

FD estimation

(1)

(2)

Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and
importer trade in industry (summed across all bilateral routes)
DV: Log bilateral exports
Log country-industry labor
productivity

0.640***
(0.242)

Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity
Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

DV: Δ Log bilateral exports

0.573***
(0.185)
149,547
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Excluding sample weights
DV: Log bilateral exports
Log country-industry labor
productivity

0.361***
(0.091)

Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity
Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

DV: Δ Log bilateral exports

0.210***
(0.041)
149,547
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Notes: Panel estimations consider manufacturing exports taken from the WTF database. Data are organized by exporterimporter-industry-year. Industries are defined at the three-digit level of the ISIC Revision 2 system. Annual data are
collapsed into five-year groupings beginning with 1980-1984 and extending to 1995-1999. The dependent variable in
Column 1 is the log mean nominal value (US$) of bilateral exports for the five years; the dependent variable in Column 2
is the change in log exports from the prior period. The intensive margin sample is restricted to exporter-importer-industry
groupings with exports exceeding $100k in every year. The $100k threshold is chosen due to WTF data collection
procedures discussed in the text. Labor productivity from the UNIDO database measures comparative advantages.
Column 1 estimates Ricardian elasticities using both within-panel variation and variation between industries of a country.
Column 2 estimates Ricardian elasticities using only variation within panels. Estimations in Panel A weight bilateral
routes by the interaction of total exporter and importer trade in industry; estimations in Panel B are unweighted.
Estimations cluster standard errors by exporter-industry. Importer-Industry-Yr FE are defined at the two-digit level of the
ISIC system. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 3: Robustness checks on OLS specifications in Table 2
Base
estimation Excluding Excluding Excluding
(Column 2,
exports
exports
electrical
Table 2) from Brazil from China machinery
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Kerr (2008) Kerr (2008)
Using a
Using ISIC
sample
sample
Using
2%/98% 2-digit level using Imp- using Imp- exporterwinsorized
industry ISIC2-Year ISIC3-Year
level
sample
groups
fixed effects fixed effects clustering
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

0.573***
(0.185)

0.573***
(0.185)

0.472***
(0.097)

0.390***
(0.121)

0.493***
(0.133)

0.266**
(0.112)

0.287**
(0.113)

0.281**
(0.138)

0.573***
(0.086)

Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,010
Yes
Yes

101,221
Yes
Yes

97,326
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

51,483
Yes
Yes

23,345
Yes
Yes

23,345
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

0.210***
(0.041)

0.210***
(0.041)

0.221***
(0.041)

0.154***
(0.039)

0.264***
(0.043)

0.097***
(0.037)

0.248***
(0.066)

0.184***
(0.069)

0.210***
(0.048)

Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,010
Yes
Yes

101,221
Yes
Yes

97,326
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

51,483
Yes
Yes

23,345
Yes
Yes

23,345
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Table 2.

Table 4: Robustness checks on OLS specifications in Table 2
Including Rybczynski effect controls of
Base
Including
Including
Including
country time trends x industry quintiles
estimation Including
exporter
route
border
Capital/ labor
Non-prod.
(Column 2, GDP/capita populations distance
effect
ratio
Mean wages
share
Table 2) interactions interactions interactions interaction
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

0.573***
(0.185)

0.938***
(0.219)

0.578***
(0.126)

0.269**
(0.125)

x Second quartile of trait
indicated in column header

-0.582**
(0.283)

0.272
(0.284)

0.330**
(0.139)

x Third quartile of trait
indicated in column header

-0.972***
(0.271)

-0.368
(0.248)

0.570**
(0.231)

x Highest quartile of trait
indicated in column header

-0.734***
(0.234)

0.060
(0.269)

0.268
(0.183)

x Bordering economies

0.465***
(0.129)

0.332**
(0.135)

0.313**
(0.132)

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

-0.581***
(0.177)

Effect at first quartile
Effect at second quartile
Effect at third quartile
Effect at highest quartile

0.938
0.356
-0.034
0.204

0.578
0.850
0.210
0.638

0.269
0.599
0.839
0.536

Value at second quartile start
Value at third quartile start
Value at highest quartile start

8,431
14,765
19,024

8,852,235
29,900,000
57,100,000

2,319
5,596
9,184

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

0.602***
(0.186)

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Table 2. Interactions in Column 4 use Great Circle distances between capital cities. To give a feel for these demarcations, the distances from Beijing,
China, to the capitals of Bangladesh, United Arab Emirates, and Spain are 3029 km., 5967 km., and 9229 km., respectively. Columns 6-8 test for the Rybczynski
effect within manufacturing. Industries are grouped into quintiles by their US capital-labor ratios, mean wage rates, and non-production worker wage bill shares.
Table 1b lists industry groupings. Linear time trends for each country by industry quintile are included in the estimation.

Table 5: IV estimations of labor productivity and exports
First-stage estimation

Reduced-form estimation

IV estimation

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer
trade in industry

Δ Log estimator for technology
flows from the United States

DV: Δ Log countryindustry labor productivity

DV: Δ Log bilateral
exports

0.589**
(0.272)

0.938***
(0.298)

Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity
Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

DV: Δ Log bilateral
exports

1.592**
(0.637)
103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Excluding sample weights

Δ Log estimator for technology
flows from the United States

DV: Δ Log countryindustry labor productivity

DV: Δ Log bilateral
exports

0.267***
(0.078)

0.648***
(0.112)

Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity
Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

DV: Δ Log bilateral
exports

2.429***
(0.791)
103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Table 2. The instrument combines panel variation on the development of new technologies across US cities during the
1975-2000 period with historical settlement patterns for migrants and their ancestors from countries that are recorded in the 1980
Census of Populations. The F statistics in Panels A and B are 4.7 and 11.6, respectively.

Table 6: Robustness checks on IV specifications in Table 5
Base
estimation Excluding Excluding Excluding
(Column 3,
exports
exports
electrical
Table 5) from Brazil from China machinery
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Kerr (2008) Kerr (2008)
Using a
Using ISIC
sample
sample
Using
2%/98% 2-digit level using Imp- using Imp- exporterwinsorized
industry ISIC2-Year ISIC3-Year
level
sample
groups
fixed effects fixed effects clustering
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

1.592**
(0.637)

1.616**
(0.644)

1.372**
(0.649)

1.616**
(0.746)

1.715**
(0.717)

0.673*
(0.393)

1.109***
(0.390)

1.794**
(0.770)

1.592***
(0.335)

Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,010
Yes
Yes

101,221
Yes
Yes

97,326
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

51,483
Yes
Yes

23,345
Yes
Yes

23,345
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

2.429***
(0.791)

2.485***
(0.801)

2.331***
(0.778)

3.415**
(1.735)

2.862***
(0.851)

1.578
(1.452)

3.448*
(2.059)

-0.808
(2.094)

2.429***
(0.646)

Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,010
Yes
Yes

101,221
Yes
Yes

97,326
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

51,483
Yes
Yes

23,345
Yes
Yes

23,345
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Table 5.

Table 7: Robustness checks on IV specifications in Table 5
Base
estimation Using total
(Column 3, technology
Table 5)
trend
(1)

(2)

Using
industry
groupings
based on
mfg roles
(3)

Using
Using first- Using later- bachelor's
generation generation educated
immigrants immigrants workers
(4)

(5)

(6)

Using nonbachelor's
educated
workers

Including
industry x
year x
distance
effects

Excluding
exporters
with <100k
ethnic US
members

(7)

(8)

(9)

The dependent variable is Δ log bilateral exports on the intensive margin by exporter-importer-industry
Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

1.592**
(0.637)

1.513***
(0.498)

2.634*
(1.583)

1.581***
(0.420)

1.699
(1.097)

2.233**
(1.052)

1.607**
(0.683)

1.352***
(0.426)

1.669**
(0.797)

Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

78,411
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

2.429***
(0.791)

3.342***
(1.096)

Invalid
first stage

2.645***
(0.733)

2.341**
(1.062)

2.727***
(0.988)

2.812***
(0.962)

2.485***
(0.776)

2.251***
(0.875)

Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

78,411
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Table 5.

App. Table 1: Descriptive statistics for inventors residing in United States
Anglo-Saxon

Chinese

European

Hispanic

Ethnicity of inventor
Indian
Japanese

Korean

Russian

Vietnam.

A. Ethnic Inventor Shares Estimated from US Inventor Records, 1975-2004
1975-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999
2000-2004

74.8%
73.4%
72.2%
70.0%
66.4%
63.1%

2.1%
2.9%
3.6%
4.8%
6.7%
8.8%

15.6%
15.1%
14.6%
14.1%
13.6%
13.0%

2.7%
2.7%
2.9%
3.2%
3.5%
3.8%

2.0%
2.6%
3.1%
3.9%
5.2%
5.9%

0.6%
0.7%
0.8%
0.9%
0.9%
1.0%

0.3%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%
0.7%
0.9%

1.9%
2.0%
2.1%
2.2%
2.5%
2.8%

0.1%
0.1%
0.2%
0.4%
0.5%
0.6%

Chemicals
Computers
Pharmaceuticals
Electrical
Mechanical
Miscellaneous

65.8%
62.9%
64.8%
64.3%
72.8%
74.1%

7.3%
8.4%
7.2%
8.3%
3.3%
2.9%

14.4%
12.6%
14.8%
13.3%
14.2%
13.9%

3.2%
3.4%
3.9%
3.3%
3.3%
3.6%

4.9%
7.5%
4.6%
5.3%
2.8%
2.3%

0.9%
1.0%
1.1%
1.0%
0.7%
0.6%

0.7%
0.7%
0.8%
0.9%
0.5%
0.5%

2.5%
2.7%
2.6%
2.8%
2.2%
1.9%

0.3%
0.7%
0.3%
0.7%
0.2%
0.2%

Top Cities as a
Percentage of
City’s Patents

WS (84)
SLC (83)
NAS (82)

SF (14)
LA (8)
AUS (6)

MIL (21)
NOR (19)
STL (19)

MIA (16)
SA (9)
WPB (6)

SF (8)
AUS (7)
PRT (6)

SD (2)
SF (2)
LA (2)

BAL (2)
LA (1)
DC (1)

NYC (4)
BOS (4)
HRT (4)

AUS (2)
SF (1)
LA (1)

B. Immigrant Scientist and Engineer Shares Estimated from 1990 US Census Records
Bachelor's Share
Master's Share
Doctorate Share

87.6%
78.9%
71.2%

2.7%
6.7%
13.2%

2.3%
3.4%
4.0%

2.4%
2.2%
1.7%

2.3%
5.4%
6.5%

0.6%
0.9%
0.9%

0.5%
0.7%
1.5%

0.4%
0.8%
0.5%

1.2%
1.0%
0.4%

Notes: Panel A presents descriptive statistics for inventors residing in the US at the time of patent application. Inventor ethnicities are estimated through inventors' names
using techniques described in the text. Patents are grouped by application years and major technology fields. Cities, defined through Metropolitan Statistical Areas,
include AUS (Austin), BAL (Baltimore), BOS (Boston), DC (Washington), HRT (Hartford), LA (Los Angeles), MIA (Miami), MIL (Milwaukee), NAS (Nashville), NOR
(New Orleans), NYC (New York City), PRT (Portland), SA (San Antonio), SD (San Diego), SF (San Francisco), SLC (Salt Lake City), STL (St. Louis), WPB (West Palm
Beach), and WS (Winston-Salem). Cities are identified from inventors' city names using city lists collected from the Office of Social and Economic Data Analysis at the
University of Missouri, with a matching rate of 99%. Manual recoding further ensures all patents with more than 100 citations and all city names with more than 100
patents are identified. Panel B presents comparable statistics calculated from the 1990 Census using country of birth for scientists and engineers. Anglo-Saxon provides a
residual in the Census statistics. Many US inventors with European names are native citizens.

App. Table 2: Estimations of extensive margin
OLS estimation

Reduced-form estimation

(1)

(2)

Dependent variable is Δ (0,1) [exports > US$100k]
Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction
of exporter and importer trade in industry
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

-0.014**
(0.005)

Δ Log estimator for technology
flows from the United States
Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

-0.008
(0.083)
241,790
Yes
Yes

241,790
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Excluding sample weights
Δ Log country-industry labor
productivity

-0.017
(0.021)

Δ Log estimator for technology
flows from the United States
Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

0.061
(0.084)
241,790
Yes
Yes

241,790
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Tables 2 and 5. Estimations test the extensive margin of trade through linear probability
models. The dependent variable is a dichotomous indicator variable taking unit value if bilateral
exports exceed $100k. The $100k threshold is chosen due to WTF data collection procedures
discussed in the text.

App. Table 3: Lag structure of first-stage and reduced-form estimations
First-stage estimation
(1)

(2)

Reduced-form estimation
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Weighting bilateral routes by the interaction of exporter and importer trade in industry
DV: Δ Log country-industry labor productivity
Δ Log estimator for technology
flows from the United States,
lagged five years

0.589**
(0.272)

Δ Log estimator for technology
flows from the United States,
contemporaneous
Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

103,839
Yes
Yes

0.524**
(0.241)
0.376*
(0.212)

0.275
(0.169)

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

DV: Δ Log bilateral exports
0.938***
(0.298)

103,839
Yes
Yes

0.886***
(0.272)
0.393
(0.253)

0.223
(0.256)

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Excluding sample weights
DV: Δ Log country-industry labor productivity
Δ Log estimator for technology
flows from the United States,
lagged five years

0.267***
(0.078)

Δ Log estimator for technology
flows from the United States,
contemporaneous
Observations
Importer-Industry-Yr FE
Exporter-Importer-Yr FE

103,839
Yes
Yes

0.265***
(0.078)
0.064
(0.071)

0.059
(0.069)

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

DV: Δ Log bilateral exports
0.648***
(0.112)

103,839
Yes
Yes

0.636***
(0.107)
0.473***
(0.111)

0.459***
(0.105)

103,839
Yes
Yes

103,839
Yes
Yes

Notes: See Table 5. The first-stage and reduced-form performance of the lagged technology flows, the preferred instrument, is contrasted with
contemporaneous flows.

